WT02-B36-1IA086-000616-B013-80http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey88.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000831 text/html 101086HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:06:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:43 GMTContent-length: 100898Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey88.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES N.Y. RESTRUCTURING RECOMMENDATION: ISO TO OVERSEE MOVE TO RETAIL ACCESS (625 words) PSNH, CONNECTICUT VALLEY ELECTRIC SLAM N.H. PUC RULING ON UTILITY FRANCHISES (576 words) GM PLANS 25-MW COGENERATION PROJECT AT N.J. PLANT, OWNED, OPERATED BY QUIXX (393 words) FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROM REPORTS TO FERC (37 words) RESTRUCTURING MMWEC SEES TRANSMISSION, MARKET POWER ISSUES AS IMPEDIMENT TO NEPOOL REFORM (486 words) NUG/MARKETER GROUP WANTS INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR TO REPLACE NEPOOL (556 words) D.C. PSC OPENS COMPETITION PROCEEDING; SEEKS WRITTEN COMMENTS BY END OF MARCH (389 words) GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER RESTRUCTURING PLAN WOULD PUT GENERATION UP FOR BID (471 words) GENERATION, TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION TO BE SPLIT WHEN BGE AND PEPCO COMBINE (261 words) HOLYOKE MUNI WANTS TO TAKE OVER DAM FROM NORTHEAST UTILITIES SUBSIDIARY (374 words) MOODY'S SEES FALLING UTILITY RATINGS RESULTING FROM INDUSTRY DEREGULATION (443 words) INDEPENDENT POWER INDEPENDENT POWER PROJECT BUYOUTS IN NEW ENGLAND (1025 words) CALPINE SEEKS EWG STATUS FOR PLANTS IN N.J. IT WOULD ACQUIRE FROM O'BRIEN (572 words) JCP&L SEEKS $18-MILLION RATE RECOVERY FOR BUYOUT OF CROWN/VISTA CONTRACTS (340 words) N.Y. PSC CONSIDERS RECOMMENDATION TO REVISE AVOIDED-COST CALCULATIONS (293 words) TRANSMISSION NEES CANNOT CHARGE FIRM TRANSMISSION RATE FOR PART NON-FIRM SERVICE: FERC (429 words) HOULTON, ME., WATER CO. GAINS NEPOOL MEMBERSHIP; BUYS FROM BOUGHT-OUT NUG (448 words) NUCLEAR POWER MAINE YANKEE OUTPUT TO BE LIMITED TO 90% DUE TO COOLING PUMP CONCERNS (429 words) 1,100-MW SALEM NUCLEAR UNITS TO RETURN TO SERVICE IN SECOND AND THIRD QUARTERS (198 words) DSM PSE&G OPENS 150-MW CAPACITY BLOCK IN ITS DSM `STANDARD OFFER' PROGRAM (495 words) MONITOR: CON ED IS SLOW ON CLEAN-UP, AND CRACKS DOWN ON WHISTLE BLOWERS (476 words) DOCKET WATCH CONNECTICUT (120 words) DELAWARE (29 words) MAINE (498 words) MARYLAND (74 words) MASSACHUSETTS (519 words) NEW HAMPSHIRE (232 words) NEW JERSEY (293 words) NEW YORK (944 words) PENNSYLVANIA (258 words) RHODE ISLAND (57 words) VERMONT (19 words) FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION (1270 words) CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. RESTRUCTURING RECOMMENDATION: ISO TO OVERSEE MOVE TO RETAIL ACCESSEstablishing an independent system operator to formalize wholesalecompetition in New York and ensure transition to retail access is a keypart of restructuring the state's electric industry, according to a statejudge and a state regulator.   The recommended decision in the state's Competitive Opportunitiesproceeding also calls for separating transmission and distribution fromgeneration and for recovering stranded costs with an access charge imposedby a distribution company (Doc. No. 95-E-0952).   The recommendation was filed Dec. 22 by the state's Dept. of PublicService Administrative Law Judge Judith Lee and Ronald Liberty, deputydirector for the Energy and Water Division. Subject to review by the PublicService Commission, it aims to lower New York's high electricity rates andkeep industry in the state.   No timetable for the ``as soon as possible'' transition to retail accesshas been established, however, a PSC spokesperson told Northeast PowerReport.   Key parts of the more than 200-page review are:   -- Strandable costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition fromregulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs could berecovered by a separate mechanism outside the market, such as anon-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by a distributioncompany.   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation ``inorder to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&D companies will needto serve all would-be buyers in the short term.   Lee said she saw as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk powersystem, noting that it should not be sacrificed in any way in order toachieve the potential price reduction that may be associated with a systemof retail access. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale levelshould be established first, with an eye toward adding retail access asrapidly as possible once a market is established and reliability isensured.''   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New Yorkindustrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Intervenors, the industrial userstrade group. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, infact, appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition fortwo years,'' she said.   Utilities, on the other hand, like the proposal. Their trade group, theEnergy Association of New York State, applauded the law judge'srecommendation as ``a thoughtful approach to what is clearly an incrediblycomplex series of issues.''   ``Wholesale competition to the extent that the Energy Association hasbeen talking about is far more significant than what might exist today inNew York--and in most other places,'' said Howard Shapiro, theassociation's president.   On the legislative front, New York Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver(D-Manhattan) unveiled a proposal calling for an immediate freeze ofelectric rates and setting a goal of cutting them by 25%.   Further, under Silver's plan, utilities would be required to buy powerin a competitive wholesale market by September 1997. By September 2000,``if conditions ensuring safety, reliability...and access to a reasonablypriced power are met,'' customers would be able to choose their own powersuppliers.   Industrials reacted in similar fashion to Silver's proposal. ``We'restudying [it] carefully. We don't think it moves fast enough. We would liketo see retail competition by Jan. 1, 1997,'' Brenner said.   The Energy Association's Shapiro said he was pleased that at leastSilver recognized that ``competition alone doesn't produce a dramaticshort-term reduction of rates and that other issues must be addressed.''   Gov. George Pataki also weighed in on the issue in his Jan. 3 State ofthe State address, calling restructuring ``a major sea change facing ourstate and our nation,'' and citing the Long Island Power Authority's planto take over Long Island Lighting (NPR, 22 Dec '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSNH, CONNECTICUT VALLEY ELECTRIC SLAM N.H. PUC RULING ON UTILITYFRANCHISES   In a closely watched case, Public Service of New Hampshire andConnecticut Valley Electric have filed detailed arguments to the NewHampshire Supreme Court against a June 1995 Public Utilities Commissiondetermination that electric utilities in the state do not have exclusivefranchises.   In a Dec. 18 filing in a case involving Freedom Energy's request tocompete against PSNH for retail customers (Doc. No. 95-610), PSNH chargedthat a series of major state court opinions and legislative actions since1911 had created a legal pattern ``incorporating the economic model of aregulated monopoly in which service by a single provider was the essentialprinciple.''   PSNH listed a long series of instances in which the state acted on theassumption that exclusive utility franchises existed and said that the 1995PUC decision against exclusive franchises ``in effect overlooked the forestfor the trees.''   ``By insisting on a specific `tree' explicitly providing for exclusivityin electric utility franchises,'' PSNH said, ``the PUC majority missed theforest of authority'' that created an economic model based on exclusivefranchises.   PSNH also said the court should dismiss PUC claims that the stateconstitution guaranteed open competition in the electric utility sector.   It said previous court decisions had recognized the unique nature ofelectric service and the practical need for monopolies in the sector. Thecreation of the PUC in 1911 to oversee such ``sanctioned monopolies'' wasin harmony with the other constitutional safeguards against monopolies.   PSNH also invoked the state's ``administrative gloss'' doctrine, sayingthat the PUC's consistent rulings in the past in favor of exclusivefranchises plus the legislature's failure to interfere with theinterpretation created a ``binding gloss'' which deprived the PUC of theright to unilaterally change its policy now.   It said this administrative gloss approach was needed because nothing instate law explicitly authorized either competing franchises or exclusivefranchises. This ambiguity made the long-standing PUC interpretation of thelaw the crucial element in determining current law.   In a third major argument, PSNH said that the fact that the NewHampshire legislature passed a detailed bill in June 1995 creating aprocess to study ways to increase electric industry competition showed thatthe PUC did not have authority to make decisions on the issue.   It said that the authority given to the PUC in the bill to carry out aretail wheeling pilot was restrictive and fell ``far short'' of the powersclaimed by the PUC to set policy.   Instead, PSNH said, the message from the 1995 law was that ``thelegislature would set policy while the PUC would assault the legislature bygathering relevant information through the pilot program.''   In its filing to the state Supreme Court, CVE said that the PUC decisionon the franchise issue ``created an imbalance in the regulatory equation''in the state. ``The PUC order revokes the utility's right to be theexclusive supplier within its service territory, but does not relieve theutility's corresponding obligation to serve all customers regardless ofeconomics.''   CVE also noted that the legislature had a record of involvement in thepolicy issues of utility franchise exclusivity and that unless it delegatedauthority in this field to the PUC, the court should assume the poweritself.   Representatives of the PUC and Freedom Energy are expected to file theircomments to the court in mid-January. The court will hear oral arguments inthe case in February (NPR, 10 Nov '95, 10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GM PLANS 25-MW COGENERATION PROJECT AT N.J. PLANT, OWNED, OPERATED BYQUIXX   General Motors wants an outside party to install and operate a 25-MWcogeneration system at its Linden, N.J., truck plant so it can cut costsand focus on its manufacturing business.   The project would be developed by Quixx Corp., a subsidiary ofSouthwestern Public Service. Based in Amarillo, Tex., Quixx would own andoperate the plant, although GM said it may take an ownership stake. Mostpower would be used in house, though some excess would occasionally be soldto Public Service Electric & Gas, which now supplies the plant. PSE&Gcharges industrials about 7.5 cents/kWh.   GM has asked the N.J. Board of Public Utilities for an order declaringthat the project would not be regulated as a utility (Docket No.EE95100486). This is a technicality that non-utility generators usuallyseek in New Jersey, and GM pointed out that the plant would not supplypower or steam to other end users. However, the company is asking the BPUfor expedited treatment of the declaration, ``due to intense economicpressures and the planning needs of GM Linden for a prompt go/no goruling.'' According to GM, the factory serves as its export plant for smalltrucks and sport vehicles, a market ``which seems to gain new competitiveentrants each year.'' It expects that the cogeneration plant could bebrought on-line in 18-24 months.   The factory was built in 1936, and it still uses the original thermalplant to provide steam, heat and compressed air for vehicle production. GMattorneys Potter & Dickson, Princeton, N.J., pointed out that the plantemploys 2,700 workers, and said, ``Without the [project], the long-termviability of the Linden assembly plant remains jeopardized by competitioninternal to General Motors and from competition by other producers of smalltrucks and sport utility vehicles.'' Aside from the energy savings--whichwere not disclosed--shutting down the old oil-fired boilers would reduceemissions and compliance costs.   Thomas Noble, manufacturing engineering manager, told the BPU that theold energy plant will have to be replaced in the near future, and that suchan investment would detract from the plant's manufacturing business.Instead, he said, ``installation of a new, state-of-the-art, on-site totalenergy system, operated by a third party of experts, will enable GM Lindenplant managers and personnel to concentrate their time, attention andinvestment decisions on GM's core business...''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROM REPORTSTO FERCIllustration(s):Table: FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE NORTHEAST IN JUNE 1995 -- FROMREPORTS TO FERC (This table is not available electronically. Please seethe January 5, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MMWEC SEES TRANSMISSION, MARKET POWER ISSUES AS IMPEDIMENT TO NEPOOLREFORM   Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric, saying it was speaking forconsumer-owned utilities in New England, has warned the investor-ownedutilities in the region that no reform of the New England Power Pool systemwill be possible without resolution of outstanding transmission and marketpower issues.   In comments presented to the NEPOOL executive committee, MMWEC said thatthe ``NEPOOL Plus'' plan for revising pool operations proposed by NortheastUtilities veered from the group's basic purpose of assuring reliability atthe lowest possible cost for all consumers (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 3).   It said that while NU's ``piecemeal'' plan would introduce bidding fordispatch, it would also ignore other key issues.   MMWEC predicted the NU plan would ``ultimately fail'' unless it includeda comprehensive solution to all pool issues. It said that the NEPOOLmanagement committee, where all members were directly represented, shoulddebate the proposed changes, rather than the executive committee.   MMWEC said the bid-based pooling system would not work unless there wasregional network service, under which all participants had equal access andequal pricing.   It said this could be done through contractual arrangements such asthose discussed in previous regional transmission group negotiations. Sucha system, run by a neutral entity, should eliminate unequal contract pathand pancake pricing problems while still compensating owners oftransmission for their investments, MMWEC said.   A bid-based system, as proposed by NU, would not work well in a trulycompetitive market, MMWEC said, because larger NEPOOL members would havethe ability to manipulate the system by controlling either a significantamount of generation or specific functional resources, such as 10-minute,non-spinning reserves.   MMWEC said manipulative actions or improper responses to market signalsby large members ought to be prohibited. It said that this rule could bepoliced by a neutral body which would hear complaints and levy sanctions.   The muni group said that pool rules should be made in the interest ofthe end user and that voting representation should remain limited tomembers which serve retail load. This would avoid giving power inside thegroup to players in the market which did not have a direct responsibilitytoward retail customers.   MMWEC said that any plan for bid-based dispatching must requiredisclosure of spot market and bilateral deals, including price informationand availability of bids.   It noted that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has alreadyraised questions about NEPOOL transmission rules, most recently rejecting aplan to allow increased bilateral energy sales in the region because thetransmission implications had not been addressed.   While the MMWEC proposals present a challenge to the large New Englandutilities, they also contradict many points contained in the NEPOOL reformplan proposed by the Competitive Power Coalition of New England which callsfor more rights in NEPOOL for non-utility members, the formation of anindependent system operator for transmission and a totally free marketapproach to the pool.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NUG/MARKETER GROUP WANTS INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR TO REPLACE NEPOOL   The debate over the future of the New England Power Pool heightened lastweek when the Competitive Power Coalition of New England circulated a draftproposal calling for replacing NEPOOL with an independent system operator(ISO).   Titled ``A Blueprint for a Competitive Electricity Supply System in NewEngland,'' the report said it offers ``an alternative to mere incrementaladjustments currently being proposed by NEPOOL incumbents.''   The Boston-based advocacy group for independents and power marketersdropped out of NEPOOL reform talks in October to pursue its own planbecause it believed the group was moving too slowly, according to JohnHowat, CPC executive director. Northeast Utilities recently proposed a moremodest reform that introduces bidding for NEPOOL dispatch in a two-phaseprocess. Called ``NEPOOL Plus,'' that plan has won widespread support amongNEPOOL members, according to NU (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 3).   CPC planned to meet this week with utilities to discuss its blueprint,which it describes as ``evolutionary not revolutionary,'' keeping thestrong elements of NEPOOL and transforming them into an independent systemoperator. For example, the ISO would probably maintain the same personnelthat are now employed by NEPOOL and use the same facilities.   However, the ISO would coordinate transmission delivery based oncontracts between buyers and sellers, rather than NEPOOL's current economicdispatch. A FERC-regulated network, it would have no corporate or businesslink with utilities or other market participants and no members, governanceboard or voting rules.   To maintain system reliability, the ISO would control some generation,procured through competitively secured contracts, or calls on generationassets.   The blueprint envisions an electric power system with six components:supply, supply aggregation, system operation, load aggregation,distribution and consumers.   While delivery would be provided at regulated prices, supply would befully competitive, with energy service providers serving as the chiefinterface with customers. The report envisioned many entities filing theenergy service provider role, including marketers, aggregators and utilityspin-offs.   The energy service providers would contract with generating companies,transmission companies and distribution companies to buy power and deliveryservices that could then be packaged and resold to retail customers. Energyservice providers might also provide additional services, such as bundlinga power sale with metering and associated equipment services.   The blueprint also gives customers the option of bypassing the energyservice provider and buying power directly from the wholesale market, anapproach more likely to be pursued by large customers than smallcustomers.   CPC recommended that utilities unbundle generation, transmission anddistribution assets through divesture, a concept that some major NewEngland utilities have already rejected. CPC said it supports strandedinvestment recovery and opposes forced contract re-negotiation betweenindependents and utilities, an approach pushed by some utilities to lowerstranded costs.   ``Our members are willing to look at renegotiations where arenegotiation would result in a mutually beneficial position,'' Howat said.``A pressure for forced renegotiation is really not a good way to movetoward a system that is based on contracts. What does that say to thefinancial community?''   ``Clearly had prices gone up dramatically, instead of gone down, and haddemand for power risen dramatically, I don't think the entities that areclamoring now for renegotiations of contracts would be singing that tune,''he said.   CPC expects to issue a final report in early January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   D.C. PSC OPENS COMPETITION PROCEEDING; SEEKS WRITTEN COMMENTS BY END OFMARCH   The District of Columbia Public Service Commission has opened a formalproceeding on electric competition and is seeking written comments frominterested parties (Case No.945). Those will be due 90 days after the PSCissues its order on the Dec. 15 pre-hearing conference, which is expectedearly in the new year.   In launching the case, the PSC cites open-access rules proposed by theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission last spring. Although these only applyto wholesale transactions, ``the impact that the adoption of the ruleswould have on retail electric sales should not be overlooked,'' the PSCstated. Although electric rates from Potomac Electric Power are low for theregion--averaging 7.2 cents/kWh--the PSC ``recognizes that, if this fact isto remain true, the commission must be prepared to take steps to allow agreater reliance on competition and customer choice.''   Further, ``increasing competition among sellers of electricity willresult in increasing choices for buyers,'' the PSC said. However, it couldalso affect reliability, planning, economic development and theenvironment. Allowing retail competition could also allow new suppliers tolure away PEPCO's larger commercial customers, stranding fixed costs thatwould fall on remaining ratepayers. Therefore, the PSC wants to explorethese issues before taking any steps to open the system.   Among the questions that the PSC would like to address are: whether thePSC should refrain from instituting retail wheeling until wholesale marketsdevelop; what impact retail wheeling would have on various classes ofratepayers; what specific steps the PSC could take to encourage wholesaleand retail wheeling; and whether the commission should order PEPCO todisaggregate generation, transmission and distribution.   In addition, the PSC would like estimates on how much capacity would bestranded, and how those costs should be allocated. It also seeks commentson whether demand-side management and environmental programs should becontinued under competition, and how they would be funded. PEPCO said itwelcomes the investigation, though it noted that questions regarding therole of the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland Interconnection (PJM) must beaddressed by FERC.   Comments should be addressed to the Commission Secretary at the Districtof Columbia Public Service Commission, 450 Fifth St., N.W., Washington,D.C., 20001. Correspondence should reference Case No. 945 and the title``In the Matter of the Investigation into Electric Services, MarketCompetition and Regulatory Policies.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GREEN MOUNTAIN POWER RESTRUCTURING PLAN WOULD PUT GENERATION UP FOR BID   Green Mountain Power has filed a restructuring plan with Vermontregulators which proposes to use an auction system to determine the valueof stranded generation investments and power purchase commitments.   The auction would not be a forced asset divestiture and the owner of thegeneration assets being sold could bid against other groups to retainthem.   The plan, filed with the Vermont Public Service Board Jan. 2 (Doc. No.5854), would deregulate generation and the sale of electricity whilekeeping transmission and distribution service under state regulation.   Retail customers would be offered competitive options for powersupplies, one of which would be a ``basic electric service package,''including regulated services from the franchise distribution company and``lowest cost available'' power supplies.   GMP said the division between regulated and competitive sectors wouldlet the marketplace establish pricing for those parts of electric servicewhich would benefit from competition while preserving a single providersystem where that would be more efficient.   In a statement, GMP said the auction approach is intended to avoid amajor hang up over the issue of how to determine stranded costs andrevenues. Instead, it said, the market would take care of thatdetermination.   GMP said its plan was based on 14 principles for restructuring reachedlast July by a Vermont state roundtable on electric industry restructuring.This included utility recovery of ``reasonable'' stranded costs and the useof a monthly wires charge to fund conservation, renewables and low incomesupport programs.   GMP said that under its plan, the distribution companies would havedirect responsibility for carrying out such service programs.   The Conservation Law Foundation, which consulted with GMP on therestructuring plan, immediately issued a statement supporting the GMPproposal, saying it would continue GMP's demand-side management effort atabout its current $4 million/year level.   CLF said that by supporting a committed stream of stable funding forconservation and renewables, GMP was taking a position already supported byNew England Electric System in its restructuring model for New England,issued in October, 1995.   The PSB proposed in December that utilities in the state submitrestructuring plans by mid-May 1996. It also proposed a series ofroundtable discussions early in the year after which it will issuerecommendations for specific restructuring plans (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 8).   GMP is the first utility in the state to submit a full plan and clearlyhopes to get an edge in guiding the upcoming discussions and PBS decisionsover the next six months. It said it hoped to work with other groups in thestate to turn the Green Mountain plan into the ``Vermont Plan.''   While Vermont Gov. Howard Dean (D) had proposed going to retail choiceby the end of 1997, the PSB has not yet proposed a date for actualrestructuring to begin.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   GENERATION, TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION TO BE SPLIT WHEN BGE AND PEPCOCOMBINE   Baltimore Gas & Electric and Potomac Electric Power will splitgeneration, transmission and distribution into distinct units when thecompanies merge, which is expected in 1997 (NPR, 29 Sept '95, 1).   They said this separation will ``position the company to better servespecific customer needs and to be prepared for potential changes in theutility industry as competition increases.'' The gas business will also beoperated separately, and there will be a distinct District of Columbia unitto focus on the district's ``unique'' regulatory, legislative and communityrelations needs.   The utilities have also announced that the merged company will be calledConstellation Energy Corp. That is now the name used by BGE's independentpower subsidiary, which has 276 MW of equity in 27 operating plants and 10more projects under development. The utilities did not say how that unit'sname will be affected.   After the merger, BGE chairman Christian Poindexter will serve as chiefexecutive officer of Constellation and PEPCO chairman Edward Mitchell willbe chairman of the board. John Derrick, PEPCO's president and chiefoperating officer, will fill those same offices with Constellation, whileEdward Crooke, BGE's president and COO, will become vice chairman ofConstellation, overseeing strategic planning and subsidiaries.   In the separation of electric functions, the following appointments weremade: Robert Denton, senior vice president for generation; Ronald Lowman,vice president, fossil; Charles Cruse, vice president, nuclear; WilliamSim, vice president, generation support; Thomas Brady, group vicepresident, distribution; Andrew Williams, group vice president,transmission; and Sharon Hostetter, vice president for marketing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   HOLYOKE MUNI WANTS TO TAKE OVER DAM FROM NORTHEAST UTILITIES SUBSIDIARY   The city of Holyoke, Mass., has begun an effort to take control of the30.8-MW Hadley Falls hydroelectric station on the Connecticut River whichis now owned by Northeast Utilities subsidiary Holyoke Water Power.   The 50-year federal license for the dam expires in 1999 and Holyoke saidit plans to ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to award the newoperating license to municipal utility Holyoke Gas & Electric.   Under the plan, the Holyoke muni would add 33 MW of new capacity to thedam and use the power both to lower costs for its own customers by 17% andattract new power users to the area based on the low-cost supplies.   At the same time, NU officials said that Holyoke Water Power intends toapply to FERC to renew its license to operate the dam. Applications must befiled to FERC by June 30, 1997.   The city of Holyoke's plan won support from local voters by a 4 to 1margin in a non-binding referendum in November 1995. During the campaign,the city claimed the project would provide benefits to the city of between$160 million and $250 million over the first 25 years through a combinationof lower cost power, job creation and improved property values.   It also stressed that the benefits of the dam should go to the cityresidents, a clear dig at NU, HWP's out-of-state corporate ownership.   The city has begun a process to get input from public groups andagencies and prepare a plan for presentation to FERC. It has asked forcomments by Jan. 28.   In initial discussions, an intervenor committee for the city of SouthHadley, Mass., which is across the river from Holyoke, has said it willemphasize in its comments the need for the eventual licensee to remainfinancially viable during power industry restructuring in Massachusetts.   South Hadley also said it wants a full exploration of the environmentalissues involved in expanding the capacity of the dam and whether it wouldbe environmentally preferable to end all power production at the site.   Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric has assisted the city withdeveloping plans for financing the takeover and may possibly providefinancial assistance if the project went ahead.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MOODY'S SEES FALLING UTILITY RATINGS RESULTING FROM INDUSTRY DEREGULATION   Credit ratings of utilities in the Northeast are particularly vulnerableto electric industry restructuring, according to a new Moody's InvestorsService report.   Compared to those in neighboring regions, investor-owned, municipal andstate electric utilities in the Northeast ``with above-average costs arelikely to experience a deterioration in credit quality as some investmentsare unrecoverable from customers through rates,'' the agency said in aprepared statement announcing publication of its report, ``NortheastBreak-Even Analysis,'' authored by vice president and senior analyst JulieDoetsch, and Tim Fremont.   Contributing to this deterioration are expensive nuclear and fossil fuelassets and power purchase contracts with independent producers, much ofwhich may end up as stranded following deregulation, Moody's said. Itestimated that stranded costs in the Northeast total $43 billion, or 145%of the combined equity of the utilities in the region. This represents aquarter of all stranded costs of all U.S. investor-owned utilities.   ``Moody's does not believe that the Northeast utilities can be shieldedfrom the negative impact of price competition,'' the agency said. It addedthat it expects ``that many of these utilities...will be forced to bearsome of the financial pain associated with the transition. This scenario inturn may result in a diminished equity cushion available to debtholders,thus pressuring ratings.'' It said the weighted average rating forutilities in the region is ``Baa1,'' below the industry average of ``A3.''   In analyzing the Northeast, Moody's examined ``all major rated utilitieswithin two transmission interconnnects of Consolidated Edison of NewYork,'' including 25 investor-owned utilities in Connecticut, Maine,Massachusetts, New York, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, RhodeIsland and Vermont, plus two public power and two Canadian utilities. Theutilities represent over $153 billion in assets, $29.7 billion in equityand $48 billion in annual revenues.   Moody's looked at each utility's cost structure to find what price itmust charge for electric power to ``break even'' and cover its variable andfixed costs. Hydro-Quebec and the New York Power Authority, relyingprimarily on relatively cheap hydropower, fared best cost-wise in thisanalysis, while United Illuminating and Long Island Lighting, both at$105/kW, and Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric, at $99/kW, had thehighest break-even costs.   Moody's also found that power purchase contracts with NUGs affect thecost structures of two out of three utilities in the region. ``The mostseverely impacted are the small northern New England utilities. Whenpurchased power is included,'' Moody's said, ``the break-even prices forCentral Vermont Public Service, Central Maine Power, and BangorHydro-Electric each increase over 400%.''   For a copy of the report, contact Deborah Primiano in New York at (212)553-0383.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   INDEPENDENT POWER PROJECT BUYOUTS IN NEW ENGLAND   During 1995, utilities in New England picked up their efforts to buyoutcontracts with non-utility generators or win major concessions on powerprice and delivery dates. As a result several NUG projects have shut downor not completed. Several others have agreed to contract changes. Thefollowing is a state by state list of such actions involving major plants.The order of data in the following listing is: project name, size, fuel,location, on-line date, owners, contract status, plant status, and buydownsavings if available.CONNECTICUT1992   -- Killingly, 32.2 MW, wood waste, Killingly, under development by ARSand Hydra-Co Enterprises. Contract bought out by Connecticut Light & Powerin August, 1992 for $11 million. Plant construction canceled. CL&P to saveabout $100 million.   -- Torrington, 13 MW, wood waste, Torrington, under development byKenetech Energy Systems. Contract bought out by CL&P in August 1992 for$6.9 million. Plant construction canceled. CL&P to save about $50 million.1995   -- O'Brien Cogeneration, 54 MW, gas, Hartford, 1991, purchased byChrysler Capital Corp. Contract bought out in June, 1995 by CL&P with helpof marketer Citizens Lehman Power. Plant closed down September 1995. CL&Pto save $60 million through 2015.MAINE1992   -- Lewiston, 11.8 MW, wood waste, Lewiston, 1985, LFC Energy Corp.Central Maine Power paid $18.5 million to buy out contract. Plant stoppedproducing power September 1992. CMP to save $60 million through 2008.1993   -- Fort Kent, 31 MW, wood waste, Fort Kent, 1994, Alternative EnergyInc. CMP bought out contract in March, 1993 for $11 million. Projectconstruction canceled, CMP to save $131 million through 2024.   -- Houlton, 31 MW, wood waste, Houlton, 1996, Alternative Energy Inc.CMP bought out contract for $11 million in September 1993. Constructioncanceled. CMP to save $131 million through 2024.   -- Topsham, 80 MW, coal, Topsham, 1996, Caithness King. CMP canceledpower contract with project in March 1993, claiming failure to meetfinancial requirements. Project construction canceled. CMP to save $85million.   -- Beaver Ashland, 34 MW, wood waste, Ashland, in operation sincemid-1993, Alternative Energy Inc. CMP arranged to cover fixed costs and AEIsuspended plant operations starting in mid-1993 for between 16 and 64months. Plant not operating as of Jan. 1, 1996.1994   -- Fort Fairfield, 33 MW, wood waste, Fort Fairfield, in operation since1987. Developed by Hydra-Co Enterprises, U.S. Energy. Central Maine Powerbought out power contract and plant assets from owners for $78 million. Ittook over plant in October 1994 and now operates it as CMP subsidiary. CMPwill save $35 million.1995   -- Jonesboro, 27.5 MW, wood waste, Jonesboro, in operation since 1986,developed by Babcock & Wilcox 50%, ESI Energy 33%, LG&E Power 17%. In June1995 Bangor Hydro-Electric bought out the contract in Jonesboro and WestEnfield plants for $162 million. Plant shut June 30, 1995. Future status isunclear. BHE will save $62 million in two years.   -- West Enfield, 27.5 MW, wood waste, West Enfield, in operation since1986, developed by Babcock & Wilcox 50%, ESI Energy 33%, LG&E Power 17%.BHE bought out contract in June 1995 (see above). Plant shut June 30,future unclear.   -- Maine Energy Recovery, 22 MW, waste-to energy, Biddeford, inoperation since 1988. Developed by KTI 51%, Pacific Generation 16%, CNARealty 30.6%. In November 1995, CMP arranged with marketer Citizens LehmanPower to buy down contract costs. Financial details not disclosed. Plantcontinues to operate. CMP savings will be $23 million through 2007.MASSACHUSETTS1994   -- Energy New Bedford, 300 MW, coal, in development by U.S. Generating70%, Eastern Energy 30%. In May 1994, Commonwealth Electric canceled 83-MWpurchase contract, saying the project had failed to meet initial powerdelivery deadline. Project has received state approvals and is still beingdeveloped, although without power contracts.NEW HAMPSHIRE1994   -- Timco, 4.8 MW, wood waste, Barnested, in operation since 1987,developed by Timco Inc. Public Service of New Hamshire reached contractbuyout deal in March 1994, agreeing to make $41 million payment to coverplants in both Timco and Bristol. Plant closed October 1994. PSNH to save$60 million in Timco and Briston plant closures.   -- Bristol, 15 MW, wood waste, Alexandria, in operation since 1988,Alexandria Power Associates. PSNH reach contract buyout agreement in March1994 (see above). Plant closed October 1994.1995   -- Whitefield, 14.6, wood waste, Whitefield, in operation since 1988,Developed by Thermo Ecotek. In September 1994, PSNH reached tentativecontract buydown deals with plants in Whitefield, Hemphill, Bethlehem,Tamworth, West Hopkington and Bridgewater based on payments to the sixprojects of ``in excess of $240 million.'' Plants will remain in operationat lower power sales price. Total savings to PSNH from the six deals to be$375 million through 2007.   -- Hemphill, 13.8 MW, wood waste, Springfield, in operation since 1987,Thermo Ecotek. PSNH reached tentative contract buydown deal with the plantin September, 1994 (see above). Plant to stay open with lower power salesprice.   -- Pinetree Bethlehem, 15 MW, wood waste, Bethlehem, in operation since1986. Developed by American Tractebel. PSNH reached tentative buydown dealwith the plant in September 1994 (see above) Plant to stay open with lowerpower sales price.   -- Pinetree Tamworth, 20 MW, wood waste, Tamworth, 1987, AmericanTractebel. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September1994 (see above). Plant to stay open with lower power sales price.   -- Bio-Energy Corp., 12.5 MW, wood waste, West Hopkington, in operationsince 1984. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September1994 (see above). Plant to remain open with lower power sales price.   -- Bridgewater, 16.3 MW, wood waste, Bridgewater, in operation since1987. PSNH reached tentative buydown deal with the plant in September 1994(see above). Plant will remain open with lower power price.RHODE ISLAND1994   -- Newbay, 72.5 MW, coal, East Providence, Rhode Island CogenerationAssociates. New England Electric Systems (40 MW) and 11 Massachusettsmunicipals (32 MW) bought out contracts with project in February 1994 for$22 million. Plant canceled.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALPINE SEEKS EWG STATUS FOR PLANTS IN N.J. IT WOULD ACQUIRE FROM O'BRIEN   Calpine Corp. has asked the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission toclassify two New Jersey projects as exempt wholesale generators. However,it plans to sell all capacity from the projects to Jersey Central Power &Light under renegotiated contracts that cut rates, but obligate JCP&L topay all gas costs.   The 122-MW project at DuPont's Parlin facility and the 52-MW NewarkBoxboard plant would be acquired from O'Brien Environmental Energy, whichis under Chapter 11 protection of the federal bankruptcy code.   Last summer, Philadelphia-based O'Brien agreed to sell all of its assetsto Calpine for $107 million and the assumption of $90 million in debt (NPR,21 July '95, 13). However, NRG Energy, the affiliate of Northern StatesPower, later challenged the sale and the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Newark,N.J., agreed to hold an auction, where other firms could bid for O'Brien.The court was scheduled to begin hearings on Jan. 3 to consider the offers.Calpine general counsel Joseph Ronan said he is optimistic, since O'Brienhad rejected an NRG offer before the original takeover deal was struck.   Although EWG status allows power producers to operate ``merchant''plants, selling to various buyers, that is not Calpine's intention,according to Ronan. He said the San Jose, Calif., firm plans to sell allelectric output from the plants to the current buyer, JCP&L. However, itwants to avoid disputes over qualifying facility status under the PublicUtility Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA).   That law requires certain efficiency standards for both electric andthermal output, and JCP&L challenged the QF status of both O'Brien plantsafter prolonged outages due to a fire in Newark and technical problems atParlin. If a project loses its QF status, the utility can revoke contractterms and pay only its avoided cost--as Rochester Gas & Electric recentlysought to do to a Kamine/Besicorp project, before a federal court granted atemporary QF waiver (NPR, 8 Dec '95, 11). Calpine had already faced theproblem when its Watsonville, Calif., plant lost its steam host, Ronannoted.   Before applying for EWG status for the New Jersey plants, Calpinerenegotiated the power sales contracts with JCP&L, Ronan said. The newterms provide JCP&L with more dispatching at Parlin and rate changes atboth facilities. Under the new Parlin contract, only 41 MW of the 122-MWplant will be considered ``base capacity (though that can rise as high as50 MW under certain conditions), while the balance is divided into severallevels of dispatch capacity.   For the Parlin base load, JCP&L will make capacity payments of 5.97cents/kWh during the on-peak period, and no payments off-peak. For thedispatchable capacity, the utility will make fixed capital payments of$9.90/kW/month through 2003, and $6.40 afterwards, though Calpine may electto levelize all payments at $9.02. In addition, JCP&L will pay $3.50 in1995 for operations and maintenance, adjusted annually.   At the Newark plant, JCP&L will pay a base rate of 4.325 cents/kWh,adjusted according to various indices. In the original O'Brien contract,JCP&L was paying 6.17 cents.   In both cases, JCP&L would pay for all costs of natural gas, supplyingthe projects from the gas pool that parent company General Public Utilitieshas set up (NPR, 15 Sept '95, 14). Although it started that pool to cutcosts for its own peakers, GPU said it would also allow non-utilitygenerators to participate if they agreed to renegotiate contracts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   JCP&L SEEKS $18-MILLION RATE RECOVERY FOR BUYOUT OF CROWN/VISTA CONTRACTS   Jersey Central Power & Light has asked the New Jersey Board of PublicUtilities to let it collect $18 million in rates to cover the buyout of two100-MW contracts with an independent power producer.   JCP&L reached a settlement with the developers of the Crown/Vista coalproject after a long dispute that wound through the BPU, state courts andthe state legislature (NPR, 15 Sept '95, 9). The 362-MW coal project wasoriginally proposed by Mission Energy and Fluor Daniel in 1989, but FluorDaniel later sold its stake to Ahlstrom Development and Entergy PowerDevelopment. When the partners concluded they could not bring the twin coalplants on-line by the 1997 ``sunset dates,'' they were granted an extensionby the BPU.   The utility--which chose 200 MW of the project in a 1989solicitation--said it no longer needed the capacity and successfullychallenged the extension in state court (NPR, 26 May '95, 6). Thedevelopers then got the backing of some state lawmakers to force theextension, but the buyout was announced before their bill cleared thelegislature.   To terminate the contracts, JCP&L agreed to pay $17 million, but it isasking to collect $18 million in rates, to cover all of its costs. Thatwould be recovered in blocks of $6-million over each of the next threeyears. The utility defended the request, saying purchases from theCrown/Vista project would have cost $700 million above market prices overthe lives of the contracts.   JCP&L is looking to collect the funds through the Levelized EnergyAdjustment Clause (LEAC), which passes along energy costs and otherexpenses without profit. In its $37.7 million request, the utility is alsolooking to recover $19 million in demand-side management costs.   Metropolitan Edison, another unit of General Public Utilities, alsoterminated its 100-MW contract with the Crown/Vista developers, and hasasked the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for rate recovery. Thatbuyout cost $30 million because of the different timing of the contractsand the costs incurred by the developers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. PSC CONSIDERS RECOMMENDATION TO REVISE AVOIDED-COST CALCULATIONS   An administrative law judge in New York's Public Service Department isrecommending new long-run avoided cost calculation methods that would moreaccurately reflect industry costs. Adoption by the Public ServiceCommission of the new method could result in an increase in the costsincurred by utilities and ratepayers in doing business with independentpower producers, according to the recommendation.   The recommendation, issued Dec. 19 by administrative law judge RafaelEpstein, is part of another recommendation to establish a process forsetting fuel targets and buyback rates. Both cases (93-E-0912; 93-E-1075)were combined in January 1995. Briefs opposing the recommendations are dueJan. 8, 1996; final briefs are due Jan. 25.   The recommendation to revise calculation methodology endorses inprinciple independent power producer Sithe Energies' proposal to adopt the`firm method' for estimating avoided energy costs, not the `non-firmmethod' now employed by the PSC and favored by the utilities and staff.Epstein recommends exploring the firm method's application before usingit.   The recommendation calls for a generic annual proceeding based on aunified data base, a conclusion supported by staff and Sithe, but opposedby the utilities. As it is now, fuel targets and buyback rates aredetermined in utility-specific rate proceedings. Epstein recommends thatthe commission should narrowly limit the permissible scope ofcompany-specific adjustments prompted by individual utility's objectionsprovided in the computer model's data base produced in the generic case.   Epstein also recommends that the commission adopt four previous rulingsas the basis for determining which computer model inputs should be deemedtrade secrets. He urged that data ought to be considered a trade secretonly if the information is competitively useful and would not be readilyascertainable by competitors in an unregulated market.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEES CANNOT CHARGE FIRM TRANSMISSION RATE FOR PART NON-FIRM SERVICE: FERC   The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has told New England ElectricSystem that it cannot charge a full firm transmission rate for service to agroup of Massachusetts municipals unless it actually provides them withfirm service.   In a Dec. 29 order, FERC said that NEES could not charge the firmservice rate to carry 35.4 MW of preference power to the munis from the NewYork Power Authority since it was providing firm service for only 17.7 MWof the load (Doc. No. ER96-200-000).   It approved for filing a firm service charge for the 17.7 MW andrequired NEES to file within 30 days a new, lower cost rate for theless-than-firm service it was offering for the rest of the load.   NEES originally filed the transmission rate proposal on Oct. 31, 1995,saying that it was the result of negotiations with Massachusetts MunicipalWholesale Electric.   According to NEES, it was not obliged to offer any firm service to themunicipals and as part of the negotiations it had voluntarily agreed toprovide the 17.7 MW of firm capacity at MMWEC's request. In return, MMWECagreed to pay the firm rate for the entire 35.4-MW load.   The group was under pressure to secure the capacity to bring in thelow-cost power from NYPA's Niagara Falls and St. Lawrence projects.However, the town of Norwood questioned the arrangement and said that inthe past FERC had always required NEES to provide lower rates to the groupfor non-firm service.   In its order, FERC agreed with this argument, saying that the mere factMMWEC agreed to pay the high rate did not make it legally acceptable. Also,the fact that NEES was voluntarily offering 17.7 MW of firm service as partof the deal ``was not a sufficient justification for charging a firm ratefor transmission that is less than firm,'' FERC said.   According to FERC, NEES could collect the full rate for the firmservice, but it had no right to charge ``excessive'' rates for the non-firmservice.   FERC also granted a waiver of the normal 60-day notice period to allowthe rate to take effect at once. The parties had originally aimed atbeginning service by Nov. 1, 1995.   Currently, the NEES firm transmission tariff is about $16/kW/year. TheFERC order said that NEES did not have to offer the municipals its standardnon-firm rate but instead could propose a rate reflecting the fact that thenon-firm service agreed to in the negotiations with MMWEC would providesome advantages over normal non-firm service.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   HOULTON, ME., WATER CO. GAINS NEPOOL MEMBERSHIP; BUYS FROM BOUGHT-OUT NUG   The New England Power Pool has agreed to allow the Houlton Water Co. inHoulton, Me., to become a member, although it is not located within theNEPOOL control area.   The publicly owned utility in northern Maine is connected to the rest ofNew England through New Brunswick Power and was asked to make specificpromises to NEPOOL on meeting capacity responsibility requirements in orderto join the group.   In 1994, Houlton decided to drop wholesale purchases from Maine PublicService, which is located in the same area. Instead, it decided to take12.5 MW of supplies from a biomass power plant in Fort Fairfield, Me.,taken over by Central Maine Power through an earlier buyout deal.   Houlton switched to the CMP supplies effective Jan. 1, 1996, and under aproposal filed with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission on Dec. 11,1995, it will become a NEPOOL member Feb. 1.   NEPOOL said in its FERC filing that because of the link through Canada,Houlton would require scheduling arrangements inside the NEPOOL dispatchingsystem different than those used by other members. These were being workedout with Houlton.   Also, NEPOOL said, Houlton would not have to include in its adjustedload 3.4 MW from the Maine Yankee plant which is backed up by New BrunswickPower resources.   Separately, Houlton and MPS are continuing a dispute before FERC overthe level of transmission costs MPS will be able to charge Houlton for useof its system to wheel power from the Fort Fairfield plant (Doc. No.ER95-836-000).   MPS proposed a general transmission tariff in April, 1995, based on alevelized rate calculation system which would result in a $35/kW/yearcharge (NPR, 14 April '95, 5).   Houlton claims this rate is exorbitant and called it a ``back doorattempt'' by MPS to cover stranded investment costs.   With the case still before the judge, no FERC decision on thetransmission rate is likely for several months. Under the currentarrangement, Houlton begins accepting service from MPS on Jan. 1 at theproposed MPS rate. But it will be entitled to a rebate if FERC laterdecides to lower that rate.   In its arguments to FERC, MPS stressed that its proposal was based onnew FERC guidelines for transmission ratemaking. Also, it said that formerwholesale customers such as Houlton were not entitled to special low ratesfrom MPS and should pay the same generic rate offered to other customers.   Houlton argued that because MPS' transmission plant is old and heavilydepreciated the levelized system did not apply. But MPS said that itplanned major new improvements to its transmission system and a levelizedapproach was appropriate.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MAINE YANKEE OUTPUT TO BE LIMITED TO 90% DUE TO COOLING PUMP CONCERNS   The Maine Yankee nuclear plant will only be allowed to operate at 90% offull capacity, or 820 MW, when it returns to service early in 1996 after a12-month outage to repair cracked tubes in the plant's steam generator.   The derating is being imposed on the plant by the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission based on claims by an anonymous whistleblower that the plant'semergency core cooling pumps could not handle the reactor if it wasoperating at full power.   The claims, received by the NRC in early December, said that plantoperators knew about the problem in the late 1980s but nevertheless askedNRC to upgrade the plant capacity to 910 MW. The derating will effectivelyput the plant back to its original rating.   The derating will be in effect until the NRC does a thorough review ofthe situation, including the computer modeling techniques used to determineproper safety levels. It is not clear how long the review will take.   In the meantime, Maine Yankee officials were awaiting a memo from theNRC detailing the exact operating conditions for the plant. Once theyreceive it they expect to restart the reactor immediately.   Maine Yankee has just completed a major project to sleeve the tubes inits two steam generators to prevent cracking (NPR, 26 May '95, 10). Theproject cost plant owners, including Central Maine Power, NortheastUtilities and New England Electric System, $30 million in repair costs and$60 million in replacement power costs.   The loss of the 90 MW of capacity due to the derating will create a newfinancial burden although plant officials could not predict the cost atthis time. A spokesman for CMP said that the actual cost will depend onwhether the winter is colder than usual and more peaking power is neededand also on the availability of extra hydro capacity in the region based onhigher than usual water levels.   The claims about the coolant system have no connection to the steamgenerator repairs which plant officials said went well and came in only afew days late and under budget.   Maine Yankee president Charles Frizzle said that with the sleeving donethere was no reason to think that the plant would not be able to functionnormally for the rest of its license period, which ends in 2008.   Anti-nuclear groups have questioned this. Also, Standard & Poor's hasraised concerns about Maine Yankee's ability to maintain plant performanceover the long term, issuing a downgrade of Maine Yankee's corporate creditrating in December.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   1,100-MW SALEM NUCLEAR UNITS TO RETURN TO SERVICE IN SECOND AND THIRDQUARTERS   Public Service Electric & Gas expects to bring the Salem nuclear unitsback into service in the second and third quarters of 1996. Each unitgenerates 1,100 MW for a consortium of utilities that includes PSE&G (43%ownership), PECO Energy (43%), Atlantic Electric (7%) and Delmarva Power(7%).   The plants were shut down in May and June for unrelated problems withheat removal equipment and switch gear cooling fans (NPR, 23 June '95, 7).Although these were not major flaws, station operator PSE&G came to anagreement with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to keep the plants downfor extended outages in order to thoroughly inspect the problems and takepreventive steps (NPR, 4 Aug '95, 10).   The Salem station has been plagued by recurring shutdowns, and therestart plans call for improving human performance, operations,maintenance, equipment reliability and other areas.   PSE&G originally expected Unit 1 to be operating by the first quarter of1996 and Unit 2 by the second quarter, but those schedules have now beenpushed back. The utility has been purchasing power in the wholesale marketto make up the shortfall, while PECO already has excess generatingcapacity.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSE&G OPENS 150-MW CAPACITY BLOCK IN ITS DSM `STANDARD OFFER' PROGRAM   Public Service Electric & Gas will be seeking 150 MW of capacity fromenergy efficiency projects over the next two years.   That block was set by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities in arecent ruling on the utility's demand-side management program for 1996-97(Docket No. EE95090415). PSE&G had originally requested a one-year, 75-MWstandard offer, but DSM advocates pushed to expand the plan and the BPUagreed.   Under the standard offer program, PSE&G makes blocks of capacityavailable and pays its avoided cost to energy efficiency projects. Since1993, the utility has been accepting bids for a 150-MW block, and in therecent case the BPU expanded that Standard Offer No. 1 to 185 MW forproposals submitted by Jan. 2, 1996.   The new 150-MW solicitation is designated Standard Offer No. 2, and willbe broken into three 50-MW blocks. These will provide declining payments,since additional capacity will reduce the value of savings to the company,and thereby, its avoided cost. That figure now stands at $5.45/kW/month forcapacity and about 2.6 cents/kWh for energy. However, the first 50-MW blockof the new standard offer will set prices 27% lower, while the second blockwill be priced 33% below Standard Offer No. 1 and the third block will beset 38% below it.   The BPU made allowance for a fourth block with no defined size at pricesthat would be 44% lower than Standard Offer No. 1. There will also be a15-MW residential ``carve-out,'' with at least half of that reserved forlow-income residences. For those projects, prices will be set 14% higherthan Standard Offer No. 1 for the first half of the contract period and 33%lower for the second half.   In addition, PSE&G will accept up to 10 MW of fuel-switching projects,but only at government-owned facilities. It will also accept up to 1 MW ofprojects that displace electric air conditioning in summer with chillerspowered by waste heat from cogeneration plants. These must involve existingcogeneration facilities that exceed 50% efficiency, and they must notresult in incremental fuel use or emissions.   If New Jersey opens up retail competition, PSE&G will continue to makestandard offer payments to projects whose hosts choose an electric supplierother than the utility. However, that pledge would only apply if PSE&G isstill allowed to recover its standard offer payments through some type ofsystem benefits charge. DSM proponents in many states are lobbying for suchcharges on distribution services to maintain efficiency programs in theface of retail access.   PSE&G accepts standard offer projects on a first-come, first-servedbasis, though they must be qualified by PSE&G for technical merit andsavings potential. They may be installed by users themselves or by energyservice companies. One ESCO that is active in the program is PSE&G's ownsubsidiary, Public Service Conservation Resources Corp. (PSCRC), whichworks with customers on standard offer projects and provides financing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MONITOR: CON ED IS SLOW ON CLEAN-UP, AND CRACKS DOWN ON WHISTLE BLOWERS   A court-appointed environmental monitor has found that ConsolidatedEdison's environmental programs still have significant shortcomings andthat the utility has discouraged proper reporting of environmentalmishaps.   ``In at least one instance,'' the monitor states in his first reportsince being named last spring, ``there has been direct retaliation againstan employee who reported information to me.''   Appointment of the monitor, Mitchell Bernard, came as part of thesentence handed down after Con Ed pleaded guilty to having conspired tocover up the release of asbestos in a 1989 steam pipe explosion. Theutility was also fined $2 million. U.S. District Court Judge John Martin,who sentenced Con Ed, received the monitor's report Dec. 18.   The monitor writes that Con Ed generally cooperated with hisinvestigations, as required by the court. But he cites some notableexceptions: a few employees were ``less than open'' in answering questions;and Con Ed ``failed to comply'' with the court's direction that it notpenalize an employee in any way for providing information to the monitor.   Con Ed ``has taken a number of commendable steps to promoteenvironmental compliance,'' the monitor notes. He recognizes the creationof an internal mechanism for investigating reports of environmentalmisconduct and the hiring of a new vice president for environmentalaffairs, among other actions.   ``At this point, however, Con Edison is without many of the basicelements of an effective program to prevent and detect violations ofenvironmental laws,'' the monitor concludes. Key problems include:ineffectiveness in the company's new Compliance Administrators Program;indications of ``an ongoing destructive corporate culture''; and problemshandling asbestos.   ``We take this report very seriously,'' said a Con Ed spokesman. Thereport ``acknowledges that we have improved our environmental awareness butthat we have a lot more to do,'' he added.   Episodes of improper treatment of employees who reported possibleenvironmental hazards, brought to the company's attention by the monitor'sreport, have resulted in a number of specific disciplinary actions. Con Edexplained, in a response that was also filed with the court, that twosupervisors have been suspended without pay, and that other individualshave been disciplined.   ``These were isolated instances,'' the spokesman said. However, anysimilar incidents in the future in which an employee is punished orintimidated will result in dismissal of the supervisor. ``We will nottolerate intimidation of employees who bring forward environmentalcomplaints.'' The spokesman acknowledged that ``we have to educate ouremployees about our company's environmental policies.''   The most serious of the incidents of intimidation involved spilled oiland water that leaked down a drain at a Con Ed service center and a problemin the company's asbestos abatement program.   Overall, the monitor writes that he ``uncovered significant problems.''The most common, he concludes, were related to the cleanup ofpolychlorinated biphenyls and to asbestos abatement projects.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CONNECTICUTDept. of Public Utility Control   95-12-09; Connecticut Light & Power buyout of 54-MW NUG owned byChrysler Corp. in Hartford   95-10-15; Proposal by United Illuminating to cut back DSM budget by 45%over the next two years   95-08-OP; Complaint by CL&P against Texas-Ohio Power Inc., which isselling power from a 1.8-MW plant to CL&P customers   95-01-01; Acquisition by Groton Dept. of Utilities of Bozrah Light &Power   94-12-13; DPUC investigation into electric industry restructuring; DPUCrecommends gradual deregulation once industry is restructured an dstrandedinvestment issues are resolved   94-04-01; Connecticut Light & Power integrated resource plan; DPUC rulesthat it may streamline IRP process in other pending cases (Doc. Nos.94-11-09 and 94-12-13)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   DELAWAREPublic Service Commission(302) 739-4247   92-103; Request by Delmarva Power & Light to approve contracts with twonon-utility generators totaling nearly 200 MWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MAINEPublic Utilities Commission(207) 289-3831   95-702; Bangor Hydro-Electric proposal to offer residentials marketrates during the winter; approved by the PUC   95-606; Central Maine Power wins approval for new economic developmentincentives that will be offerred to its manufacturing customers; companieswill be able to get a 1.5-cents/kWh reduction in energy costs for new andexpanding loads over a three year period   95-598; Proposal by Central Maine Power that it reduce its DSM target toabout 4 MW of additional savings in 1996 and eliminate all new DSM programswhich require subsidies to participants   95-462; Industry restructuring initiative   95-429; Central Maine Power plan to reduce costs of power from awaste-to-energy plant in Biddeford, with the help of Citizens Lehman Power   95-148; Request by Kennebunkport Light & Power District to sell power tothe Kennebunk, Kennebunkport and Wells Water District, formerly a CentralMaine Power customer   95-129; Bangor Hydro-Electric plan to acquire Union River ElectricCooperative; aproved July 10   95-109; Bangor Hydro asks permission to borrow between $80 to $100million from a special Maine state trust fund as part of plan to float a$162-million buyout of two wood-fired independent power projects in WestEnfield and Jonesboro; PUC approves plan for buyouts   95-055; PUC proposal to create a general system in the state forutilities to collect stranded investment charges in the form of exit feesfrom retail customers who leave their grids; PUC terminates action in wakeof FERC NOPR on transmission access   94-475; Request by Maine Public Service that the PUC disallow a proposedpower sales contract between Central Maine Power and Houlton Water Company,a former MPS customer   94-379; PUC review of a 1967 state law allowing municipal utilities theright to compete with franchise investor-owned utilities for customers; PUCrules munis can take customers away from IOUs only if they were alreadyserving those customers in 1967   94-301; Maine Public Service request to cancel or modify power purchasecontract with a 17.6-MW biomass plant in Sherman Station developed byWheelabrator Environmental Systems; two hearing examiners say increasedcosts do not merit contract cancellation; PUC says PURPA preempts stateauthority to allow modification of contract   94-235; Central Maine Power plan to auction surplus energy to commercialand industrial customers; PUC orders utility to sell off 15% of surplusthrough auction, rather than 30% as recommended by staff   94-213; Proposed buyout and shutdown of 33-MW biomass-fired FairfieldEnergy Ventures non-utility generator for $78-million; plan for buyout andtakeover opposed by industrials in state Supreme Judicial Court on groundsthat ratepayers are shortchanged   94-176; PUC inquiry into stranded investment costs and standby servicecharges; towns of Jay, Norway, Old Orchard Beach and Westbrook considermunicipalization; Norway, Westbrook and Old Orchard Beach challenge stateauthority to assess stranded investment costs, calling them tantamount to atax   94-079; Central Maine Power general stranded investment tariff,including provision to recover stranded investment costs incurred whencustomers leave system but still require wheeling servicesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MARYLANDPublic Service Commission(410) 767-8022   Case 8678; PSC investigation into competition in the electricmarketplace; industrials advocate full retail competition, utilities favoreincreased wholesale competition   Case 8583; Consideration of alternative power supplies for PECOsubsidiary Conowingo Power; PSC hearing examiner to determine whetherDelmarva Power & Light can buy Conowingo; PSC tentatively approvesacquisition in late November   Case 8488; Panda Energy application for CPCN for 230-MW plant; PendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MASSACHUSETTSDept. of Public Utilities(617) 727-9748   95-95; Com/Electric integrated resource plan for 1995-2014, includingRFP for 26 MW in 2001   (no number) Commonwealth Electric attempts to buy out 37-MW PepperellPower; DPU extends 9/7 deadline for decision   95-40; Massachusetts Electric performance-based rate filing, includingproposed auction of 10 to 25 MW of wires access; DPU says industrialscannot be made to pay for utility's excess power   95-35; Request by Cambridge Electric for recovery of stranded costsassociated with serving the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whichhas left its system to self-generate; DPU allowed 75% cost recovery   95-30; Dept. of Public Utilities investigation into industryrestructuring; order issued Aug. 16 tells utilities to unbundle services,set up stranded investment charges, move toward customer choice; individualutility plans due in about six months   95-18; DPU investigation into Boston Edison claim that it is beingovercharged about $740,000 a year by MassPower   94-176; Request by town of Stow to switch service from Hudson Light &Power Dept. to NEES; HL&PD asserts that it must charge Stow strandedinvestment charges   94-162; The DPU agrees to request from Boston Edison, CambridgeElectric, Commonwealth Electric, Fitchburg Gas & Electric and WesternMassachusetts Electric to streamline integrated resource management rules;utilities request more control over bidding and reduced regulatoryoversight of resource portfolios; Div. of Energy Resources suggestsallowing third parties to rent space on utility T&D systems; CONUG saysshareholders, not ratepayers, should absorb costs incurred when utilitiesunderestimate need and have to go out to buy more expensive power   94-158; Investigation into replacing traditional utilitycost-of-service, rate-of-return regulation with performance-basedincentives; DPU rules that utilities can replace rate-of-return ratemakingwith performanc-based incentives   94-115; SESCO seeks disclosure of bids in Comonwealth Electric DSM RFP;SESCO says it was improperly excluded from award group; order 8/9 rejectingcomplaint   94-114; Request for approval of power sales deal between NantucketElectric and New England Electric System; Nantucket Electric board hasapproved acquisition in principle; briefs filed   94-112; Massachusetts Electric IRM stating need for 231 MW of new powerbeginning in 2002; No supply-side RFPs are included in plan; DPU requiresutility to take second loo at its forecast in June   94-110; Eastern Edison IRM proposes 65-MW RFP to be issued July 1995;settlement agreement filed; DPU approves RFP, subject to second look inMarch 1995   94-102; Investigation into Massachusetts Electric demand for strandedinvestment charge from ex-retail customer MBTA; FERC to await DPU findingsbefore ruling; technical session 11/2   94-49; Boston Edison integrated resource management plan; Boston Edproposes experimental 250-MW "options" RFP to be used in March 1995; CONUGsays utility should issue supply-side RFP; briefs and reply briefs filed   94-23; Investigation into regulatory treatment of costs incurred tocomply with Title IV of Clear Air Act Amendments. NUG coalition calls onDPU to penalize utilities that hoard emissions; Comments filed   94-12; Western Mass Electric's IRM; delayed pending progress of industryrestructuring   94-8-C; Investigation into monitoring and evaluation of Western MassElectric's DSM program; DPU requests further information 10/4   94-1-A; Generating unit performance review for Boston Ed; Briefs filedin JuneCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW HAMPSHIREPublic Utilities Commission(603) 271-2431   DR95-250; State-sponsored retail wheeling pilot for 60 MW of load   DR95-231; New Hampshire Office of Consumer Advocate asks PUC to declarePSNH discounts with industrials void under agreements of merger with NU   DR95-216; Rulemaking on industrial rate discounts, intended todiscourage `poaching' of customers between utilities; PUC approves draftguidelines giving utilities some ability to tailor contracts to individualcustomers   Doc. No. 95-095; PUC order upholding PUC rights to order QF wheelingunder state's 1978 Limited Electrical Energy Producers Act; PSNH andConnecticut Valley Electric seek reversal   DE94-163; PUC rules Public Service New Hampshire does not have exclusivefranchise rights in its territoryand that reseller Freedom Electric Powerhas a legal right to recieve utility status and compete against PSNH forretail customers   DE94-004; Request by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to use biddingamong qualifying facilities to set avoided costs   DR94-160; Proposal by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to seek 20 MWfrom qualifying facilities; PUC rules that NHEC can issue RFP, but mustseek FERC ruling on whether it can legally contract for QF power   DR94-004; Request by New Hampshire Electric Cooperative to conductauction for QF power; granted by PUC Oct. 24DR94-239; Application by PublicService of New Hampshire to offer Polyvac a special rate discount on aconfidential basis; PUC rules 1/3/95 that utility must disclose terms ofdiscountCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW JERSEYBoard of Regulatory Commissioners(201) 648-2375   EE95-090415; Jersey Central Power & Light demand-side management filing,including set-aside for 150-MW block for bidding by ESCOs   EE95-080359; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Niagara Mohawk Power   EE95-040185; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Cleveland Electric Illuminating   EE95-040184; Power purchase agreement between Jersey Central Power &Light and Pennsylvania Power & Light   EC92-040516/EM 88-010206; American Ref-Fuel request to switch PSE&Gcontract to JCP&L   EE92-920103; Atlantic Electric plan to cut demand by 5.6 MW throughtwo-year DSM program   EE92-090883; Atlantic Electric annual bidding filing; Under staffreview   EE92-090911; JCP&L annual bidding filing; Under staff review   EE92-090212; PSE&G annual bidding filing; Under staff review   EE92-090884; Rockland Electric's annual bidding filing; Under staffreview   EE91-111747; Atlantic Electric's approved application for siting ofsubstation and transmission lines in Washington Twp. area; ALJ rulingpending   EM94-030058; Request by MidAtlantic Energy to order Jersey Central Power& Light to buy power from a 198-MW NUG in Pennsylvania   ER95-010005; Application by Public Service Electric & Gas for approvalof a rate discount for Co-Steel Raritan; approved by BPU   ER94-0577; Jersey Central Power and Light request for $68.3-million ratehike under levelized energy adjustment clause filing, blaming NUG costs forincrease   ER94-07-0293; Public Service Electric & Gas levelized energy adjustmentclause filing; Independent Energy Producers of New Jersey claim PSE&G isimproperly trying to beat NUG costs by buying natural gas from itself   EX95-070320; Initiative to implement flexible ratemaking for electricutilities, in accordance with a new statute; approved by the BPU   EX94-120585Y; State energy master plan proceeding   EX9405-1060/EX9412-1578; Rules for utility integrated resource planning;to be published by end of January, with comment period of 45 days tofollowCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   NEW YORKPublic Service Commission(518) 474-2500   95-E-0924; Petition by the City of Cortland for permission to conduct afive-year pilot retail wheeling program   95-E-0867; Complaint agaisnt New York Power Authority by MunicipalElectric Utilities Association over use of allocated power by NYPA to servenew industrial load   95-E-0636; Request by Suffolk County to direct Long Island Lighting topass property tax refund back to ratepayers   95-E-0476; Request by the Long Island Power Authority to direct LongIsland Lighting to pass property tax refund back to ratepayers   95-E-0264; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for assistance in monitoringcompliance by qualifying facilities with the requirements of PURPA   95-E-0141; Nassau County, N.Y., asks state PSC to allow retail wheelingfor its businesses and residences, claiming LILCO's high rates are stiflingthe local economy   95-E-0117; Parallel power exchange agreement between Kodak and RochesterGas & Electric   SAPA 94-E-00385SA1; Proposal by Education/Electric Buying Group to allowthe public schools on Long Island to purchase interruptible supplies ofelectric power on the open market   94-E-1091; Complaint by IPPNY that Niagara Mohawk is inappropriatelyusing a customer service line to advertise against NUGs; thrown out by thePUC   94-E-0952; PSC competitive opportunities investigation; ALJ issuesrecommendation urging ISO to oversee wholesale competition duringtransition to retail competition, but no timeline is offered   94-E-0908; Petition by Destec Energy to force LILCO to buy power from aplanned 300-MW power project at the Pilgrim State mental hospital on LongIsland   94-E-0611; Request for approval by Long Island Lighting of ratediscounts for industrial customers; PSC grants approval   94-E-0557; Request by Consolidated Edison to defer expense ofterminating a 140-MW contract with an unnamed non-utility generator   94-E-0334; Request for rate hike of $349 million, 6.6% by ConsolidatedEdison; various parties agree to and PSC approves a rate freeze through1995 and moderate rate hikes in 1996-97, revenue-per-customer cap, licensefor Con Ed to attempt marketing excess power to new customers   94-E-0136; Petition by Sithe/Independence Power Partners LP forcertificate of public convenience and necessity to provide electric serviceto Alcan Rolled Products and Liberty Paperboard; staff endorses competitiveentrant fee to be paid NiMo by Sithe; PSC grants certificate Sept. 8; feeof $19.6-million over 7.5 years agreed to by Sithe; NiMo wants PSC toreconsider certificate; NiMo plans to appeal to the state court followingPSC announcement that it would not reconsider Sithe sales to industrials   94-E-0098; Niagara Mohawk granted 1.1%, $36-million electric rateincrease for 1995   94-E-0051; Orange & Rockland petition for authorization to defer costsrelated to termination of power sales agreement with State Line PowerAssociates for a gas-fired NUG in Ringwood, N.J.; PSC authorizes defermentof expenses for termination, but not for litigation   94-M-0349; New York State Electric & Gas granted $108.9-million, 7.8%,rate increase effective 7/31 blamed largely on high cost of NUGs   94-T-0539; Petition by New York State Electricn & Gas for certificate ofenvironmental compatibility and public need for a proposed nine-mile,10-inch Arcadia natural gas pipeline to Empire State Pipeline   93-E-1123; LILCO's request for two-year base rate freeze and 4% hike inthird year; opposed by consumer and environmental intervenors; PSC approvesproposal that will freeze base rates in 1995 and will allow the utility toget a return on the Shoreham nuclear plant   93-E-1084, 92-E-1085, 92-G-1086, 94-M-0347; Petition by MultipleIntervenors to suspend modified settlement agreement concerning New YorkState Electric & Gas rates   93-E-1075/93-E-0912; Proceeding to simplify and annualize the processfor setting fuel targets, toward the end of calculating more accurateutility avoided costs   93-E-1074; U.S. Generating request for approval of a financing plan forits 150-MW Wallkill plant   93-E-1073; U.S. Generating application for a CPCN for its 150-MWWallkill plant; certificate granted on condition that on-line date bedelayed until 12/15/96, with all penalties for not meeting on-line datemilestone waived by Orange & Rockland Utilities, and that U.S. Generatingbe required to accept a reasonable buyout offer   93-E-0295; NiMo petition for clarification urging Inter-Power to seekother purchasers for Halfmoon; Pending   93-E-0272; NiMo petition for a declaratory ruling against Sithe's planto sell 40 MW to a retail customer; PSC rules April 6 that Sithe retailsale is subject to minimal regulation; Written order expected in a fewweeks   93-E-0127; New York State Electric & Gas proposal to suspend curtailablerate options for commercial and institutional customers   93-E-0082 and 93-M-0849; Examination of Orange & Rockland Utilitiesrates, charges, rules and regulations; PSC ordered 6/10 that O&R fileamendments to its tariff to revise the revenue decoupling mechanism   93-M-0643; CHG&E request for permission to invest an additional$5-million in its energy services subsidiary; Pending   93-M-0229; PSC examination of competition in the electric and gasindustries; PSC decides to open second phase July 20 to determinefeasibility of establishing a wholesale competitive market; PSC rules thatutilities must provide efficiency upgrades when offering discounts toretain big customers   92-E-1187; Proceeding to determine whether environmental externalitiesshould be included in LRACs; ALJ urges removal of externalities from rates   92-E-0954, Opinion No. 94-23; PSC approval of a settlement onincremental development of renewable-fueled capacity in New York state; RFPto be forthcoming in the next few months; NiMo files petition asking forpermission to fund program thorugh voluntary residential rates   92-E-0992; Buyout of Destec Energy's 57-MW Northway cogeneration projectby Orange & Rockland Utilities; Settlement reached 6/28, termsconfidential   92-E-0886; Call for comments on updating of utility integrated resourceplans due 4/1/95; comments due 9/23   92-E-0841; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for permission to curtailpurchases of power from non-utility generators during periods of lightload; NiMo sought to reactivate request in early April; IPPNY chargescurtailment violates PURPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PENNSYLVANIAPublic Utility Commission(717) 783-3190   A-00110500F0172; Pennsylvania Power & Light request to build 2.75-miletransmission line; Pending   A-00110300F051; Siting hearings for 500-kV transmission line betweenPittsburgh and Harrisburg; Testimony resumed with Office of Trial Staffsaying a wider right-of-way was needed   C-00935374; Findlay Township request to switch electricity suppliersfrom Duquesne Light to West Penn Power; ALJ request that PUC rule on retailwheeling declined, with commissioners favoring addressing the issue ingeneric competition proceeding   C-00934947 and C-00934948; Complaints from the Riverside SchoolDistrict, which wants PP&L to relocate certain transmission lines due toEMF concerns   I-00940032; Investigation into wholesale and retail electricitycompetition; Scheduled for completion in February 1995; hearings scheduledfor Dec. 8, 1995, and Jan 12, 16 and 17, 1996   M-00940527; Pa. Office of Consumer Counsel challenges replacement powercosts during Susquehanna outage claimed by Pennsylvania Power & Light inits energy cost rate filing; PUC disallows $14-million; utility to appeal   M-00940504; PJM companies directed to notify PUC when a voltagereduction warning is issued   M-00920312C0005; Complaint on energy cost rate filed by industrials thatPP&L is using power supplied by NUGs to sell capacity off-system   P-00940774; 10-year discount rate contract between PECO Energy and theUniversity of Pennsylvania, designed to forestall the construction of auniversity cogeneration facility; approved by PUC   P-00920578; Petition by Metropolitan Edison to purchase 89 MW formNorthampton Energy Project; Pending   I-00860025; PUC investigation of competitive bidding in the electricpower marketplace; PUC rules that investor-owned utilities should usebidding to procure future resourcesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   RHODE ISLANDPublic Utilities Commission(401) 277-3500   1186; Tariff filing by Newport Electric, a subsidiary of EasternUtilities Associates, petitioning to give defense manufacturers a 10% baserate discount   939; Review of Naragansett Electric's 1992 C&LM program and costrecovery for 1993; Utility ordered to limit spending to 1992 levels; CLF,Energy CouncilCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   VERMONTPublic Service BoardFrederick Weston, (802) 821-2358   5854; Investigation into electric industry restructuringCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION   EL-95-71; Complaint filed by PSNH charging the New Hampshire ElectricCooperative with preparing to violate a partial-requirements contract byissuing a solicitation for QF power   EL-95-64; Request by Freedom Enegy Inc. for an expedited ruling on itsplan to wheel power over Public Service of New Hampshire lines to retailcustomers; FERC sets 8/8 deadline for intervenor comments   EL-95-57; Complaint agaisnt New York Power Authority by MunicipalElectric Utilities Association over use of allocated power by NYPA to servenew industrial load   EL-95-41; Petition by Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania Electric toovertun six NUG contracts; denied by FERC in late June   EL-95-38; Petition by Niagara Mohawk Power to dismiss complaint by SitheEnergies alleging overcharges for transmission of power from Sithe projectalong NiMo lines   EL-95-36; Petition by Jersey Central Power & Light asking that FERCdeclare its contract with a 117-MW independent power project developed byAdvanced Power Systems and Constellation Energy in Freehold is illegal   EL-95-30; Petition by West Penn Power for rate relief in connection withobligations to buy power from the 85-MW Washington Water Power project inBurgettstown; FERC refuses to consider   ER-96-200; Filing by New England Electric System for approval of firmtransmission rate to be charged to a group of Massachusetts municipals   ER-95-1782; Filing for approval of 32nd amendment to the New EnglandPower Pool agreement; approved by FERC   ER-95-1696; Northeast Utilities' new Tariff No. 7, based on FERC proforma tariffs; rejected by FERC   ER-95-1586/EL-96-17; Citizens Utilities point-to-point and networkintegration service transmission tariffs   ER-95-1625; Application by U.S. Generating to form USGen Power Services,a power marketer   ER-95-1491; Application by Energy Alliance Partnership, comprised ofsubsidiaries of Hydro-Quebec, Consolidated Natural Gas and Noverco, forstatus as a power marketer; FERC says Hydro-Quebec must open itstransmission lines   ER-95-1466; Proposal by NEPOOL to allow members to trade energy based oncost of capacity committed to the pool; rejected by FERC   ER-95-1010; Transmission service agreement between New York StateElectric & Gas and Heartland Energy Services   ER-95-992; Transmission service agreement between New England Power andLouis Dreyfus Electric Power   ER-95-892; Filing by Citizens Lehman Power L.P. for approval to createfive subsidiaries to facilitate certain long-term power contracts   ER-95-887; Agreement reached between Delmarva Power & Light and OldDominion Electric Cooperative that will enable DP&L to secure the lowestcost energy on a daily or hourly basis and serve part of ODEC commitmentsto Public Service Electric & Gas   ER-95-870; Petition by Enron Power Marketing and Jones Capital to sellpart of the output from a 149-MW power project in Milford, Mass., to EnronPower Marketing; approved by FERC 6/2   ER-95-885; Non-firm transmission service agreement between NortheastUtilities and Citizens Lehman Power Sales   ER-95-852; Filing by Maine Public Service to sell power to the Northeastbulk power market at market rates and an open acess, comparable servicetransmission tariff   ER-95-851; Maine Public Service is ordered to include point-to-pointflexibility in its tariff   ER-96-839; Maine Public Service open access tariff   ER-95-836; Filing by Houlton Water Dept., Van Buren Light & PowerDistrict and Eastern Maine Electric Cooperative objecting to a proposedMaine Public Service open access transmission tariff   ER-95-823; Transmission service agreements between Central Maine Powerand Catex Vitol Electric, Citizens Lehman Power Sales, Louis DreyfusElectric Power and Enron Power Marketing   ER-95-791; General Public Utilities transmission tariffs, includingdistance-sensitive rates   ER-95-759; Request by Niagara Mohawk Power for approval of atransmission service agreement with Citizens P&L   ER-95-752; Request by Northeast Utilities for approval of transmissionservice agreement with Electric Clearinghouse   ER-95-746; Request by Montaup Electric for approval of transmissionrates for Rainbow Energy Marketing   ER-95-743; Request by Boston Edison for approval of transmission serviceagreement with InterCoast Power Marketing   ER-95-742; Request by Boston Edison for approval of transmission serviceagreement with Citizens Power & Light   ER-95-738; Request by New York State Electric & Gas for approval ofsales of capacity and energy to Electric Clearinghouse   ER-95-735; Request by Central Maine Power for permission to sell 12.5 MWfrom a bought out NUG to a new wholesale power customer, Houlton Water Co.,which used to be a customer of neighboring Maine Public Service; approvedby PSC 6/15   ER-95-730; Request by New England Power for approval of transmissionrate for Enron Power Marketing   ER-95-708; Request by Central Hudson Gas & Electric for approval of atransmission service agreement with Citizens Lehman Power Sales   ER-95-679, -680; Central Vermont network service and open accesstransmission tariff filings   ER-95-601; Request by General Public Utilities Service Corp. forapproval of a service agreement with Electric Clearinghouse under whichGPU's operating companies will make available their surplus operatingcapacity for sale   ER-95-570; Request by Allegheny Power System to add Enron and ElectricClearinghouse to their list of customers under APS' Standard GenerationService Rate Schedule   ER-95-539; Request by New England Power for approval of a contract withCatex Vitol that allows NEP to make economy purchases of power from Catexsupplied by third-party sources from February to April 1995   ER-95-419; Request by RG&E for approval of a service agreements withwith Louis Dreyfus Electric Power   ER-95-267-000; FERC approves rate settlement under which New EnglandElectric System will freeze its base wholesale rates through the end of1996; NEES and key intervenors filed the settlement with FERC saying thatit would avoid a major NEES rate hike by balancing charges for NEES overthe two years   ER-94-1446-000; Application for approval of membership in New EnglandPower Pool for Milford Power Ltd., an independent power producer inMilford, Mass., developed by Enron Power and Jones Capital; FERC approvedAug. 10   ER-94-1200-000; Proposal by Maine Public Service to sell 64 MW of powerfrom Maine Yankee and Wyman 4 power plants at market rates; FERC rejects,saying it will require MPS to file an open access transmission tariff ifthe utility wants to sell the power that way; MPS decides not to submittariff   ER-94-994-000; Enron Milford disputes $2.5-million in supplementalinterconnection charges sought by NEES   ER-94-291-000; MMWEC and NU transmission agreement whereby NU sellsnon-firm Tariff No. 2 of $9/kW short-term power to MMWEC members; Pending   ER-94-129; FERC approves compromise settlement of stranded investmentdispute between NEES and MBTA covering 16 MW of firm wheeling service. Thetwo sides agreed on a five-year contract with a $44.40/kW/year startingrate. MBTA will treat the charge as a flat rate while NEES will use$24/kW/year of the revenue as a stranded investment charge to reduce coststo other customers   EL-94-41; Request by Metropolitan Edison and Pennsylvania Electric tovoid contracts with five NUGs; FERC refused; utilities request rehearing   ER-93-920-000; NEES proposed firm transmission tariff; FERC approvalaccepted without challenge by intervenors.   ER-93-902-000, 93-925-000; NU request for approval to sell 10 MW toUNITIL and 3 MW to Princeton Municipal Light Dept.; Pending   ER-92-67-000; Altresco's interconnection agreement with WMECo fortransmission; ALJ said NUGs can be charged for transmission upgrades tosupport tie-in   EC-90-10-010; Transmission tariffs proposed by Northeast Utilities fortransmission-dependent utilities So. Hadley Electric Light Dept. andWestfield Gas and Electric Light Dept.; approved Nov. 30   QF95-302; Application by Brooklyn Navy Yard Congeration Partners forstatus as a qualifying facility under PURPA for its 315-MW NUG; Con Edobjects   RM95-8/RM94-7; Revamp of the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-MarylandInterconnection Association, proposing an independent operator   TX94-6-000; Request by Reading (Mass.) Municipal Light Dept. to preserveNEPOOL preferential transmission arrangements under authority of Section211 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992; opposed by Northeast Utilities, NewEngland Electric System, Boston Edison   TX-94-5; Request by Old Dominion Electric Cooperative for orderinstructing Delmarva Power to wheel 150 MW from PSE&G to three ODEC-servedco-opsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B36-2IA086-000616-B013-123http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey72.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000938 text/html 105124HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:06:51 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:49 GMTContent-length: 104936Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey72.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Vol. 21, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPOT U PRICE IN U.S. RISES ABRUPTLY; DOC CLEARS ENTERGY LEU SHIPMENT (1926 words) MINATOM OFFICIAL CALLS FOR MAKE-OR-BREAK DECISION ON KRASNOYARSK RT-2 PLANT (864 words) LA HAGUE SITE REACHES NOMINAL PRODUCTION; MELOX GEARS UP (240 words) BNFL TAPS EXXON CHEMICAL VICE PRESIDENT FOR COMPANY'S CHIEF EXECUTIVE SLOT (249 words) WASTE MANAGEMENT YEAR LATER PASSAGE OF WASTE BILL REMAINS AN INDUSTRY TOP PRIORITY (601 words) HOLTEC, SIERRA NUCLEAR, AND SEG-VECTRA MAKE MESCALERO PROJECT SHORT LIST (442 words) IN MATTER OF YEARS, DOE STANCE SHIFTS FROM `OBLIGATION' TO NO CLEAR LEGAL DUTY (1466 words) SOUTH CAROLINA STUDIES WASTE FEE OPTIONS (235 words) WESTINGHOUSE HANFORD AWARD FEE $1.5-MILLION (169 words) HOLTEC WINS RERACKING JOB AT ANGRA-1 (99 words) NRC STAFF LOOKS TO FRENCH PROGRAM AS IT REVIEWS DOE WORK ON BURNUP CREDIT (687 words) TOLEDO EDISON BEGINS LOADING THREE NUHOMS MODULES AT DAVIS-BESSE (416 words) ENRICHMENT USEC SALE SHOULD BE CANCELED, SAYS HARVARD STUDY OF HEU DEAL (739 words) NONPROLIFERATION MINATOM EXPECTS EURATOM HEU DEAL; STATE DEPT. WON'T INTERVENE ON FRM-2 (527 words) GAN IN NO POSITION TO TAKE RUSSIAN PHYSICAL INVENTORY (1219 words) WITHOUT EC ASSURANCES, NRC MOVES TO SUSPEND COMPONENT EXPORTS (1359 words) DOE POSTPONES DECISION ON ALTERNATIVE FOR TAKING BACK RESEARCH REACTOR FUEL (548 words) REPROCESSING RT-1 OPERATION FACES COST CRISIS, UNCERTAIN FUTURE DEMAND SCHEDULE (1168 words) REPROCESSING CRITICS SAY MAYAK WILL DIE WITHOUT FOREIGN BUSINESS (893 words) FUEL CYCLE NONPROLIFERATION, SPENT FUEL HANDLING KEY TO LWR SUPPLY CONTRACT WITH DPRK (1140 words) URANIUM CAMECO'S PORT HOPE REFINERY LICENSE RENEWED JUST DAYS BEFORE EXPIRATION (289 words) CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoSPOT U PRICE IN U.S. RISES ABRUPTLY; DOC CLEARS ENTERGY LEU SHIPMENTBy:Michael Knapik, Washington; Ray Silver, Toronto; Ann MacLachlan, ParisThe spot uranium price in the U.S. rose in the last weeks in December. TheUranium Exchange Co. raised its spot U3O8 price to $12.10 per pound onDecember 18; Washington Nuclear Corp. raised its U3O8 price December 21 to$12.50/lb. Some analysts thought that latter figure was high, but mostagreed that the market was clearly trending upward.   In deals completed before the holidays, Cameco apparently selectedseveral suppliers to fill its request for offers for 700,000 U3O8, but willprobably not buy the entire amount. The mining company, sources said,didn't see any offers below $12/lb and will probably buy much of thematerial at a price around $12.25/lb, plus or minus 10 cents. Some offersreportedly as high as $12.50/lb were considered, but several others withprices a $1 or so higher than that were dismissed.   British Nuclear Fuels reportedly also selected more than one supplier,reportedly for more than 200,000 lb U3O8. One source suggested that thecompany may have bought as much as 500,000 lb U3O8 equivalent at pricesranging from $12.20/lb to slightly above $12.40/lb.   San Diego Gas & Electric is said to have selected a supplier for U3O8.(The utility had been looking for offers to supply 223,000 lb.) The priceis said to be at or slightly above $11.85/lb, the TradeTech value at theend of November. Said one source, ``San Diego and Wisconsin Public Service(which is still evaluating offers) may have seen the last of theunder-$12/lb uranium.''   At press time there was a report that Consumers Power was out lookingfor a supply of 600,000 lb U3O8.   Fermco, the company in charge of cleaning up the DOE defense facility atFernald in Ohio, solicited offers last month for the purchase 484,061 lb ofexcess normal uranium, which is in various forms including derbies, ingots,recyclable metal, and UF4. The minimum acceptable price, the solicitationsaid, was $2.04/lb--$1.36/lb for the material and $0.68/lb for analysis,handling, and packaging. Bids were due December 20. According to sources,Fermco received expressions of interest from four companies.   In NuclearFuel's judgment, significant open-market transactions in theU.S. during the forward two-week period could be concluded within the rangeof $12.00-$12.40/lb U3O8, a rise from the range reported two weeks ago of$11.80-$12.10/lb. So-called unrestricted buyers, those able to use uraniumfrom the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), could probably concludea deal within the range of $10.00-$10.30/lb, a slight rise in the rangereported two weeks ago of $9.90-$10.20/lb.DOC Clears Import Of Entergy LEU   A shipment of low-enriched uranium (LEU) destined for use in one ofEntergy's reactors was finally released December 21 by the U.S. CustomsService after the import was cleared by the Department of Commerce. Thematerial, enriched at Eurodif and imported by Cogema Inc., containeduranium originally from Kazakstan and/or Uzbekistan. Sources said DOCcleared the shipment after Entergy agreed to match an equal quantity of theuranium with newly produced U.S. uranium. Neither DOC nor Entergy officialswere available to confirm that report, however.   Under the terms of the antidumping suspension agreements with thosecountries, the origin of the uranium does not change when it is enriched ina third country and therefore, the uranium can only be imported right nowinto the U.S. under the quota systems in both suspension agreements.   Joseph Spetrini, DOC deputy assistant secretary for importadministration, has been trying to negotiate an agreement to grandfathersome of the so-called bypass Uzbek and Kazak uranium. In October, Spetriniproposed to grandfather 75% of the uranium utilities contracted for beforeMarch 27, the date the Kazak agreement was signed. The remaining 25% couldcome in if the utilities matched the uranium with newly produced U.S.uranium. The mining company petitioners, including Cogema Inc.'s PathfinderMines, protested to Spetrini and told him that they would agree tograndfathering only under certain conditions.   Spetrini found himself in a bind and, according to one source, wasfacing the threat of a lawsuit by Entergy if the shipment was not cleared.   (Washington Nuclear reported that Customs cleared the five containers ofEntergy's LEU that had been held up at Portsmouth, Va. since December 8.)   On the Entergy shipment, DOC, according to one source, ``used chewinggum to patch together'' the settlement, allowing Commerce to make the callto Customs to clear the shipment. The mining companies apparently didn'tagree to the settlement and still maintain that there is no legal basis tolet the uranium in.Miners' Conditions For Grandfathering   The ad hoc group of U.S. uranium mining companies, petitioners in theantidumping cases, submitted a confidential set of conditions that they saymust be met for them to agree to any grandfathering of Uzbek or Kazakuranium (NF, 18 Dec. '95, 2). The miners say these conditions represent ``afirm position of industry.'' Among the conditions, sources said, are thefollowing: The quantity of grandfathered material is not to exceed9.5-million lb; the material to be allowed in without restrictions must beonly 75% of the nominal quantity contracted for; the matched sales to allowimport of the remaining 25% must be done by June 30 and must be matchedwith newly produced U.S. uranium; the utility contracts for the purchase ofUzbek or Kazak uranium concluded after March 27 and those not brought toDOC's attention in response to September 22 Federal Register notice wouldnot be eligible for grandfathering; and the DOC must reverse itsinterpretation of the Uzbek agreement--and an interpretation that allowsfor a doubling quota amount to 1.88-million lb U3O8 per year after 1996.   ``There are limits to industry's willingness to accept mechanisms whichwill flood the U.S. market with dumped CIS uranium,'' the miners said.``Those limits have been reached.''Australian Analysts See $14.25/lb U Price in 1996   Analyst Daniel Stubbs of the Australian Bureau of Agriculture & ResourceEconomics is predicting that the average spot uranium price will rise to(US)$14.25/lb U3O8 in 1996 from $11.50/lb in 1995. Stubbs and fellowanalyst Charles Millsteed are predicting that in the longer term, the spotprice will increase to $19.70/lb ($17/lb in 1995 dollars) by the end of2000. Rising prices will lead to increased production from Australia's twooperating companies--Energy Resources of Australia and Western Mining Corp.The cost of production in Australian uranium mines is estimated to be inthe range of $10-$15/lb U3O8. Production is expected to rise from 4,700metric tons U3O8 to 6,300 MT in 1999-2000, the analysts say. The articlesabout uranium appeared in the December 1995 issue of the journal AustralianCommodities.INI: Price Spike In 1998, But Softening Thereafter   International Nuclear Inc. (INI), whose president is ex-Nuexco analystDavid Schramm, has recently completed an analysis of the market thatforecasts a spot market price spike by 1998, but with the price softeningafter that. INI says it believes the spot price in constant 1995 dollarswill be in the $16.50 range by 1998 but will fall by the year 2000 toaround $14.80/lb U3O8. The spiking will occur, INI believes, because ofpressure to produce more uranium as utility stocks get used up over thenext two years. The softening will occur, however, as more blended-down HEUenters the market under the formula called for in the pending U.S.Enrichment Corp. privatization bill and as more uranium enters the U.S.from Kazakstan and Uzbekistan under their suspension agreement quotas, INIbelieves. INI, as do most analysts, foresees essentially flat requirementsover the next five years.   INI also believes there could be a rising premium for longer-termcontracts, and it forecasts a base price for those types of contracts inthe mid-$18/lb range by 1998.ESA Advisory Group Elects New Officers   The Euratom Supply Agency's advisory group met last month to elect newofficers and hear updates on various items of interest, but took no newinitiatives, participants reported.   Elected chairman was Jose-Luis Gonzalez of Enusa; new vice chairmen areStig Sandklef of Vattenfall Fuel and H. Blackwell Gresley of Urenco Ltd.   The committee heard a brief report on the U.S.-Euratom agreement fornuclear cooperation, now under review by the U.S. Congress, and onrelations with Russia and the ex-Soviet republics that export uranium, buta source said there is ``nothing new'' in the latter field. The committeewill have to tackle the issue during the coming year, to define whether andhow the ESA's ``common policy'' of limiting nuclear materials imports fromRussia must change when the overall European Union-Russian Federationpartnership and cooperation agreement enters into force, in principle onJanuary 1, 1997. The agreement calls for free trade between the two partieson that date, but the EU insisted on a potential exemption for nucleartrade if the required market conditions are not fulfilled.Linder Fund Buys More Stock In URI   Uranium Resources announced December 26 that one of its largeststockholders--the Linder Dividend Fund Inc.--had exercised it rights undera May 1995 warrant agreement to buy more common stock in the company. Theexercise of 500,000 warrants will infuse the company with $2-million inworking capital for project development and other purposes.   URI said that it expects production to begin at its Kingsville Dome sitelate in the first quarter. Combined with production from Rosita, URI saidit expects to produce more than 2-million lb in 1996. In 1995, URI said610,000 lb U3O8 were produced at Rosita.   URI's stock closed December 26 at 5 3/8, with 16,800 shares beingtraded. Its 52-week high was 8 5/8.Court Okays Denison Restructure   Four days before Christmas, Denison Mines President Bill James announceda new deal for shareholders who have been in financial limbo for four yearssince Ontario Hydro canceled its long-term commitment to buy 100-million lbof high-cost Elliot Lake uranium. With final approval from the OntarioCourt of Justice, General Division, James said the company could proceedwith a restructuring plan that will reclassify existing Class A, Class Band preferred shares into new common shares. The new shares should belisted for trading on Montreal and Toronto stock exchanges by January 3, hesaid.   ``It has been a long road and all stakeholders have paid a price. The(federal and Ontario) governments have provided interest relief on taxesand a postponement of taxes payable; corporate lenders and Canada Mortgage& Housing Corp. have given interest, principal and repayment concessions;preferred shareholders have agreed to eliminate a large amount of dividendsin arrears and their priority on liquidation; Class A and Class Bshareholders have accepted a significant dilution of their equityinterest,'' James explained. The provincial government have madeconcessions in exchange for assurance that decommissioning of DenisonMines' Elliot Lake mine-mill facility would be completed.   ``As a result of the stakeholders contributions, Denison has beenpreserved as a going concern and its capital structure have beensubstantially improved,'' James noted.Czech Deal With Cameco   The first company in Eastern Europe to take its uranium conversionbusiness to Canada, the Czech electric power utility CEZ has contractedwith Cameco Corp. for conversion services at Port Hope, Ontario. Notingthat the Soviet Union previously met such nuclear fuel demands, CamecoChairman and President Bernard Michel said the CEZ deal ``reflects thechanging global marketplace as Eastern European countries open their doorsto Western business.'' Cameco would not say how much uranium would beinvolved nor the dollar value of the CEZ contract.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoMINATOM OFFICIAL CALLS FOR MAKE-OR-BREAK DECISION ON KRASNOYARSK RT-2PLANTBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   Prospects for completing the RT-2 reprocessing plant at Krasnoyarsk-26are bleak, according to a key official at the Russian Ministry of AtomicEnergy (Minatom).   RT-2, with a design throughput of 1,500 metric tons heavy metal (MTHM)per year, was supposed to reprocess spent fuel from VVER-1000 plants.Construction began in 1987 but was stopped two years later for lack offunds (NF, 4 Jan. '89, 5). Meanwhile, spent fuel is being stored atreactors and at an interim storage facility adjacent to the RT-2construction site at Krasnoyarsk-26.   Evgeny Mikerin, who heads up nuclear fuel production at Minatom, saidlast month the plant is about 30% complete. Since 1989, the project hasbeen modified to include design innovations, including safety improvementsin the aftermath of an explosion at a separation plant at Tomsk-7 (NF, 12April '93, 1). If construction were to resume now, Mikerin said, RT-2 couldbe completed by the end of 2003.   Construction cannot proceed, however, until regulator Gosatomnadzor andlocal authorities review reports required under Russia's new nuclearlicensing laws, passed in mid-1995. Mikerin said Minatom anticipatesdifficulties in getting all consulting experts to agree on the contents ofan ecological report that must be submitted to licensing authorities.   In the meantime, Mikerin said, Minatom has not appropriated anyconstruction funding for the project. Russian media reported in early 1995that following a decree by Russian President Boris Yeltsin to completeRT-2, that the central government, Minatom, and local and regionalauthorities earmarked more than $100-million for the project. But Mikerinsaid those reports were false.   ``There is no money for RT-2 beyond the small amounts required tomaintain the infrastructure already there,'' he said. Mikerin added that,because construction on the Siberian site had started nearly 10 years ago,infrastructure maintenance must be funded at a higher level now in order toprevent the equipment from deteriorating.Taiwan, ROK Won't Take Back HLW   There also is no longer an agreement inside the Russian administrationon the project's cost. Mikerin said that while costs associated with RT-1have been rising, cost estimates for the construction and operation of RT-2also have increased. But, he said, ``the government has taken no decisionon this as of yet.''   He said Minatom still is looking for foreign partners wanting toreprocess fuel at RT-2 ``because we cannot continue to depend upongovernment support.'' Mikerin said on December 5, ``As of today, all those(parties) we have discussed the project with have declined'' to beinvolved.   Mikerin confirmed that utilities in Germany and Switzerland haveformally declined to consider a reprocessing joint venture atKrasnoyarsk-26. He said that talks also had been held with utilities inTaiwan and the Republic of Korea (ROK). Those potential clients have notcategorically withdrawn from the talks, Mikerin said. But the two Asianstates are not yet willing to take back high-level reprocessing waste(HLW), he added. That takeback is now required by Russian law.   Mikerin also contradicted speculation that Japan, as part of an ongoingreview of its own reprocessing expansion program, might fund completion ofRT-2 to reprocess Japanese spent fuel. The Minatom official said thatnuclear political relations between Tokyo and Moscow are ``not good'' andare hampered by a long-running dispute about Russian Navy low-level wastedumping off Russia's Pacific Coast. Under these circumstances, he said, itis not possible to strike a deal with Japan involving RT-2.   Mikerin acknowledged that the slow pace of Minatom's nuclear powerdevelopment program since the Chernobyl accident in 1986 now poses problemsfor the economics of the reprocessing project. At 1,500 MTHM/yr, RT-2 wasdesigned to be much too large for the current projected demand.   ``It's time to make hard decisions about RT-2'' Mikerin said. ``If wewant to finish it, we should find the money and do so--now. If not, weshould give it up.''   The interim storage facility at Krasnoyarsk-26 for VVER-1000 spent fuelis 15% full, Mikerin said, compared to 13% at the end of 1994.   As a result of a government-to-government agreement with Ukraine, abouthalf the spent fuel to be added to the storage facility will come fromVVER-1000 units in Ukraine, he said.   Following a commercial contract two years ago, Ukraine is trying to payfor the storage of its spent fuel at Krasnoyarsk-26. About half of thepayments it makes to Minatom are in cash. The rest are in barter, mostly infood and stainless steel tubing provided in advance for RT-2, as well aszirconium and a small amount of uranium ore.   While RT-2 could be ready in eight years if approved and funded, Minatomofficials said, without foreign help, it will take longer for Russia todigest the plutonium output of the plant in the form of plutonium-uraniumfuel.   So far, Mikerin said, an experimental fabrication line forplutonium-based fast reactor fuel at Chelyabinsk-65 has produced only twoto three assemblies per year. They have been loaded into the BN-600 fastreactor at Beloyarsk, near Ekaterinburg. The reactor, like most otherSoviet-design fast reactors, has traditionally operated on uranium fuelenriched to up to 25% U-235.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoLA HAGUE SITE REACHES NOMINAL PRODUCTION; MELOX GEARS UPBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Cogema's La Hague reprocessing site reached its nominal capacity for thefirst time in 1995, processing some 1,550 metric tons heavy metal (MTHM),despite the labor unrest that slowed production in June, said Jean-LouisRicaud, the company's reprocessing chief.   The UP3 plant that reprocesses foreign reactor fuel was commissioned in1990 but reached its nominal capacity of 800 MTHM/year five years later.UP2-800, commissioned in August 1994, took less than a year to reach thesame target, Cogema officials point out, saying this demonstrates thecompany's mastery of the industrial process.   Ricaud said that Cogema's mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel fabrication complexalso is gearing up, with the refurbished Cadarache MOX plant havingmanufactured more than 30 MTHM of fuel for Electricite de France (EDF) in1995.   The much bigger Melox MOX plant at Marcoule produced low-enrichment andmedium-enrichment MOX pins last year, but complete fuel assemblies includedhigh-enrichment pins made in Cadarache, he said. About 70-75 fuelassemblies were produced at the plant, or 20 MTHM equivalent of MOX fuel.   But Melox will really begin full production in 1996, Ricaud said. ``Weare confident that the plant will be able to deliver 85 tons to EDF in 1996with the label `Made in Melox,' as scheduled,'' he said.   The nominal capacity of Melox is 120 MTHM/year. Cogema has announcedplans to increase that to 160 MTHM/year in the near term.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoBNFL TAPS EXXON CHEMICAL VICE PRESIDENT FOR COMPANY'S CHIEF EXECUTIVE SLOT   British Nuclear Fuels plc (BNFL) has confirmed the appointment ofinternational chemical industry executive John Taylor as its new chiefexecutive. His appointment will go into effect in March.   Taylor, currently a vice president of Brussels-based Exxon ChemicalEurope Inc., replaces Neville Chamberlain. Last month Chamberlain left thatpost for a promotion as deputy chairman of BNFL (NF, 4 Dec. '95, 11).Chamberlain is combining both roles until Taylor's installation.   BNFL is beefing up its top management in efforts to maximize overseasopportunities. Taylor, 48, has been with Exxon Chemical for 26 years,holding a number of senior international management positions in the U.K.,U.S. and Belgium.   Taylor said that BNFL's improved safety and environmental performance,coupled with recent successes in winning international business, made it an``exciting time...to move the company forward.'' BNFL was recently namedthe U.K.'s fastest growing large exporter (NF, 23 Oct. '95, 8).   Taylor's appointment coincided with BNFL's announcement that site workhas started on a revolutionary 360-million-pound (U.S.$560-million) plantto treat intermediate-level radioactive waste (ILW). The plant is expectedto cut 500-million pounds from the lifetime costs of BNFL's ILW program andto attract international business with its state-of-the-art technology.   The Sellafield Drypac plant, scheduled to come on line in 2002, willconvert wet ILW into dry material that can be compacted, mixed withconcrete, and packed in 500-liter stainless steel containers. Main buildingand civil contract work on the plant is due to start April 1997.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoYEAR LATER PASSAGE OF WASTE BILL REMAINS AN INDUSTRY TOP PRIORITY   The nuclear power industry has no ``Plan B'' up its sleeve in the eventnuclear waste legislation does not pass this year, said Joseph Colvin,executive vice president of the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).   ``There is a strong consensus across the nation this needs to be done,''he said.   A year after the industry trade association set waste legislation as itstop priority for 1995, a congressional fix of the faltering DOE wasteprogram still has top billing. But Colvin remains optimistic that can beaccomplished.   Even as the Upton-Towns nuclear waste bill, H.R. 1020, became boggeddown in congressional budget battles on Capitol Hill, it remained one ofthe strongest bipartisan bills making its way through the legislativeprocess, he said. Supported by the Republican leadership and suchinfluential Democrats as Reps. John Dingell of Michigan and Frank PalloneJr. of New Jersey, the bill has a hefty list of supporters.   More than 230 members of the House are ready to move on the bill,according to Colvin.Breaking The `Scoring' Logjam   NEI has sent suggested solutions to the House Commerce Committee in aneffort to break the ``scoring'' logjam that prevented the bill from movingto the floor in 1995. Earlier Budget Committee Chairman John Kasich(R-Ohio) had warned that the user fee provisions in the bill would requireabout $4.2-billion in new offsetting budget cuts.   Under H.R. 1020, money collected from nuclear utility ratepayers to fundthe DOE waste program would be limited to the amount the program spent theyear before. The provisions would eliminate the hundreds of millions ofdollars in surplus fees collected from ratepayers each year that arescored, or counted against the federal budget.   Colvin said that doing away with the new railroad spur called for inH.R. 1020 would save $1-billion. That, coupled with the one-time paymentsutilities are required to make to the DOE program, would put the scoringdifference at less than $1-billion, he said.   He noted that NEI still has a lot more to do in working with the Senateleadership on fixing the waste program. Sen. Larry Craig's (R-Idaho) S.1271 is the companion to H.R. 1020 and will be tackled this year.   Timing will be everything in both chambers. Colvin said NEI isoptimistic about getting a bill through the Senate early in the year,before the political pressure of the presidential election year gets toohigh. He noted there was no magic cutoff point for passing nuclear wastelegislation, but that the longer that effort dragged on the more difficultit would be.Increasing Industry Role   The role the nuclear industry will have in the DOE waste program isexpected to increase in 1996. Colvin said that DOE is expected to issue arequest for proposals early in the year, seeking private sector involvementor input on spent fuel transportation.   DOE program director Daniel Dreyfus has noted that budget cuts wouldforce DOE to turn that work over to the private sector. The department alsowill be terminating its multipurpose canister (MPC) program, also leavingthat work up to the private sector.   Colvin said NEI plans to play a key role in the private-sectordevelopment of spent fuel canisters that can be used to store, ship, andultimately bury the waste. NEI will be a key coordinator of work and isexpected to outline utility specifications for the canisters, much likewhat the industry did for advanced light water reactor requirements throughthe Electric Power Research Institute.   ``Clearly NEI will have some type of catalyst role,'' said Colvin.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoHOLTEC, SIERRA NUCLEAR, AND SEG-VECTRA MAKE MESCALERO PROJECT SHORT LISTBy:Elaine Hiruo, Washington   Three dry storage teams made it to the Mescalero project's short listlast month, keeping them in the running as potential suppliers for thecommercial spent fuel storage business planned for Mescalero tribal land inNew Mexico. Final selection is expected early this year.   On the short list are Holtec International, Sierra Nuclear, and a teammade up of Westinghouse subsidiary SEG and Vectra Technologies Inc.   A contract with the Mescalero-utility project could open doorselsewhere. Northern States Power Co. (NSP), for example, is the leadutility in the project and will only consider storage technologies tappedfor the Mescalero venture when it develops its own away-from-reactorstorage facility.   Under Minnesota law, the utility must look for sites elsewhere inGoodhue County, away from the Mississippi River, to store Prairie Islandspent fuel. The plant is in Goodhue County near the river. Jim Alders, NSPmanager of regulatory projects, said last week that the storage capacity atthe away-from-reactor site will be limited to 680 fuel assemblies.   NSP, he said, expects to receive vendor bids in mid-January and toselect the winning technology by mid-March. The utility plans to submit alicense application to the NRC in October.   Public opposition, meanwhile, is mounting against attempts to movePrairie Island spent fuel away from the reactor site. A citizens advisorygroup's draft report now circulating recommends that the state scrap plansfor an away-from-reactor storage facility, said Alders. The group isscheduled to submit its final report to the Minnesota Environmental QualityBoard in mid-January.   Alders said he did not know if a board decision to leave spent fuel atPrairie Island would put the issue back in the lap of the Minnesotalegislature.   Meanwhile, dry storage vendors expect the Mescalero Apache Tribe and itsutility partners to select more than one technology for the spent fuelstorage facility planned for New Mexico. The project is aimed at providinglimited storage relief to participating utilities, which feel they can nolonger rely solely on the faltering DOE nuclear waste program.   The commercial venture is slated to have enough storage capacity tohandle 20,000 metric tons uranium of spent fuel. It will be built andoperated as a business, with an operating life of no more than 40 years.   The short-listed companies already have links to utilities participatingin the project. Holtec, for instance, earlier sold its canister-based spentfuel storage system to Commonwealth Edison, the largest nuclear utility inthe U.S. and a member of the Mescalero project. Sierra Nuclear and Vectrastorage systems, likewise, have been purchased by other project members.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoIN MATTER OF YEARS, DOE STANCE SHIFTS FROM `OBLIGATION' TO NO CLEAR LEGALDUTY   In 1984, DOE correspondence on the department's accepting utility spentfuel in 1998 was peppered with such phrases as ``legal obligations.''Despite being called for in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 and incontracts DOE signed with utilities, by 1993 those phrases were gone, andDOE officials maintained they didn't have a clear legal obligation to takethe spent fuel by the 1998 contract date if DOE failed to have a place toput the waste.   Attorneys for states and nuclear utilities suing the department over its1998 responsibility have submitted DOE correspondence to the U.S. Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia Circuit that appears to show anevolving policy. Plaintiffs in the case have asked the court to reinforcewhat they consider a binding DOE obligation to begin taking utility spentfuel by January 31, 1998.   Oral arguments are slated for January 17.   The following are excerpts from DOE correspondence in the joint appendixplaintiffs' attorneys filed with the court or in DOE's response to aFreedom of Information request.May 30, 1984 letter from DOE General Counsel Theodore Garrish to Sen.Bennett Johnston (D-La.), ranking Democrat on the Energy & NaturalResources Committee:   ``The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 was passed with the presumptionthat a repository would be operational by January 31, 1998. The Departmentfully intends to meet this congressional objective and is currently in theprocess of taking the steps necessary to ensure that we fulfill all of ourcorresponding legal obligations under the act....   ``We believe the intent of Congress when formulating the act wasdirected toward commencing disposal operations by 1998. The Department istotally committed to achieving this objective. In light of this commitment,we are not now in a position to analyze in any meaningful way the legalconsequences raised by your question as the act was premised upon theexistence of an operational repository by the January 31, 1998 date.''June 21, 1984 letter from Johnston to Secretary of Energy Donald Hodel:   ``For some time I have been concerned about the Department's nuclearwaste program. In pursuing this concern I have put several questions toDepartmental spokesmen. Recently I received a rather extraordinary letterfrom your General Counsel, Theodore J. Garrish, responding to a requestthat I had made of the Department for a memorandum on the Department'sinterpretation of certain provisions of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of1982.   ``I had asked for an opinion on the legal obligation of the Departmentand the Department's authority to take title to spent nuclear fuel in theevent that a repository has not commenced operation. Garrish's reply was asfollows: ``...(W)e are not now in a position to analyze in any meaningfulway the legal consequences raised by your question....   ``The only sensible interpretation I can put on this response is thatthe Department does not want to provide an answer to my question.''Draft letter, dated June 29, 1984, from Hodel to Johnston [Eric Fygi, DOEdeputy general counsel under the current administration, later said this isan unused draft of the response Hodel later sent to Johnston on September7, 1984.]:   ``My first reaction to your letter was sympathy. Lord knows that manytimes I, too, have despaired at getting a `sensible interpretation' out ofthe Office of General Counsel. As if that were not enough, the Office ofGeneral Counsel has adopted its own version of the winemaker's adage, underwhich `they'll not opine before it's time.'   ``But as I actually turned to Mr. Garrish's repsonse [sic] of May 30 itseemed to make a good deal of sense. It emphasized Congress' clear policyobjective that acceptance of spent fuel for disposal would commence byJanuary 31, 1998. Instead of trying to render a legal opinion in a factualvacuum, Mr. Garrish's letter advised you, correctly, that the Department is`totally committed to achieving this objective.'''August 30, 1984 letter from Garrish to Johnston:   ``The Department does not intend to breach the legal commitments it hasmade in carrying out the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, and, of course, to datethere has been no suggestion that it has defaulted on any of itsobligations. To the contrary, this administration's clear policy commitmentis directed to commencing waste acceptance `beginning in 1998.'...   ``Since the clear policy commitment made by the Congress in formulatingthe Act was directed to beginning repository operations in sufficient timeto commence disposal of spent fuel by 1998, and since the Administration iscommitted to achieving precisely that objective, the issues that might bepresented by the unavailability of a repository at that time have anabstract quality. We are not in a position now to analyze in any meaningfulway the legal consequences of unavailability of a repository wholly bereftof a real factual setting necessary to aid our understanding of thequestion. Section 302(a) (5) contemplates beginning disposal of spent fuelby January 31, 1998, and the Department is fully committed to achievingthat objective.''September 7, 1984 letter from Hodel to Johnston:   ``In our original letter, the Department stated a firm commitment toaccept for disposal, on an orderly schedule, high-level radioactive wasteand spent fuel not (sic) later than January 31, 1998.''March 12, 1987 letter from DOE General Counsel J. Michael Farrell to Rep.Philip Sharp (R-Ind.):   ``(A)cceptance of spent fuel for storage at an MRS (monitoredretrievable storage) facility beginning January 31, 1998 would comply withthe contract requirements that were based on the Nuclear Waste PolicyAct...''   ``Thus we believe section 302(a) (5) (A) imposes a duty on the Secretaryafter commencement of repository operations to take title to spent fuelpromptly on request, but does not foreclose the Secretary from taking titleto spent fuel in advance of commencement of repository operations if thatstep is necessary and appropriate in fulfilling the terms of the contractby which the program is implemented.''April 1, 1987 letter from Farrell to Sharp:   ``Had Congress intended in section 302(a) (5) to specify a date by whicha first repository was to begin operations, the logical point at which toexpress this policy would have been in that section's subsection that dealsexpressly with `commencement of operation of a repository.' Instead, itrefrained from specifying a date certain for commencement of repositoryoperations, but required only that, once a repository has begun operations,the Secretary shall act with expedition to take title to spent fuel on therequest of the generator or owner of spent fuel.''Prehearing questions and answers related to the April 23, 1987 hearing bythe Senate Environment & Public Works Subcommittee on Nuclear Regulation.Witness: Secretary of Energy John Herrington.   Q: ``Do you view the MRS facility as either a `disposal' facility or afacility in which to `dispose' of `spent nuclear fuel?'''   A: ``No. The MRS is viewed as a DOE facility as defined in Article I 10of the contract; which would be an integral part of the waste disposalsystem. That definition expressly includes a facility to which spent fuel`may be shipped by DOE prior to its transportation to a disposal facility.'The purpose of that definition was described in the preamble of the finalrule adopting the contract terms `to expressly state, an accordance withthe act, that there may be an interim storage facility...which DOE mayutilize prior to emplacement in a repository.''January 12, 1991 letter from DOE waste program director Daniel Dreyfus toCommissioner Susan Clark of the Florida Public Service Commission:   ``The Department does not have a clear legal obligation under theNuclear Waste Policy Act to accept spent nuclear fuel absent an operationalrepository or other facility. However, the Secretary has acknowledged herbelief that the Department may have created such an expectation through itsimplementation of the Standard Contract for Disposal of Spent Nuclear Fueland/or High-Level Radioactive Waste (10 CFR 961). The Secretary has furtherindicated her intention to explore with affected utilities various optionsand methods for offsetting a portion of the financial burden associatedwith continued onsite storage in order to address expectations resultingfrom currently projected waste acceptance schedules.''December 29, 1993 letter from Dreyfus to Robert Butterworth, Florida stateattorney general:   ``The Department shares your concern regarding the timely provision ofdisposal services for the Nation's spent nuclear fuel. When the NuclearWaste Policy Act was enacted in 1982, the Department planned to have afacility in operation and prepared to begin acceptance of spent nuclearfuel in 1998. The Department does not have a clear legal obligation underthe Nuclear Waste Policy Act to accept spent nuclear fuel absent anoperations repository or other facility.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoSOUTH CAROLINA STUDIES WASTE FEE OPTIONS   Concerned about the lack of progress in the DOE civilian high-levelnuclear waste program, South Carolina last month became the third state tolook into withholding nuclear utility ratepayer contributions from thefederal Nuclear Waste Fund. The state Public Service Commission on December20 approved Commissioner Warren Arthur's motion to establish the reviewprocess. Arthur said the commission is obligated to determine if the wastefee is in fact a ``prudent expenditure.'' He said that commission staffwill look into such things as the legal aspects, under South Carolina laws,of withholding the ratepayer payments.   Arthur said that, in the context of a rate case proceeding, thecommission might later pursue such options as barring utilities frompassing the fee on to ratepayers, or placing that money into a specialescrow account. Arthur said the staff has been asked to present itspreliminary report to the commission February 22. The final report is dueby June 1.   The Virginia State Corporation Commission (SCC) became the first statebody to request such a study in July 1995. SCC staff was slated to presentthe report to the commission late last week. The Minnesota Department ofPublic Service (DSC) announced its probe of the fee issue in November. AnyDSC recommendation to change the way the fee is handled would have to betaken up by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoWESTINGHOUSE HANFORD AWARD FEE $1.5-MILLION   The Westinghouse Hanford Co. received a $1.5-million DOE award fee lastmonth after receiving a rating of ``good'' for its work at the shutteredHanford nuclear arms plant in Washington state. The rating covers thesix-month period ending September 30 and is up from the satisfactory gradethe company received for the previous six months. The maximum award feepossible for work done during this latest rating period was $5-million.   The fee is one of several the company can receive, based on the caliberof its work. Westinghouse Hanford is prime contractor at the DOE site. DOEsaid that fiscal 1995 fees awarded to the company as of December 15included: $11.7-million out of a possible $13.3-million for meetingperformance-based objectives; $9.4-million, based on a claimed savings of$188-million (DOE said a cost savings validations is under way and isexpected to add to the cost-savings fee.); and $2.6-million out of apossible $3-million for its handling of solid waste at the site.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoHOLTEC WINS RERACKING JOB AT ANGRA-1   The team of Holtec International and U.S. Tool & Die has received acontract to install high density spent fuel storage racks at Angra-1 inBrazil. Value of the deal has been estimated at $6-million. The rerackingwill increase the in-pool storage capacity of the Furnas CentraisElectricas S.A. unit from 363 storage locations to 1,252 slots. Holtec saidthe racks are designed to store fuel in two regions of the pool: Region 1will be designed for storing fresh fuel assemblies, and Region 2 will befor assemblies taking credit for burnup.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoNRC STAFF LOOKS TO FRENCH PROGRAM AS IT REVIEWS DOE WORK ON BURNUP CREDITBy:Elaine Hiruo, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris   NRC staff expects to soon be able to submit questions to DOE on thedepartment's topical report on burnup credit. When approved, the reportcould serve as a valuable reference to dry storage vendors in the U.S.,according to one DOE official.   Late last month Charles Haughney, deputy director of the NRC spent fuelprogram office, said he believed that DOE was on the road to addressingissues surrounding the use of burnup credit. Key among them iscriticality.   ``You really have to take an attitude that a criticality accident in thepublic sector is absolutely unacceptable,'' Haughney said. Criticalityalready is on NRC's roster of technical issues that must be addressed inits licensing of such things as the spent fuel containers and therepository itself.   Any NRC approval of the DOE topical report is expected to have vendorsscrambling back to the drawing boards to redesign spent fuel basketsalready approved by the NRC. The credit could result in higher capacitywaste packages.   Burnup credit is not now used in the U.S. Haughney was part of atwo-member NRC team that went to France in November to see how the issue ishandled there. The differences between the more mature French program andDOE's would prevent any direct shifting of technology and ideas. ButHaughney said the visit left him wondering how some of what the French docould be adapted to fit within the framework of the U.S. program.   ``We went over there to get a little smarter, not to find the keys tothe kingdom,'' he said.   French officials say that as fuel burnups increase, calculating theresidual uranium enrichment of spent fuel precisely can translate intooptimization of transport and consequent cost savings.   Jean-Louis Ricaud, head of Cogema's reprocessing and engineeringoperations, which also includes the Cogema group's transportation business,said no special burnup credit was needed for fuels with an initialuranium-235 enrichment of around 3%-3.5%, corresponding to today's standardburnups of around 35,000 megawatt-days per metric ton. Standard spent fueltransport casks and especially internal fuel baskets were designed toprevent criticality accidents for such enrichment levels, he explained.   But when utilities began moving to higher burnups, requiring initialenrichments above 3.5%, the French company and its customers sought amethod to give credit for U-235 burnup in a reactor, in order todemonstrate that spent higher-enrichment fuel does not in fact have aresidual enrichment greater than 3% and thus that no special measures arerequired for its transport, such as loading the transport baskets withfewer fuel elements.   Ricaud said equipment has been developed to measure the dose rate fromassemblies in the reactor, calculate the fuel's content in fissionproducts, and deduce the amount of U burned and thus the amount remainingin the assembly after discharge. The method requires monitoring fuel burnupin-reactor. Ricaud said he didn't know how widespread the practice is inFrance today; Electricite de France is only beginning to move tohigher-burnup fuel.   Research staff of the Institute of Nuclear Safety and Protection (IPSN)have participated in the development. IPSN is a semi-autonomous unit of theCommissariat a l'Energie Atomique (CEA) which works partly for the CEA andother industry customers, and partly in a safety analysis function for theFrench nuclear safety authority, DSIN.   Ricaud said that following a criticality specialists' meeting inAlbuquerque, N.M. last September, technicians from the CEA and the NRC hadagreed to pursue discussions on burnup credit.   Ricaud observed that the U.S. situation is ``fundamentally different''from the French situation, because spent fuel is generally shipped inFrance to La Hague after only one or two years' cooling. In the U.S., hesaid, fuel cools longer at-reactor, so the capacity of each transport caskis theoretically higher. An additional margin could be won if credit isgiven for burnup in calculating the amount of fuel that can be loaded intoa given basket. But the real problem in the U.S., he said, is that``there's no place to ship'' the spent fuel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoTOLEDO EDISON BEGINS LOADING THREE NUHOMS MODULES AT DAVIS-BESSE   Toledo Edison Co., after being cleared by NRC, began the process ofloading three Nuhoms spent fuel storage modules December 26 at Davis-Besse.The modules, made by Vectra Technologies Inc., will hold 72 assemblies andallow the utility to maintain a full-core off-load capability when itenters a refueling outage in April. The utility may need two or moreadditional modules in early 1998 (before the next refueling outage) if afederal interim storage facility is not available, a company spokeswomansaid.   NRC declined to grant a request from the Toledo Coalition for SafeEnergy to halt the loading of the casks. The Toledo group had one lawsuitdismissed in November challenging the NRC rule allowing the Nuhoms cask tobe used for spent fuel storage. However,the group November 30 filed a newlawsuit in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit,claiming that NRC improperly allowed Vectra to alter a safety analysisreport commitment on cask wall thickness (NF, 6 Nov. '95, 17). Joining theToledo Coalition in its latest suit is the Maryland Safe Energy Coalition,which seeks to block the use of Nuhoms modules at Baltimore Gas & ElectricCo.'s Calvert Cliffs.   Separately, Vectra reported in mid-November a net loss of $1.9-millionfor the three months ending October 1 on revenue of $24-million. In thesame period a year ago, the company earned $23,000 on revenue of$32.5-million.   In a filing with the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission, Vectra saidthe revenue decrease was due partially to a decrease in nuclear engineeringservices. Vectra President Ray Fortney said the company would have astronger fourth quarter.   In September, the company negotiated a new $3-million loan, which itsays will be sufficient to meet all its commitments through the end of1995. But the 10Q filing notes that operations in 1995 will not alonegenerate sufficient cash to continue operations. But it adds that``management anticipates that sufficient cash will be provided throughadditional reductions in operating expenses, entering into a joint ventureor strategic partnership, or the sale of other assets. The company alsointends to explore alternatives for raising capital through preferred stockor a rights offering.'' Fortney said he is confident that ``Vectra will bein business in 1996.''   Earlier in the year, the company sold its chemical decontaminationbusiness, Plant Services Inc., to Westinghouse for $19-million, lesscertain adjustments. Among other things, Vectra used the money to reducelong-term debt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoUSEC SALE SHOULD BE CANCELED, SAYS HARVARD STUDY OF HEU DEALBy:Wilson Dizard III   The planned privatization of the U.S. Enrichment Corp. (USEC) is a baddeal for the U.S. Treasury and for national security, according to aforthcoming book by Richard Falkenrath and others of Harvard University'sCenter for Science & International Affairs (CSIA).   Falkenrath's study of the high-enriched uranium (HEU) deal and USEC'srole in it appears as part of Avoiding Nuclear Anarchy: Containing theThreat of Loose Russian Nuclear Weapons and Fissile Material, to bepublished by CSIA this year.   According to a prepublication copy of the study provided to NuclearFuel,``The U.S. government could resolve many of the problems with the U.S.purchase of Russian HEU if it were simply to cancel the privatization ofUSEC.   ``Under this option, USEC would remain the executive agent of the HEUdeal, but the U.S. Treasury would remain USEC's sole owner. As agovernment-owned corporation, USEC could be instructed to accept lowerprofits for the foreign policy gains associated with the purchase ofRussian HEU--a trade the corporation would resist making if it were ownedby normal, profit maximizing investors.   ``This solution, of course, would work only so long as the governmentexercises more effective oversight of USEC's purchase of HEU from Russiathan was the case in 1994-95.   ``Canceling the public sale of USEC is a less radical idea than it mayseem. Most if not all of the efficiency gains associated withprivate-sector management were achieved in July 1993, when USEC wasestablished as a government-owned corporation out of the highly inefficientgovernment enrichment operation run by DOE. Few if any additionalefficiency gains can be expected by transferring the ownership from thegovernment to the private sector. Indeed, there are at least two reasonswhy the public sale of USEC may be a poor choice for the government. Thefirst reason has already been noted: the White House could compel agovernment-owned USEC to accept the lower profits associated with buyingRussian HEU, whereas a publicly owned USEC would resist this pressure.   ``The second argument against privatizing USEC is that the net presentvalue of USEC as a government-owned corporation exceeds by a substantialmargin the net expected proceeds of the sale of USEC.''   Falkenrath's analysis of the costs to USEC of buying Russian material isbased on his view that USEC's production cost for SWU hovers around $60,compared to the current cost of SWU to USEC under the HEU deal of $82.50.   The Harvard scholar's view that the sale of USEC will cost the U.S.government more than it gains is based in part on a study of thetransaction conducted by the General Accounting Office last year (NF, 25Sept. '95, 1).   Other enrichment market analysts have raised the point that delaying,rather than canceling, the sale of USEC could lead to increased revenue forthe U.S. government. Under one privately discussed analysis, the Treasurywould stand to gain as much as $1-billion by delaying the sale of USEC forone year.NRC Sees Certification Delay   Another factor that could impair the privatization of USEC is the recentannouncement by NRC staff that completion of the review of the federal SWUcompany's application for safety certification will be delayed by severalweeks.   NRC's Executive Director for Operations, James Taylor, informed the NRCcommissioners November 28 that the certification schedule was likely toslip several weeks from the previous completion date of February 29.   NRC staff asked USEC 1,300 first-round questions about the second safetycertification application the federal SWU corporation submitted onSeptember 15. The first safety certification application was rejected inApril   ``USEC has responded to a substantial number of questions,'' Taylorwrote. ``However, responses to a number of substantive issues have not yetbeen received. In addition, it is apparent from discussions with USEC thatcertain issues raised by the staff's questions will not be easily resolved.For example, the staff believes that substantial improvements are needed inUSEC's proposed technical safety requirements, particularly those needed toensure protection of workers from death or serious injuries from potentialuranium hexafluoride accidents.''   Taylor said NRC staff would brief the commission before making adecision on certification. He made his comments in Secy 95-279, ``Status ofCertification of the USEC Gaseous Diffusion Plants.''   Separately, USEC announced that it has hired Donald Hatcher as directorof risk management. Hatcher will oversee insurance programs at USEC.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoMINATOM EXPECTS EURATOM HEU DEAL; STATE DEPT. WON'T INTERVENE ON FRM-2By:Mark Hibbs, Moscow; Michael Knapik, Washington   The Ministry of Atomic Energy (Minatom) for the Russian Federation andthe European Union (EU) have begun negotiations over supply of weapon-gradehigh-enriched uranium (HEU) to the Euratom Supply Agency (ESA) and may soonconclude an agreement, Moscow officials confirmed last month.   According to an aide to Minatom head Viktor Mikhailov, negotiations onsupply of HEU for research reactor fuel to ESA might be concluded by lateJanuary. The aide added, however, that scheduling and other details couldpush back a final agreement until sometime in February.   Diplomatic sources in Moscow said that so far Minatom had not attachedany ``unusual restrictions'' on the supply of the HEU to Euratom beyondrequiring the usual peaceful-use commitments. Accordingly, HEU supplied byMinatom to ESA would be fungible under the terms of a peaceful-useagreement, and it will be up to ESA to determine how the material would bedistributed.   The sources said that, also conforming with usual practice forpeaceful-use agreements, Minatom would specify that HEU it supplied isintended for use in research reactor fuel and would expect to receive alist of where Euratom intends to store, process, and irradiate thematerial.   German opponents to the FRM-2 materials test reactor project, planned tobe built by the Technical University of Munich, have said the Russian HEUwould effectively relieve pressure from the U.S. to convert the reactor touse low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel.   Following up high-level talks in September between Secretary of EnergyHazel O'Leary and German IAEA representative Cornelia Yzer, U.S. and Germanofficials are expected to meet in Garching in mid-January to discuss theprospects for building the FRM-2 with a slightly larger power rating and acore using lower-enriched uranium. DOE hopes to see Germany agree tore-design FRM-2 to use fuel proposed by the Reduced Enrichment for Researchand Test Reactor (RERTR) program. Argonne National Laboratory unilaterallyproduced such a redesign last year at a meeting of the RERTR programparticipants, raising protests from the FRM-2 sponsors and constructorSiemens (NF, 25 Sept. '95, 7).No State Department Action   After the U.S. Department of State asked Germany to confirm a reportthat Minatom and ESA had agreed to supply HEU for research reactors (NF, 25Sept. '95, 7), diplomatic sources speculated that the State Departmentwould intervene--either to persuade Russia not to consummate a deal thatwould challenge U.S. nonproliferation policy, or to request assurances fromESA that FRM-2 would not be supplied Russian-origin HEU.   But a senior U.S. official said last week that the State Departmentwould not take any action with Moscow. The official suggested that as longas the U.S. is using HEU in some research reactors, U.S. objections toFRM-2 running on the material are not credible. In the past this argumenthas been pushed by European operators, who have said they are disadvantagedcommercially by the continued use of HEU in the U.S.   Other U.S. officials say that the German desk at the State Departmenthas determined that proliferation concern about using HEU in FRM-2 is alow-priority issue in U.S.-German affairs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoGAN IN NO POSITION TO TAKE RUSSIAN PHYSICAL INVENTORYBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   Gosatomnadzor (GAN), the agency appointed by President Boris Yeltsin towatch over Russia's nuclear materials, has neither the means nor thepolitical clout to carry out a comprehensive material balance inventory,Russian officials said last month.   Yuri Volodin, head of the department of safeguards at GAN, said thatinspectors have been able to do only ``book audits'' based on data alreadycollected by operators of facilities under the control of the Ministry ofAtomic Energy (Minatom). In addition to the audits, GAN personnel canconduct ``problem checks'' of data, to see how a facility operator obtainsand processes the information.   ``In a few cases,'' Volodin said, facility operators ``measuredcanisters for us,'' to verify the amounts of material declared to GAN. ``Wehave been everywhere and seen everything, but not much of the inventory hasbeen verified,'' he said.   There is no central data bank at Minatom or GAN for inventories ofnuclear material. GAN officials said that inventory data are in the handsof plant operators. The only reporting obligation plant management has tocentral authorities in Moscow, one official said, is an ``annual request''by the Ministry of Finance to report on the production of materials forcustoms purposes. GAN does not know whether Minatom facilities routinelycomply with those reporting requests, he said.   GAN staffers complain that the agency has never seen some sensitiveinventory data that Minatom passed on to the U.S. DOE in mid-1995. Thatinformation was given to the U.S. as part of a bilateral agreement relatedto the transfer of weapon-grade uranium to the U.S. and the disposition ofRussian plutonium.   There are also no plans at GAN to conduct a comprehensive physicalinventory in Russia. Volodin said that such an effort would requiretechnical means, political authority, and funding that is out of hisagency's reach. The cost of new equipment needed to take a completephysical inventory would be about $6-million. GAN has nearly no resourcesat all and is routinely two to three weeks behind in paying staffers, hesaid.   To meet payroll and routine expenses for the last several months of1995, the central government had to scrape to find an extra 300-millionrubles (about $60,000 at current exchange rates). For safeguards efforts atDOE or Euratom, Volodin said, ``this amount would be a pittance.''   But it paid about 30 safeguards inspectors located in four Russianregions that GAN has staffed up during the 24 months since Yeltsin made GANresponsible for nuclear materials accounting. Permanent on-site inspectorshave been assigned to bulk-handling facilities at Tomsk-7, Krasnoyarsk-26,Chelyabinsk-65, and Sverdlovsk-44.   Regional centers have been set up in St. Petersburg for northeasternRussia (Northern Fleet naval fuel inventories in Severodvinsk, allRMBK-design reactors, and St. Petersburg research institutions); inNovosibirsk for Siberia (11 fuel cycle processing facilities, includingTomsk-7, Krasnoyarsk-26, and Angarsk; plus a uranium mining operation inChita); and Ekaterinburg for the Urals (fuel processing plants inSverdlovsk-44 and Chelyabinsk-65).Naval Fuel Accounting Deficiencies   A fourth regional center for the Far East is also being set up inKhabarovsk, centering on the Komsomolsk shipyard at the mouth of the AmurRiver. Officials said that GAN had gotten enough access to fuel assemblyoperations for the Pacific Fleet to have determined that there is ``noinput control, no quality control for nuclear material, no check of thequantity of material in single cores, and no accounting system'' duringpreparation of naval propulsion fuel, another Russian official said.   Through the St. Petersburg center, GAN is working with the MurmanskShipping Co. and the German firm Gesellschaft fuer Anlagen- undReaktorsicherheit mbH (GRS) to improve physical protection and accountingmeasures for nuclear fuels associated with Russian icebreakers and othernon-military vessels.   While Yeltsin at the outset had put GAN in charge of accounting for allRussian nuclear materials, in October 1994 Yeltsin stripped GAN ofresponsibility for military inventories and production facilities.   Volodin downplayed the impact of the Yeltsin decision, calling it a``relief'' that served to clarify questions about GAN's access andeliminate a conflict point between GAN, Minatom, and the Ministry ofDefense (MOD). But other officials complained that Minatom had pressedYeltsin to keep GAN out of military activities. Minatom ``plays all kindsof political games in Moscow'' to deny GAN funds and authority, another GANinspector complained. ``The basic problem we have is that Minatom justdoesn't believe in the need for an independent safeguards agency.''   Just before Yeltsin cut off GAN's access to military activities, thisofficial elaborated, MOD had begun to work with GAN and had appointed arepresentative on a joint committee to organize safeguards activities atdefense-related facilities. Now, MOD itself is in sole charge of safeguardsat these sites. GAN officials said that MOD, unlike GAN, does not have aset of procedures for accounting for weapon-grade uranium and plutonium,however. In the meantime, MOD has assured GAN that it will get completeaccess to disarmament materials, once they are broken down from weaponscomponents.   Minatom officials objected that, in the U.S., NRC also has no safeguardsaccess to defense-related materials. But GAN staffers replied that DOE,unlike Minatom, has a complex defense material accounting and controlsystem that relies heavily on established safeguards practices.Plutonium MUF Problems   One result of Yeltsin's October 1994 ``clarification'' is that GAN hasbeen told it has access in principle to all inventories of UO2 and PuO2,including those produced by defense-related facilities, officials said.   According to Volodin, GAN's access is blocked once oxides are processedinto metal form. A discussion is underway between Minatom and GAN about thepoint where GAN must forfeit access and the material becomes categorized asdefense material, Volodin said. ``But we have access to all the PuO2 storedat all the reprocessing plants,'' he said.   Regardless of access in principle to PuO2 inventories, lack of properequipment has prevented GAN and Minatom so far from accurately measuringand verifying plutonium inventories at bulk-handling facilities. This hascontributed to a significant estimate of material unaccounted for (MUF) inprocess inventories at the RT-1 reprocessing plant at Chelyabinsk-65(Ozersk), for example, officials said.   Surge tanks at RT-1 have a ring geometry that, one GAN official said,prevents plutonium in solution from settling homogeneously, causingsignificant reliability problems. In addition, the accuracy of equipmentused at RT-1 to weigh samples of material is only plus or minus 5 grams pereach 3-kilogram sample.   The point of departure for Minatom's calculation of initial inventory atany bulk-handling facility is the estimated amount of U-235 in fresh fuelfeedstocks. GAN has access to historical records of these estimates, but,officials said, Minatom never used non-destructive or destructive analysisto verify the estimates. The only reliable plutonium inventory figuresavailable for reprocessing plants are for the plutonium output itself,which can be determined analytically.   Independently of the battles over authority, GAN officials said that, atthe facility level, plant management is very cooperative with their effortsto assess inventories. According to fuel cycle plant officials, however,cooperation would be less if facilities were operating at Western capacityfactors. RT-1 last year ran at about 30% of design throughput. ``We haveplenty of time to show the inspectors around,'' said chief engineer EvgenyDzekun.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoWITHOUT EC ASSURANCES, NRC MOVES TO SUSPEND COMPONENT EXPORTSBy:Michael Knapik, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris; Mark Hibbs, Bonn   A jurisdictional dispute between the European Commission and certainmember states prevented Euratom from giving the U.S. legal assurancesrequired for certain nuclear reactor and fuel component exports before theexpiration of the U.S.-Euratom agreement for cooperation on December 31.   As a result, the U.S. NRC was in the process, as NuclearFuel went topress December 28, of suspending the general and specific licenses (thoselicenses referred to as XCOM and XMAT) to export reactor components, heavywater, and nuclear-grade graphite to all Euratom countries except Spain,Sweden, and Finland. NRC's action could cost several companies``potentially millions of dollars,'' said one agency staffer.   A senior EC official said December 28 that member states are examiningtwo solutions but that neither would be in place when the originalU.S.-Euratom agreement expires, and with it the validity of the existingletters of assurance.   The list of so-called non-major or non-sensitive components is containedin items five through nine of Appendix A to 10 CFR Part 110. The itemsinclude pressure tubes, zirconium tubes, such reactor internals as coresupport structures, and reactor control drive mechanisms. Among thecompanies most affected by the suspension are Siemens--which importszirconium tubes from the U.S. and has a large fuel fabrication business inthe U.S.--and Carpenter Technology, sources said.   European Commission staff had hoped that an interim solution could beworked out to avoid an interruption of trade in the affected items onDecember 31. They had aimed at an ``interim measure'' under which theCommission would have made the necessary assurances on behalf of EuropeanUnion (EU) member countries, while preparing a permanent exchange ofletters--to be submitted for formal approval by the European Council--thatwould take effect with the new U.S.-Euratom agreement in the spring (NF, 18Dec. '95, 8).   Sources said, however, that France and Britain objected to theCommission making the assurances on their behalf, because they touch areasin which the Commission does not have jurisdiction, or shares it withmember states. This is notably the case for the assurance that the exporteditems will be used for peaceful purposes only, since defense is a nationalprerogative in the EU today.   Pressed by Siemens, the German government approached the U.S. aboutdelivering a separate set of assurances so that exports could continue toGermany. That solution became less attractive, however, when the Germanswere told that with such bilateral assurances, German companies could nottransfer the exported components to another country within Euratom withoutU.S. consent.   In addition to control over retransfers, the U.S. requires countries togive assurances that the components will be under IAEA safeguards and willbe used for peaceful purposes. In the U.S., the fact that the newassurances have not been given was described as ``disturbing andmystifying,'' by a senior administration official.   The assurances are necessary to satisfy U.S. law--which many Europeansapparently find just as mystifying. The non-major components and materialsare not covered by the U.S.-Euratom agreement, which contains similarassurances covering more sensitive nuclear materials, equipment andtechnology. But the 1978 Nuclear Nonproliferation Act requiredpeaceful-use, safeguards and retransfer-approval assurances on thenon-sensitive items, too--hence the need for separate assurances coveringthem.   The current generic component assurances, given in 1979, are tied to theexpiring U.S.-Euratom agreement, although they are not a part of it.   The U.S. entered into separate agreements with Sweden, Spain, andFinland before they became members of Euratom. As a result, nuclear exportscan continue to those countries under the individual agreements, even inthe absence of any agreement between the U.S. and Euratom.Authority Of EC Assurances Challenged   One source following the U.S.-Euratom saga in Brussels said that theCommission had produced a draft assurance package and submitted it to EUcountry ambassadors at their regular meeting December 22. But certain EUstates maintain that the Commission does not have the authority to make therequired commitments. ``They can't make a peaceful-use commitment for us,''said a French official. ``That's the prerogative of member states.''   Worse, said one industry official, EU states didn't know there had beenan exchange of letters between the Commission and the U.S. government in1979, containing such commitments on behalf of the states, until last July,when the Commission was forced to make the old letters public in the courseof EU debate on the new Euratom-U.S. agreement for cooperation.   The discovery that the Commission had unilaterally agreed to the U.S.conditions in 1979 added to the tension surrounding the intra-Communitynegotiation of the U.S.-Euratom text, member state sources said.   ``We were astonished when we discovered the existence of that exchangeof letters,'' said an attorney for a major French nuclear company.   The senior Commission official acknowledged that in fact the EuropeanCouncil--the EU's collective political leadership--had been informedofficially of the existing exchange only at the beginning of November. Anda check following the protests of member states last summer turned up ``notrace of a report to the Council'' in 1979, when the initial exchange wasaccomplished, or since then, he said.   The EC official said the history of the commitments was still unclear,but ``it's possible it was considered as a measure for management of the(U.S.-Euratom) agreement'' at the time. Such management measures can betaken without the Council's approval.   ``Obviously, that didn't improve the atmosphere'' between the Commissionand member states, which have criticized the Commission's negotiation ofthe U.S.-Euratom agreement, the Commission official acknowledged. It alsodidn't help, he said, that the matter was put before the EU ambassadors``under pressure'' right before the Christmas break. ``People got a bitirritated,'' the official said, and an agreement could not be found.   French vendors aren't very affected by the Section 109b assurances,industry sources said, because they export very few such components fromthe U.S. But they are worried about the principles involved in theassurances.   One attorney for a French vendor, who appeared to believe there wasstill some leeway in U.S. law to permit an alternative to the blanketassurance letters, said he wondered if it would be simpler to provideassurances case-by-case on affected components or materials destined forexport from the U.S. The industry does not like the fact that the lettersof assurance also list countries to which U.S.-origin components may befreely re-exported, he said.German Industry Sought Action   According to a German fuel cycle official, German industry pressed theGerman Foreign Ministry to submit independent assurances to the U.S.``after it became clear that (the EU) would not act in time'' to prevent aninterruption in bilateral commerce.   The German official said that difficulties had arisen during negotiationof a ``consensus text'' of the letters among Euratom parties, noting theobjections by France and Britain related to their status as nuclear weaponstates. The official also said that German representatives had haddifficulty demonstrating to Euratom ``just how serious our situation is.''   As of mid-December, he said, Bonn had been assured that the U.S.Department of State would take action on the letter submitted by Germany.   The official said that in anticipation of a December 31 cutoff, Siemenshad succeeded in stockpiling U.S.-origin zirconium in Germany for later usein manufacturing fuel assemblies. But the company did not manage to arrangefor advance production and delivery of all UO2 fuel assemblies undercontract with European customers through the first few months of 1996, norin stockpiling enough UO2 to manufacture assemblies using its limitedcapacity available in Germany.   The EC official said the Commission and member states are consideringtwo alternatives: either a complete set of bilateral assurances, such asthose proposed by Germany, but only provided any potential obstacle tointra-Community trade is removed; or ``collective assurances'' that wouldbe given by the Commission and member states together, ``each one accordingto his jurisdiction.''   Whatever is decided, an interruption in trade in the nonsensitivematerials and components is inevitable and will likely last for severalweeks, until the EU can formally approve a new set of assurance letters.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoDOE POSTPONES DECISION ON ALTERNATIVE FOR TAKING BACK RESEARCH REACTORFUELBy:Michael Knapik, Washington   Secretary of Energy Hazel O'Leary apparently decided December 22 not todecide on a preferred alternative for dealing with about 22,000 spent fuelelements of U.S.-origin fuel that have been used at non-U.S. researchreactors around the world. Sources said O'Leary wants some more analysisfrom her staff.   The fact that selection of a preferred alternative for DOE's finalenvironmental impact statement (EIS) was again delayed would typically becriticized by advocates of those foreign research reactors facing a spentfuel storage crisis. Instead, the non-decision was greeted with a sigh ofrelief by those sources because, in their opinion, DOE was about to decideon an alternative that would be ineffective, be open to legal challenge byGreenpeace, and be fatal to the U.S.'s reduced enrichment in research andtest reactor (RERTR) program.   Those points were made in a December 20 letter to O'Leary by HowardShapar, who along with Joseph Egan has provided legal assistance to a groupof 17 foreign research reactor operators--a group put together by EdlowInternational--that have spent fuel covered by the EIS. Shapar told O'Learythat he learned her staff was leaning toward an option that would haveforced operators in countries with a nuclear waste program to send theirfuel to the U.K's Dounreay plant for reprocessing. DOE would sign amemorandum of understanding with the U.K. under which Dounreay would, inthe future, begin reprocessing low-enriched spent fuel. Reactors operatingtemporarily on high-enriched fuel would have to down-blend to LEU with DOEpaying the cost of down-blending. DOE would reprocess the remainder of thefuel at its Savannah River Site (SRS) in South Carolina except for Trigafuel, which would be shipped to the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.   This option, Shapar said, ``would send a strong signal to the foreignresearch reactor community that DOE has abandoned the RERTR program for allbut a few select reactors.'' He mentioned that government authorities inSweden and Denmark, and probably in Norway, will not allow reactoroperators in those countries to pursue the Dounreay option, ``largely forpolitical reasons.'' DOE, Shapar said, will have stranded these countrieswith no alternative other than shutdown and/or HEU dry storage.   Other operators, Shapar said, will stop efforts to convert theirreactors. ``They will not now expend millions of dollars on conversion,''Shapar said, ``in the hope that DOE's MOU with Britain will produce an LEUreprocessing stream at Dounreay by the time they are ready to ship theirLEU spent fuel. Instead, they will maintain operations on HEU fuel andavail themselves of a certain HEU reprocessing stream, with reliance onRussian HEU.''   Shapar went on to note that Greenpeace, which is opposed to reprocessingat Dounreay, would likely sue DOE ``for failing to consider theextraterritorial impacts of its actions in the U.K.''   Shapar said DOE should decide to bring all of the spent fuel (except theTriga fuel) to Savannah River. ``Given DOE's recent decisions to keep oneof the reprocessing canyons open at the SRS...it is unlikely that thestate's congressional delegation will oppose taking the foreign researchfuel back,'' Shapar said. The governor of South Carolina could sue, ``butwe believe that to be very winnable litigation,'' Shapar said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoRT-1 OPERATION FACES COST CRISIS, UNCERTAIN FUTURE DEMAND SCHEDULEBy:Mark Hibbs, Moscow   A senior official at the Russian Federation Ministry of Atomic Energy(Minatom) said last month that prices for reprocessing services at the RT-1separation plant at Ozersk must be raised to justify further operation.   Evgeny Dzekun, chief engineer at RT-1, told NuclearFuel that thereprocessing plant, designed to handle a throughput of 400 metric tonsheavy metal (MTHM) of spent fuel from VVER-440 reactors, naval reactors,and fast reactors, is currently allowed by local authorities to reprocessup to 250 MTHM/yr spent fuel.   During 1995, however, RT-1 handled far less than that amount, and in1996 it will process still less spent fuel, officials in Moscow said lastmonth. Ozersk was earlier known as Chelyabinsk-65.   Dzekun said that between 150 and 180 MT of spent fuel were reprocessedat RT-1 in 1995. According to information from other Minatom fuel cycleofficials, the total was closer to 150 MT. At average discharge burnups forVVER-440 fuel of 20,000-25,000 megawatt-days/MT, about 0.8% of therecovered output is plutonium. Since Dzekun said that the amount of freshplutonium added to the stockpile at Ozersk during 1995 was just over 1 MT,no more than about 150 MT of spent fuel could have been handled there,these experts said.   Dzekun had said previously that, up to 1990, the historical averagethroughput at RT-1 was about 200 MT/yr; in 1991, he said, 170 MT wasreprocessed, and in 1992, 120 MT (NF, 4 Jan. '93, 4).   Russia's overall economic situation, and the failure of nuclear powerplants to be paid for power they produce (Nucleonics Week, 7 Dec. '95, 1),meant that plant management ``can no longer pay for reprocessing,'' Dzekunsaid.U.S. `Interference'   Dzekun also claimed that U.S. government interference posed a threat tohis reprocessing operation, and he blamed Washington for persuading VVERreactor management outside Russia to opt for dry storage of spent fuel.   Officials in Finland, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic all havefelt diplomatic pressure from the U.S. not to reprocess any more VVER fuel,he said.   Last month, under terms of a commercial contract with Finland's IVO, thelatest annual shipment of spent fuel from the Loviisa VVERs to Ozerskoccurred. The Finns are still considering whether to ship spent fuel toRT-1 in 1996 (NF, 18 Dec. '95, 15). Dzekun said that, contrary to claims byenvironmental groups, safety will not be a factor in Finland's decision.Both IVO and regulator STUK have surveyed the RT-1 reprocessing operationand found it ``safe and reliable.'' However, IVO can send the fuel to thestorage facility being built by Finland's other nuclear utility, TVO.   In both 1994 and 1995, RT-1 took delivery of spent fuel from the PaksVVER station in Hungary under a spent fuel takeback deal signed in 1994.Dzekun said that Paks management has decided in principle to continuereprocessing spent fuel at RT-1 in 1996 but that it is ``intimidated'' bythe consequences of Russian nuclear law, passed in mid-1995. The lawobliges RT-1's foreign clients to take back high-level reprocessing waste(HLW) in vitrified form after 25 years of interim storage.   Hungary ``must take this into consideration if it wants to keepreprocessing,'' he said. GEC-Alsthom is building a vault-type spent fuelstorage facility for the Paks Nuclear Power Plant that Dzekun suggestedcould be licensed to contain HLW.Reprocessing Cost Inflation   Dzekun said that, every three months, the cost of inputs for RT-1reprocessing operations are adjusted upward because of continuing Russianinflation and market price reforms.   Real prices for electricity, chemicals, equipment, and transportationhave reached near-Western levels, he said, while RT-1 is tied to premarketcontracts and is not able to pass these increased costs on to customers.``We will have to raise the price of reprocessing to Russian reactors tocontinue justifying operation of the plant,'' Dzekun said. Dzekun said thathe was holding talks with Russian VVER plant managers in an effort to``persuade'' them to pay more for reprocessing services.   Dzekun would not reveal the price that VVER-440 stations in Russia payfor reprocessing. According to unconfirmed reports from other Minatomsources, however, in some cases reactor management pays as little as $50per kilogram heavy metal (kgHM), compared to European reprocessors' goingrate of about $1,000/kgMH.   Similar to steps taken by Cogema to hang on to its German reprocessingclients (NF, 4 July '94, 1), Minatom will offer VVER-440 reactors a``package deal'' involving an array of fuel cycle services, including fuelfabrication, along with higher reprocessing prices, Moscow officials said.   One senior Russian fuel cycle official qualified that because Minatomhas dropped the VVER-440 from its nuclear energy development plan, ``thereal issue for RT-1 is who its clients will be'' in the future.   In the meantime, the RT-1 client base is expected to shrink further.Minatom plans to decommission soon after 2000 the country's older VVER-440reactors, including Kola-1 and -2, and Novovoronezh-3 and -4. These unitsreprocess their spent fuel at Ozersk. Dzekun ``must convince foreignclients to keep reprocessing'' to keep RT-1 operating, according to an aideto Minatom head Viktor Mikhailov.   The aide speculated that an alternative strategy would be to put RT-1 towork on the huge inventory of spent fuel from the Russian Navy icebreakerand submarine fleet. But he said that neither Minatom nor the Ministry ofDefense can fund major management of Russia's daunting propulsion reactorfuel inventory.   Evgeny Mikerin, head of Minatom's fuel cycle operations, said thatreprocessing of UO2-based icebreaker fuel at RT-1 poses no technicalchallenges, but that a large inventory of spent icebreaker fuel presentlystored near Murmansk would be ``difficult to transport'' to Ozersk.Uranium-zirconium fuels used in submarine reactors, Mikerin said, aredifficult to reprocess there.   Dzekun also would not disclose prices paid by RT-1's foreign clients.But Mikerin said that speculation that Hungary pays only about $200/kgHMfor reprocessing services is false. Mikerin said that both the Paks VVERstation and IVO are paying ``somewhat less'' than the Western price, addingthat the rates charged foreign clients are consistent with Minatom's policyof slightly undercutting market prices.   According to unconfirmed reports from other Moscow sources, IVO paysabout $700/kgHM for RT-1 reprocessing.   At present, about 28 MT of separated plutonium from RT-1 VVERreprocessing operations are stored at Ozersk, Dzekun reported. A littlemore than 1 MT was added in 1995. Minatom will continue to stockpile theplutonium there, he said, in anticipation of BN-800 fast reactors beingbuilt at the Beloyarsk and South Urals sites--the latter adjacent toRT-1--to absorb the material later as MOX fuel.   According to Mikerin, however, no funding is allocated for BN-800construction, and the units will not be built until sometime in the nextcentury.   Three years ago, Dzekun said, reprocessing-related operations atChelyabinsk-65 employed about 18,000 people. Now the complex provides workfor 14,000; the other 4,000 employees have left for commercial workelsewhere in the formerly closed city.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoREPROCESSING CRITICS SAY MAYAK WILL DIE WITHOUT FOREIGN BUSINESSBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Official Russian recognition that the RT-1 reprocessing plant at Ozerskis fighting for its future confirms predictions made by reprocessingcritics last year.   In companion papers submitted to the recent Global 95 conference inVersailles, Anatoly Diakov of the Moscow Institute of Physics & Technology,and Oleg Bukharin of Princeton University, argued that without reprocessingbusiness from Hungary and Finland, paid for in hard currency, RT-1 ``wouldbe completely unprofitable,'' as Diakov put it.   Ironically, Bukharin pointed out that the existing backlog of navalspent fuel and submarine dismantlement--amounting to up to 350 submarinereactor cores' worth of spent fuel within a few years--would provide enoughwork for RT-1's naval fuel processing line for ``tens of years,'' even at100% capacity. But ``this work does not add to the plant's revenues,''Bukharin said, since the fees paid to RT-1 operator Mayak by the Navy andthe icebreaker fleet only cover production costs. He added that the Navy ishaving trouble finding even that amount, independent of the problem ofshipping the spent cores.   Reprocessing of HEU fuel, Bukharin said, is not favored by Mayak becauseit must be funded by Minatom (the Russian Ministry for Atomic Energy) andis actually a drag on Mayak's own budget.   Bukharin reviewed the situation with operators of VVER-440 reactors inRussia and abroad, concluding that economic difficulties in Ukraine andBulgaria would diminish the economic value of any spent fuel takebackarrangements with reactors there. As for VVER-440 operators in centralEurope and Finland, they are gradually moving toward alternativearrangements, in light of Minatom's high reprocessing fees and the newrequirement for returning waste to reprocessing customers.   ``Reprocessing of foreign spent fuel has become the principal source ofrevenues for Mayak,'' Bukharin said, but those revenues ``cannot be assuredin the future....The loss of the foreign contracts would likely undermineMayak's reprocessing business.''   Recently, Minatom officials--like some of their counterparts in theWest--have attempted to sell future reprocessing operations at RT-1 as partof a global disarmament and waste management strategy involving mixed-oxidefuel use and, potentially, advanced techniques of actinide incineration.   Even if Mayak stopped processing spent fuel soon, Russia would stillhave a weapons plutonium inventory of 125 metric tons--an amount destinedto grow in the future as plutonium is separated out from nuclear weaponscomponents--and a civilian stockpile totaling 72 MT, excluding plutoniumcontained in about 8,000 MT of spent fuel stored at reactor sites,according to Diakov's figures. As of October 1994, all newly producedplutonium is supposed to be stored in oxide form. High-level Minatomofficials have argued that this plutonium represents a ``nationaltreasure'' whose use as fuel must be promoted.   But Diakov argued that technical difficulties, including reactor design,costs and licensing requirements, would foreclose the introduction of MOXfuels in Russia's VVER-1000 reactor fleet. Minatom has essentially noexperience burning MOX in LWRs, an argument used by breeder reactorenthusiasts to promote the recycling of plutonium in fast reactors insteadof LWRs (NF, 9 Oct. '95, 6).   Diakov, however, contends that the high cost of MOX in a breederstrategy also would kill that option. He cited an estimated cost of$765-million for a new BN-800 fast reactor at Beloyarsk and amultimillion-dollar cost for the so-called Shop 300 plutonium fuelfabrication plant at Ozersk. An additional three BN-800 units planned forthe South Urals site, near the Mayak complex, would cost $3-billion, hesaid.   Diakov--a well-known opponent of reprocessing and bete noire ofMinatom--said that the nuclear ministry had requested $85-million as partof its fiscal 1995 program to support a program for transforming ex-weaponsplutonium into MOX fuel. But as of last June 30, the ministry had receivedless than 10% of the funds, he said.   Another potential obstacle is Russia's new nuclear legislation, whichimposes more stringent environmental standards and consequently complicateslicensing of new fuels.   Because of ``Russia's current chaotic political and economicalcondition,'' the Moscow researcher wrote, ``it is unlikely that plans forPu utilization will be carried out soon.''   Moreover, Diakov said, Minatom is not enthusiastic about non-reactoroptions for plutonium disposition, such as vitrifying the material, whichit perceives as unsafe.   Diakov predicted that ``in the next several decades...there will be noplutonium use in Russia.'' For one thing, Russia's uranium productioncapability can support 100 gigawatts of installed reactor capacity, whilethe country has only 22 GW. For another, its stockpiles of high-enricheduranium and uranium enrichment tails are estimated at 1,200 metric tons and300,000 MT, respectively. Finally, Diakov said, Minatom has about15-million SWU worth of enrichment capacity and the potential to fabricate4%-enriched uranium fuel from 0.3% tails at a cost of $540 per kilogram.   ``It is clear there is no economical motivation for Russia's nuclearindustry to reprocess spent fuel or use plutonium for fuel fabrication,''he said. Diakov argued that the real question is whether Russia's nuclearbusiness will take a short- or long-term view of the plutonium dispositionissue. He noted that the main concern is ``to prevent diversion and reuseof weapons-grade material in new weapons.''   Rather than seek new uses for plutonium, Diakov contended, the Russiangovernment should ally with the U.S. to ``make a determined effort to setup a reciprocal regime of plutonium storage under bilateral orinternational control.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoNONPROLIFERATION, SPENT FUEL HANDLING KEY TO LWR SUPPLY CONTRACT WITH DPRKBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   Under a supply contract signed between the Korean Peninsula EnergyDevelopment Organization (KEDO) and North Korea in New York December 15,KEDO will be responsible for providing fuel to and handling spent fuel fromthe two light water reactors promised to Pyongyang.   North Korea's ambassador to the United Nations, Ho Jon, and KEDOExecutive Director Stephen Bosworth signed the agreement following long anddifficult negotiations that began in Kuala Lumpur in September and resumedOctober 16 in New York City. While the contract leaves many details aboutthe reactor deal unanswered, it paves the way for a possibleground-breaking at the reactor site in North Korea as early as April, asource close to the talks said.   KEDO will finance the $4.5-billion reactor project. It still must enterinto a prime contract; select a ``program coordinator,'' as thearchitect/engineer is being called; and finish the site characterizationunderway at Sinpo. The Korean Electric Power Corp. is expected to be theprime contractor, with a number of subcontractors. The supply contract saysthat the program coordinator is to be a U.S. firm. The contract for programcoordinator is expected to be awarded based on open competition, with arequest for proposals going out in January or February, said one sourceclose to the talks. The contract calls for completion of the two reactorsby 2003.   The contract specifies that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea(DPRK) will continue the freeze on its 5-MW research reactor and refrainfrom building the two larger reactors that were planned, as well ascontinue to cooperate in safely storing and canning the spent fuel from theresearch reactor, Dan Poneman said at a news briefing in Washington, D.C.on December 15. Poneman is senior director for nonproliferation and exportcontrols at the National Security Council.   KEDO was established in March by the U.S., the Republic of Korea, andJapan to finance the cost of constructing two 1,000-MW reactors promised toNorth Korea under the October 1994 Agreed Framework between the U.S. andNorth Korea. The Clinton administration negotiated the agreement to addressthe nuclear weapons proliferation threat posed by the DPRK.   The supply contract says that KEDO will provide nuclear fuel for theinitial loading of each LWR and then will assist the DPRK in obtaining LWRfuel, other than that provided in the initial loading, through commercialcontracts. KEDO and the DPRK are to cooperate to ensure safe storage ofspent fuel. ``If requested by KEDO, the DPRK must relinquish any ownershiprights over the LWR spent fuel and agree to the transfer of the spent fuelout of the DPRK through commercial contracts,'' a KEDO statement said.Contract Prohibits Reprocessing   Under the contract, the DPRK agrees to apply IAEA safeguards to the LWRproject. North Korea also agrees not to reprocess or increase theenrichment level of any nuclear material used in or produced through theuse of any reactor or nuclear material transferred in connection with thereactor project.   KEDO officials insist that no target date has been set for theground-breaking, because there are still many uncertainties surrounding theproject. That decision will depend on the findings of the sitecharacterization teams and on the timetable for completion of the othercontracts and protocols that KEDO needs to negotiate.   KEDO sent a third site characterization team to the survey area nearSinpo City in South Hamgyong Province on December 16. The 15-member teamplans to remain in North Korea for a month, during which time it willgather information for a topographical map and prepare boring work for thenext step of the site survey, KEDO officials said.   Of the estimated $4.5-billion cost to construct the two reactors, it isexpected that South Korea will contribute about $3-billionz, Japan about$1-billion, and the U.S. and other KEDO members about $500,000, plus thecost of continuing shipments of heavy fuel oil promised to North Korea inthe agreedment, one source noted. However, the exact amounts of moneypledged by the two major players, as well as smaller donations pledged byother countries, have not been made public.   A KEDO spokesman declined to comment on the organization's finances orto provide information on the contributions provided by member nations orcontributing countries. A South Korean embassy official said December 19that a decision on the amount South Korea will contribute to KEDO has notbeen made yet, because the exact cost of the project is not yet known. Theofficial suggested that a decision might be made following the KEDO boardmeeting planned for mid-January.   Among the key issues to be worked out before construction can begin arethe details of how North Korea will repay South Korea for the financing.The supply contract states that KEDO will finance the cost of theconstruction and will be repaid by the DPRK, interest free, over 20 years,inclusive of a three-year grace period, beginning with the completion ofeach LWR.   ``Repayment may be in cash, cash equivalents or through transfer ofgoods,'' a KEDO release on the agreement stated.   Under the supply contract, KEDO is to provide a radioactive wastestorage building for low- and medium-level waste with a 10-year storagecapacity for the two LWRs; nuclear fuel for the initial loading of eachplant, including such fuel rods as may be necessary to preserve safety forinitial operation; and technical support services for the first LWR for oneyear after its completion.   The DPRK further agrees: to allow the IAEA to resume ad hoc and routineinspections of facilities not covered by the nuclear freeze when the supplyagreement was signed; to remain a party to the Treaty on theNonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to allow implementation ofits safeguards agreement under the NPT; and to come into full compliancewith its IAEA safeguards agreement when a ``significant portion'' of theLWR project is completed, but before the delivery of key nuclearcomponents.   The DPRK also agrees: to conclude a bilateral agreement for peacefulnuclear cooperation with the U.S. prior to the delivery of key nuclearcomponents, if U.S. firms provide such components; to transfer spent fuelfrom the 5-MW reactor from North Korea when the delivery of key nuclearcomponents for the first LWR begins; and to begin dismantling itsgraphite-moderated reactors and related facilities upon completion of thefirst LWR, and to complete the dismantlement upon completion of the secondLWR.   The contract further states that prior to shipment of any fuelassemblies, the DPRK will observe the provisions of Convention on NuclearSafety, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, theConvention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or RadiologicalEmergency, and the Convention on the Physical Protection of NuclearMaterial.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR FUEL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996   Vol. 21, NoCAMECO'S PORT HOPE REFINERY LICENSE RENEWED JUST DAYS BEFORE EXPIRATIONBy:Ray Silver, Toronto   Cameco Corp.'s refinery at Port Hope, Ontario was granted a two-yearlicense renewal December 19, a dozen days before its operating permit wouldhave expired. The facility is the oldest of four large uranium processingplants in the world.   The license renewal had been deferred earlier in the month after arearesidents voiced safety and environmental concerns at an Atomic EnergyControl Board meeting. Despite staff reports that the facility posed nothreat to the environment or to public health and safety, several residentshad concerns ranging from emergency response plans to the ultimatedecommissioning of the facility.   The introduction of environmental issues into the license reviewapparently stemmed from a 15-year debate on the disposal of low-levelrefinery waste at Port Hope. The Port Hope license renewal was announced aweek after Canada's natural resources minister Anne McLellan said she wouldask the government early this year to consider a task force recommendationthat radioactive Port Hope refinery waste be buried at Atomic Energy ofCanada Ltd.'s Chalk River nuclear station.   Cameco's predecessor company, Eldorado Nuclear, built the Port Hopefacility in 1932 to extract radium from pitchblende. The plant was modified12 years later to refine the stockpiled residue and yellowcake to uraniumfor the Manhattan Project in the U.S.   In 1962 Eldorado began to produce uranium oxide (UO2) to fuel Candureactors and in 1969 to produce uranium hexafluoride (UF6) for light waterreactors. Both uranium trioxide (U03) from Cameco's Blind River, Ontariofacility and uranium from other producers feed the Port Hope refinery,which produces 8,000-9,500 metric tons of fuel a year, most of it as UF6for LWRs in the U.S. and abroad.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B36-3IA086-000616-B013-157http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001025 text/html 99138HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:07:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:48 GMTContent-length: 98951Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey73.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNet September 12, 1991 Vol 69, SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EXPERTS SUPPORT CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO INTERNATIONAL SAFETY CONVENTION (1235 words) NOVOVORONEZH CALLED 'NO KOZLODUY' BUT SAFETY CULTURE FOUND LACKING (1118 words) PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS BEGINS AS FINNS PREPARE FOR REACTOR ORDER (304 words) CASH-STRAPPED MCDERMOTT MAY SELL FRAMATOME MORE OF B&W VENTURES (438 words) FIFTH TEAM OF WNP-2 OPERATORS AGAIN FAILS REQUALIFICATION TEST (189 words) BARSEBAECK BWR PUMP FAILURE REHEATS COOLANT DURING REFUELING (370 words) SETTLEMENT ON GRAND GULF COULD RECOUP $90-MILLION FOR NOPSI (260 words) IRRADIATION ACCIDENT SHOCKS FRANCE; 'CRACKDOWN' ON SMALL USERS PROMISED (526 words) CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS MIXED WASTE FACILITY AT HANFORD (579 words) COURT ORDER ENDS SECRECY IN DOE PROCEDURES THWARTING FOIA (502 words) SELIN BACKS LICENSING REFORM BILL DESPITE AMBIGUITY OVER NRC ROLE (1343 words) KOREA PLANS 13 MORE REACTORS TO MAKE NUCLEAR MAIN GENERATOR (510 words) ITALIAN REGULATOR GIVEN AUTONOMY AS ENERGY AGENCY CHANGES FOCUS (337 words) UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS LOOM ON IRAQI CENTRIFUGE EFFORT (1918 words) USSR OFFERS UP RBMKS TO SCRUTINY OF WORLD SAFETY EXPERTS, VIA IAEA (1052 words) CZECHS WERE FORCED TO TAKE UNITS THEY KNEW WERE BELOW-STANDARD (733 words) EDF AND SIEMENS TO BID TOGETHER ON KOZLODUY DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS (456 words) DIABLO CANYON-2 BREAKS RECORD FOR LWR CONTINUOUS OPERATION (284 words) NOTES PERTAINING TO THE GENERATING TABLE FOR JULY 1991 (2125 words) CORRECTION INDEX, NEDS ARE OPERATING. (179 words) Four BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly in (49 words) NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 (25 words) CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, EXPERTS SUPPORT CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO INTERNATIONAL SAFETY CONVENTIONBy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   Nuclear safety officials from over 40 countries agreed in Vienna lastweek to proceed ''step by step'' towards an international safety regimethat could eventually include a framework convention defining a commonnuclear safety approach and how to achieve it practically.   German Environment/Nuclear Safety Minister Klaus Toepfer, who chairedthe Vienna meeting under the auspices of the IAEA, said the world iswaiting for all countries using nuclear energy to commit to a safetyregime, which he called ''the cornerstone of nuclear energy.''   As expected, the conference did not endorse the idea of a bindingconvention whereby nations would commit to meet certain minimum safetystandards and submit their installations to international audits--asurprise proposal Toepfer floated at the conference's opening session (NW,5 Sept., 1). But IAEA directors and conference participants hailed the10-point agreement they reached on ways to bolster the international safety''regime'' as the first tangible consensus of technical and politicalnuclear safety experts on the sensitive subject.   Participants in the meeting, called ''International Conference onNuclear Safety: Strategy for the Future,'' saw the unified approach asindispensable to ensure there are no dangerous outliers among the world'snuclear power plants and/or operators, which could suffer accidents thatwould put the rest of the world's nuclear programs in jeopardy.   Among the points the 350 experts agreed on were strengthening ofexisting IAEA safety service programs, developing ''a common basis'' onwhich to judge the safety of reactors built to earlier standards, moreexchange and dissemination of operating experience, and developing commonsafety criteria for future reactor designs.   They also agreed that safety is above all the responsibility of nationalauthorities, and that the IAEA should help promote ''sufficient nationalregulatory oversight.'' They called on national operating organizations andauthorities to come forward to ''identify operating nuclear power plantswhich do not meet the high safety performance levels of the vast majorityof operating plants and undertake improvements with assistance from theinternational community.''   Toepfer was visibly pleased at the result and, at a closing pressconference September 6, insisted that the momentum towards a convention ofa binding nature must not be lost. He firmly believes the world nuclearcommunity must have made clear progress towards such a text by next June,when the United Nations Conference on Environment & Development meets inBrazil to discuss, among other things, climate change and a possibleinternational convention on global warming. ''If you have no good answerabout the control of safety and about handling of nuclear wastes'' to bringto a concerned world, he said, ''you won't be able to have'' nuclearenergy.   IAEA Director General Hans Blix said that the earliest a conventioncould actually be presented to the agency's Board of Governors and GeneralConference would be in one year's time, but the task could well take twoyears. Once the convention entered into force, separate protocols thencould be concluded to agree on such things as incident reporting, use ofseverity scales, and safety reviews. ''The fewer things you try to do, theeasier it is,'' he commented.   Although the Soviet-design plants of central and eastern Europe came uprepeatedly in the three days of debate, senior IAEA officials said that therecommendations were aimed at all countries. Several participants namedIndia, Mexico, Argentina, and Cuba as countries considered worthy of closerscrutiny and/or intensified help in the nuclear safety domain, because ofeither their inexperience or the closed nature of their nuclear programs.   The experts also agreed that socio-economic factors should not be usedto justify continued operation of a plant that does not meet agreed-onminimum safety standards and that if sucha plant cannot be suitably backfitwith available resources, it should be shut down and alternativeelectricity sources ''sought.''But Who Decides?   The group did not say who should decide all this to whose standards, orwho should provide the electricity, but German technical nuclear safetychief Adolf Birkhofer said, ''We must judge (a plant's acceptability) on anad hoc basis using the best information available including (that of) theIAEA.'' Toepfer said this might be a ''second-best solution'' awaiting theagreement on universal standards, but said, ''That's what we have to livewith in political life.''   Blix told journalists the initial shock the convention proposalgenerated in some quarters may have stemmed from misinterpretation of theword. ''Is a 'convention' an instrument to drive through jointinternational standards, or an expression of states'' of their commoncommitment? he asked. ''We can come a long way'' towards strengtheningnuclear safety worldwide with existing services and standards promulgatedby the IAEA, such as OSART (Operational Safety Review Team) missions andNUSS (the agency's Nuclear Safety Standards series), Blix said, but ''aconvention gives it a more solid ground.'' He said a formal convention onsafety, like the conventions on early notification and mutual assistance incase of nuclear accidents negotiated quickly after the Chernobyl accidentin 1986, would represent ''a higher level of development in the field ofnuclear safety.''   It would also likely represent a higher level of expenditure for thosecountries whose budgets are already being strained for other contributions.Blix said one OSART typically costs $100,000 and that a program such asoutlined by the experts' meeting would surely cost ''millions of dollars.''The agency's current program to review the safety of older VVER plants ineastern Europe has been funded all off-budget, and Assistant DeputyDirector General for Nuclear Safety Morris Rosen said that one-third of the60 professionals in his division--which absorbs only 6% of the regular IAEAbudget--are working on extrabudgetary programs.   A major push to increase on-budget nuclear safety-related spending atthe IAEA would almost certainly provoke debate among members. The U.S.,which contributes 25% of the agency's budget, is concerned about theproliferation of expensive extrabudgetary programs at the IAEA, but at thesame time is apparently not ready to endorse budget growth for the agency,which has been living with zero-growth budgets for the past six years.   Blix said that ''if you run a great many'' of these programs, ''youcan't just run it on a shoestring.'' The agency's Chernobyl project and itsVVER-440 program ''started with nothing and we practically walked aroundwith a hat,'' he said. ''That's not the way to run a railroad.''   The issue was to be debated late this week at the IAEA Board ofGovernors' meeting before being taken up by the full General Conference,which meets September 16-20.   Some participants in the safety conference also questioned whether aninternational safety program would be the most efficient way to get at thereal problem plants in the world. ''I'm worried that an internationalorganization largely funded by us is going to spend a lot of time lookingat us and not where they should be looking,'' commented NRC CommissionerForrest Remick, who led the U.S. delegation.   ''If we're aiming at improving operating plants, setting standards won'timprove that in the short term. What those countries need is help inimplementing the standards we already have,'' Remick told Nucleonics Week.And ''knowing that some international organization has standards isn'tgoing to enhance public acceptance of nuclear in the U.S.'' or elsewhere,he added.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NOVOVORONEZH CALLED 'NO KOZLODUY' BUT SAFETY CULTURE FOUND LACKINGBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   The first IAEA Safety Review Mission to a first-generation PWR(VVER-440) plant in the USSR, at Novovoronezh, confirmed that conditionsthere are nowhere near as alarming as those at the similar Kozloduy plantin Bulgaria. But officials returning from the Novovoronezh safety missionin early September said the Russian units still suffer from a number ofdesign deficiencies, notably lack of separation between systems andinadequate fire protection. More fundamentally, the Novovoronezh operatorsand management, while exhibiting competence and enthusiasm, showed adisturbing lack of safety culture and safety philosophy as it is understoodin the West, the officials said.   The conditions discovered by the IAEA team during their safety review ofthe four Kozloduy VVER-440 Model 230 reactors in May-June were sodisastrous that they set off alarms all over western Europe and launched acrash program to aid the Bulgarians to get their plant in order by thewinter. The program, under the auspices of the European Communities and theWorld Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), is already under way (NW, 29Aug., 11). However, Germany is pressing for recognition by the Bulgariansthat the oldest Kozloduy units, 1 and 2, should still be shut as soon aspossible.   An earlier review of VVER-440/230 units at Bohunice in Czechoslovakiaconfirmed that the Czechs had made many safety improvements and had asatisfactory safety culture. But the question remained open for thefirst-generation Soviet VVER-440s at Novovoronezh and Kola (two units ateach site).   The safety reviews are the final piece of a year-long IAEA-sponsored''Study of the Safety of Older Reactors,'' focussed on the first-generationVVER-440s, that is due to wind up in October. A safety review team leftVienna September 7 for the Kola plant, in the far north of the USSR nearMurmansk.   ''It's not Kozloduy,'' said a senior IAEA safety review official lastweek in regard to the Novovoronezh station. ''The management is committedto improvement and has sufficient resources and authority'' to do the job,whereas Kozloduy had been plagued with attrition of senior staff to betterjobs and wholesale abandonment earlier this year by the Soviet experts whohad in effect been running the plant. Nevertheless, the IAEA source said,the Novovoronezh team found housekeeping problems similar to those atKozloduy--indicating that the lessons of Kozloduy had not been taken intoaccount at the Russian VVER station--and confirmed the well-known designdeficiencies of the VVER-440/230 plants.   The review covered Novovoronezh-3 and -4, the head-of-series twinreactors on which Bohunice, Kozloduy, and the now-closed Greifswaldreactors in the former German Democratic Republic were based. Two earlierprototype units at Novovoronezh, VVER-440 Model 179s, were decommissionedin 1988 and 1990.   On the positive side, the IAEA review team confirmed the existence ofconservatism in the early VVER designs due to large primary system waterinventories and a wide core design safety margin. They also found thatpressure vessel annealing as carried out in the USSR today appeared to be''well established technology,'' according to a press release issued at theclose of the review, and approved backfits already carried out   Nevertheless, the team said that the leak-before-break concept forguaranteeing primary circuit integrity must be proven applicable atVVER-440s in order to establish ''an acceptable safety level for thelong-term backfitting program'' at Novovoronezh. The Soviets have usedleak-before-break to justify the absence of full-pressure containments overtheir early PWRs.   The IAEA team also remained concerned over the potential forcommon-cause failures that could affect safety functions, especially asregards service water systems, boron injection pumps, electrical andinstrumentation & control cable rooms, and control room I&C. The team, asource said, found a host of safety-related equipment, including safetyinjection pumps, in the auxiliary building that also contained turbines andcondensers, with inadequate separation between them. The control room wasseparated from the condensers in the turbine hall by a glass door, and firedoors were blocked open all over the plant.   ''They seem to have no idea about environmental qualification,especially for electrical equipment,'' said an IAEA official. The team wasalso chagrined at the lack of written procedures for both normal andemergency operations, and recommended that such procedures be developed soas to ''remove the reliance and burden placed on operators in needing torecall operating instructions from memory.''   The team also was concerned by the ''lack of understanding of safetyphilosophy'' at the plant level, as one member put it. Plant management andoperators had no idea about severe accident analyses, saying that was thebusiness of the design institutes in Moscow, and were not particularlyworried because they had been assured that severe accidents were impossibleat their plant. The plant simulator--the first in the USSR and nowsignificantly obsolete, according to the IAEA official--cannot reproduce asteam generator tube rupture beyond the very beginning of the accidentsequence.   As a start, the IAEA team advised the Novovoronezh management to compilea safety report for the plant. One never has existed, and safety-relatedinformation is spread over several different institutes, including the VVERscientific leader Kurchatov Atomic Energy Institute and architect/engineerAtomenergoprojekt. The plant management produced 600 pages ofsafety-related information for the IAEA review team the day the auditorsarrived, apparently the first time all the documentation had been collectedin a single report. ''We told them to pressure the design institutes forsafety studies. It's their plant, they have the right to the information,''a senior IAEA official said. VVER experts from Kurchatov have been invitedto show up at the current Kola review with their safety documentation, theofficial added.   Members of the Novovoronezh mission are not likely to forget their stayat the Russian PWR--not for reasons of nuclear safety, but because thesecond week of the reviewencompassed the Soviet Union's most dramaticevents in over 70 years. Far from being apathetic about another change ingovernment as hard-liners were attempting to carry through a coup d'etat inMoscow, the Novovoronezh citizens sprang to the defense of the USSR'slegitimate government. On August 19, a town meeting was broadcast live onlocal television in which the usurpers were repeatedly denounced.   Euphoria followed the failure of the coup two days later. ''I'll bet itwas the only time a safety review team will see reactor operators crying attheir stations--first from shame because of the coup, then for joy becausedemocracy had triumphed,'' an IAEA official remarked.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS BEGINS AS FINNS PREPARE FOR REACTOR ORDERBy:Risto Valkeapaa, Loviisa   Finnish power companies Imatran Voima Oy and Teollisuuden Voima Oy (IVOand TVO) have begun the information campaign that, under Finnish nuclearlaw, is the first step in preparations for the country's planned fifthnuclear reactor.   IVO and TVO sent 45,000 letters September 9 to households in the areasof Loviisa and Eurajoki, their two current nuclear power plant sites. Theletters contain a general study of the planned new power unit as well asnotification from the Ministry of Trade & Industry of public hearings onthe issue October 15 in Eurajoki and October 22 in Loviisa.   Preliminary public information meetings are also planned October 2 inthe two towns.   IVO Managing Director Kalevi Numminen opened the event at an informationmeeting in Loviisa and TVO Chairman Juhani Ahava, in Eurajoki, but theinterest center-of-gravity was Loviisa. IVO's predominant role in theinformation process was underscored by the fact that even the informationmaterial was produced mostly by IVO.   Numminen confirmed that four plant types are in the Finnish competition:ABB Atom's BWR-90; NPI-BWR, a Siemens-design BWR proposed by Nuclear PowerInternational (NPI); NPI-PWR, a Siemens-Framatome PWR also proposed by NPI;and a modern VVER-1000 from Atomenergoexport of the USSR. It is commonlyknown that IVO is keenly interested in being architect/engineer of theplanned reactor and that the company has very good knowledge of PWRs fromhaving operated the two Loviisa units.   Numminen said the Finnish project must proceed speedily because newgenerating capacity will certainly be needed after 1995. He said historyhad shown that electricity needs grow after periods of recession and thatFinland's economy has been raised by improving industrial efficiency andtechnical methods, all of which implies more electricity demand.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CASH-STRAPPED MCDERMOTT MAY SELL FRAMATOME MORE OF B&W VENTURESBy:Ben A. Franklin, Washington; Ann MacLachlan, Paris   McDermott International, Inc., the Louisiana-based oil service companywhich now owns 50% stakes in the profitable Babcock & Wilcox subsidiaries,B&W Nuclear Services Co. (BWNS) and B&W Fuel Co. (BWFC), is expected tosell controlling interests in the two joint ventures to Framatome to raisecash. McDermott and Framatome held out the possibility that the Frenchcompany would increase its holding in the two subsidiaries at a laterdate.   In 1989 McDermott sold half ownership in BWNS to Framatome and 49% ofBWFC to Virginia Fuel Inc., a consortium of Framatome, Cogema, and UraniumPechiney in which Framatome holds 40%.   The deal now under discussion was said to be worth $70-million. It wouldraise the French owners' stake in each B&W enterprise to 75% for now, witha likely third helping later. BWNS and BWFC, which account for 85% of B&W'scivilian nuclear business, have been profitable and growing (NW, 13 June,11).   A Framatome official said that the French vendor is so pleased with theperformance of and prospects for the B&W ventures that ''if we had had totake over all of McDermott's share, we would have done it.''   B&W and Framatome said the parties expect to complete the transfer ofownership by the end of this year and added the companies are ''discussingarrangements whereby Framatome would have the opportunity to furtherincrease its ownership of both companies at a future date.''   Framatome board chairman Jean-Claude Leny said his firm's increasedcommitment to the B&W companies underscored its confidence in the future ofnuclear energy, especially in America. Leny said he believes a nuclearrevival ''inevitable'' in the U.S. and that it could start as soon as threeyears from now. Framatome also is counting on expansion of the nuclearservices market with massive replacement of steam generators andrejuvenation related to plant life extension.   By joint agreement, BWNS and BWFC are to remain under the management ofcurrent President Charles Pryor.   ''The motive here is pretty clearly McDermott's need to improve itsbalance sheet by adding cash,'' a Wall Street analyst said. ''They arelosing money in the oil service business. They sold the crown jewels ofB&W, Bailey Controls, to an Italian company, Finmeccanica, for $295-millionin 1989. But that and the earlier B&W spinoffs to the French apparentlyjust weren't enough.''   Don Washington, a McDermott spokesman, said his company's guidance toB&W in shedding its civilian nuclear business, which is based largely inLynchburg, Va., reflected McDermott's announced ''consideration of sales toincrease liquidity.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, FIFTH TEAM OF WNP-2 OPERATORS AGAIN FAILS REQUALIFICATION TEST   A WNP-2 crew has failed one of three simulator tests, postponing reactorrestart for ''at least several more weeks,'' according to utility spokesmanJohn Britton. The outage, which began for refueling in April, is costingthe Washington Public Power Supply System (WPPSS) about $100,000 per day.   When only three of the five required control room operator crews passedNRC requalification exams last February and March, WPPSS had to postpone tolate August WNP-2's post-refueling restart of WNP-2. Instead, WPPSS resumedretraining the two failed crews and prepared for re-exams (NW, 18 July,6).   On September 9, one of the two flunked crews again failed one of threesimulator emergency scenarios.   Britton said one of the two crews given makeup requalification teststhis week was successful. But the second--the fifth crew of the fiverequired--did not do well enough in a late afternoon and evening simulatorchallenge. ''They failed only one of three different emergency scenarios,''Britton said, ''but making no apologies, the overall fact is that theyfailed.'' He said WPPSS would begin immediately ''putting together a newcrew.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, BARSEBAECK BWR PUMP FAILUREREHEATS COOLANT DURING REFUELINGBy:Mark Hibbs, Bonn    A pump trip at Sydkraft AB' Barsebaeck-2 on September 6 led toreheating of reactor coolant in the pressure vessel for several hoursduring a refueling outage. The incident has been classified as level 1 onthe International Nuclear Event Scale (INES).    Plant officials this week said that for about 3.5 hours on Friday,September 6, failure of the one oprating residual heat removal (RHR) pumpoperating caused the water temperature in the pressure vessel to increasefrom 50 degrees C to about 98 degrees C. With the pump in operation afterthe BWR had been shut down to begin the outage, water temperature hadfallen as planned to 50 degrees C.    The two RHR pumps are periodically used during reactor operation tocirculate coolant through heat exchangers and ion filters. During refuelingoutages they are used to lower coolant temperature prior to opening thevessel.    The pump failed to work after a suction valve began to close andtripped the pump. The valve is pneumatic and nitrogen pressure dropped whena pressure relief valve was tested. With the main circulation pumps shutdown at the onset of the refueling operation, water temperature in thevessel began to increase when the heat removal pump failed. The second RHR1pump was available and was started manually after the first pump was foundout of service, officials said, and coolant temperature was again loweredto 50 degrees C.    Operators in the control room during the beginning of the refuelingexercise did not notice that water temperature in the vessel had increased,since temperature monitors were not located in a position on the residualheat removal lines so as to record the temperature. The increase wasnoticed only when the lid to the pressure vessel was removed and a ''smallrelease'' of steam occurred, the official said, but the release was belowthe level which, would have triggered radiation alarms. After a shortdelay, however, a fire protection alarm was triggered by the release, hesaid.   The refueling outage at the reactor was scheduled to take 13 days.Because of the incident, however, the lengthj of the outage might beincreased, the official said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, SETTLEMENT ON GRAND GULF COULD RECOUP $90-MILLION FOR NOPSI   An agreement in principle would permit New Orleans Public Service Inc.(NOPSI) to recoup an additional $90-million of its Grand Gulf-1 nuclearplant investment from ratepayers. NOPSI has already written off$186.2-million of its $535.5-million share of Grand Gulf.   The tentative agreement announced last week between NOPSI, the NewOrleans City Council, and the Alliance for Affordable Energy would endthree years of litigation over the city council's ''prudence'' disallowanceof $135-million of Grand Gulf-1 costs.   The 1,306-MW General Electric BWR came on-line in 1985, and in 1988 thecity council disallowed recovery of $135-million after finding$476.2-million imprudent. The utility had already written off $51.2-millionof the plant's costs, which were 15.3% of Grand Gulf's $3.5-billion.   Appeals and counterappeals in the case were heard in both Louisiana andfederal courts, and the case is scheduled to be heard by the U.S. SupremeCourt later this year.   The agreement calls for NOPSI to reduce electric rates by $11.3-millionwhen the agreement becomes effective; but then allows rate increases of$7.3-million in 1992, $6.7-million in 1993, $5.2-million in 1994, and$4.4-million in 1995.   In exchange for these increases, aimed at re-capturing Grand Gulf costs,NOPSI will freeze any other rate increases for five years and concede to a13.76% cap on earnings from electric operations.   The New Orleans City Council has scheduled a public hearing on theproposed settlement for September 19, with a decision expected aroundOctober 3.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, IRRADIATION ACCIDENT SHOCKS FRANCE; 'CRACKDOWN' ON SMALL USERS PROMISEDBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Two men remained hospitalized in France this week after being severelyirradiated in August by electrons from a particle beam accelerator at anindustrial enterprise in Forbach, near Metz. France's environment ministersaid the accident shows that insufficient attention has been paid to smallusers of radioactivity and promised a ''crackdown'' on such uses.   The estimated doses sustained by the workers, who came from thetemporary-employment agency Manpower and had apparently not receivedtraining in radioprotection, were reported to be between 50 and 100 rem,but an expert at the Institut de Protection et de Surete Nucleaire (IPSN)said the exposures must have been much higher to have caused theradiation-induced burns from which the patients are suffering. IPSN wasconducting biological exams of the patients early this week at the Percymilitary hospital in Clamart, near Paris, to determine the doses withgreater accuracy. The accident is the most serious of its kind on LaborDepartment record in France.   A third person, a recently hired crew leader, was also irradiated butmuch less severely and was not hospitalized with the others August 27. Theenterprise, Electron Beam Service (EBS), which used the beams to refinecarbon particles, has been ordered closed and responsibilities in theaffair are under investigation by the regional Labor Department and theprosecutor general of Sarreguemines. The company, pleading human error onthe workers' part, says safety instructions forbade entering the beam hallfor 10 to 15 minutes after the beam was switched off, but local Laborofficials say the instructions were written in English and that EBS had notdeclared the existence of the accelerator to the authorities.   Environment/Risks Minister Brice Lalonde declared, ''I didn't know youcould have a particle accelerator in your attic. We have been paying somuch attention to the tree of nuclear power plants, we haven't seen theforest of small users'' of radiation equipment. ''We are going to have toreally crack down.''   The dose estimates of 50 to 100 rem reported in the French media overlast weekend were far too low, according to the IPSN expert, to have led tothe effects suffered by the two workers: skin burns several millimetersdeep and loss of hair. The results of the IPSN examination are covered bymedical confidentiality. But a radioprotection expert told Nucleonics Weekthat skin burns, radiodermatitis, and other radioactivity-induced effectsimply irradiation to at least ''several tens of Gray'' with a minimum of 6Gray. One Gray equals 100 rad. Grays and rads measure the energy absorbedby irradiated matter; 100 rem is equivalent to 100 rad, but rem measuresthe biological damage done to living tissue that has been irradiated.Experts say that above 50 rem--at which level no biological damage isobserved--one should speak rather of rad, or Gray.   By way of comparison, ''liquidators'' working on the Chernobyl nuclearplant site in 1986 almost routinely received doses of 50 rem, but those whocontracted radiation sickness on the night of the catastrophe were said tohave received upwards of 600 rem (6 Gray).Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS MIXED WASTE FACILITY AT HANFORDBy:Richard R. Zuercher, Washington   Chemical Waste Management, Inc. (CWM) plans to spend more than$100-million to build and operate a facility to clean up waste that is bothhazardous and radioactive at DOE's Hanford nuclear reservation inWashington.   The company--a unit of Waste Management, Inc.--says the state-of-the-artTri-Cities Environmental Analysis & Treatment (Treat) complex will functionas an analytical laboratory and waste treatment facility for wastesproduced by DOE and other generators in the Pacific Northwest.   ''We expect to invest over $100-million in CWM facilities at Hanfordover the next six to eight years to bring our world-renowned commercialclean-up experience to serve DOE's needs as well as those of the PacificNorthwest,'' said CWM Chairman Jerry Dempsey. ''Having these facilitiesavailable will accelerate the cleanup of Hanford by years and reduceoverall restoration costs.''   Dempsey said CWM expects to first build an analytical facility adjacentto the Hanford reservation. Construction tentatively is set to start laterthis year, with the facility to come on line in 1993. The facility willprovide laboratory analysis of mixed waste (low level radwaste alsodesignated as chemically hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency),and will accommodate Treat management staff and CWM scientists who plan toparticipate jointly in research with DOE's Pacific Northwest Laboratory.   CWM currently is negotiating for purchase of the land, in the city ofRichland at the Port of Benton's Richland Airport, CWM said.   The second major component of the Treat complex will be a wastetreatment facility on the Hanford reservation. That facility, to belicensed by Washington state and built over the next two to six years, willcontain separation, sampling, records management, incineration,stabilization, repackaging, and transportation operations needed to treatmixed waste from Hanford and regional commercial generators. Constructionis expected to begin in 1993, CWM said.   The waste treatment complex will be built in the center of the560-square-mile reservation, about eight miles from the Columbia River andagricultural areas of the Columbia Basin. CWM said the facility's advancedeffluent controls and the extensive buffer provided by the Hanford sitewill do much to make the facility environmentally sound.   ''The facility will be designed so that, as the Hanford mixed-wastemarket grows and advanced technologies become fully available, enhancementsto the treatment complex can be made to safely maintain efficientoperations and high environmental standards,'' the company said. Residuesfrom the processing of waste will not be dumped at the Treat facility butwill be disposed of at off-site commercial hazardous, licensed low-levelradwaste facilities, or--in the case of Hanford mixed waste--be returned toHanford.   While waste available for treatment in DOE's current inventory is smallcompared to other Pacific Northwest markets--about 75 tons of hazardouswaste and 50 tons of mixed waste annually--this type of waste is expectedto increase significantly over the next few years, CWM said. CWM projectsthat two-thirds of the waste it eventually will treat will come from DOE,with the remainder from the commercial market. No tonnage projections wereavailable. Constructing the waste facility now will serve to avoid the needfor prolonged storage and the environmental risks that accompany it, thecompany said.   Dempsey said serving both DOE and Pacific Northwest markets is key tothe Treat complex's financial viability. The complex is expected to employsome 200 workers, he added.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, COURT ORDER ENDS SECRECY IN DOE PROCEDURES THWARTING FOIABy:Ben A. Franklin, Washington   A federal judge in Los Angeles ruled this week that DOE--acting insecrecy--wrote departmental procedures designed to shield from disclosureunder the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) the safety, health and otherrecords of the corporate contractors running its nuclear weapons program.The court ordered an end to the concealment.   The September 9 ruling by U.S. District Judge Edward Rafeedie deniedDOE's petition for summary dismissal of the suit. Instead, the courtgranted all demands by the plaintiff in the case, the Committee to Bridgethe Gap (CBG), for the public release of DOE proposals for, and drafts of,previously hidden rules and orders designed both to thwart FOIA requestsand to block public scrutiny of the department's process of concealment.   The decision directs DOE henceforth to submit all directives and ordersaffecting the public release of contractor data to formal rulemakingprocedure, and requires public notice and opportunity for public comment.(Civil Action 90-3568-ER).   Daniel Hirsch, president of CBG, the Los Angeles-based public interestgroup that began the dispute in 1988 when DOE denied its FOIArequest--called the decision ''a tremendous victory for public oversight ofDOE.''   ''Proposals to prevent public access to records of DOE'scontractor-operated facilities have been roundly defeated,'' Hirsch said ina statement. ''This marks the end of DOE's practice of secretly makingrules affecting the public.'' The plaintiffs charged that DOE officials hadbeen proposing to shield from disclosure, among other things, data onworker exposure to radioactivity.   DOE seemed somewhat less excited by the court ruling. ''Our lawyers callit a non-event,'' a departmental spokesman said. ''We were going to do thisanyway, and told the court so. But I guess the plaintiffs would say we didnot agree to that until they filed suit.''   CBG said the irony was that DOE has been promulgating rules that tightenits FOIA procedures, and doing so in secret. ''They were doing it bycalling the changes 'orders' instead of regulations so they could evade therequirement that proposed regulations be published for public comment.''Hirsch said.   The lawsuit, given a preliminary hearing April 29 (NW, 2 May, 4), wasbased in part on CBG's unofficial access through a ''leak'' of amemorandum from Bruce Twining, manager of DOE's Albuquerque, N.M.,operations office. CBG cited what it said was Twining's proposal thatcontractors' documents on DOE weapons program activities be made virtuallyinvulnerable to requests under the FOIA, and even more tightly''suppressed'' than suggested by top department officials in Washington.   The litigation began when CBG submitted an FOIA request for copies ofchanges proposed by DOE in its FOIA procedures and had both that requestand an administrative appeal of its denial turned down by DOE. ''We had tofile an FOIA request, an appeal of its denial, and finally had to go tocourt to obtain a copy of DOE's proposed FOIA rule changes,'' Hirsch said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, SELIN BACKS LICENSING REFORM BILL DESPITE AMBIGUITY OVER NRC ROLEBy:David Stellfox and Dave Airozo, Washington   NRC can live with the Bush Administration's ideas on nuclear plantlicensing reform legislation even though the pending legislation thatbrings about the change (S. 1220) is ''sort of ambiguous'' about NRC'sauthority to make a final, overall, pre-operational safety finding.   Though he concedes the ambiguity, NRC Chairman Ivan Selin isn't botheredby it. What does have him uneasy is the possibility that the House ofRepresentatives will offer companion legislation that will gut one of thekeystones of the Administration-backed bill or that the Administration, inits zeal to pass licensing reform, could ''inadvertently trash'' theagency's new one step-licensing rule--a rule the commission believes isadequate and not in need of legislative undergirding.   Selin's comments to Nucleonics Week came by way of explanation ofprevious and apparently contradictory statements on S. 1220.   When Selin told a House subcommittee in July that the commission wouldnot object to certain changes in the bill, he appeared to contradict, or atleast back away from, previous commission support for the legislation.   Secretary of Energy James Watkins, keenly aware of Wall Street'sleeriness about nuclear investments, thinks S. 1220 is fine the way it isand could help spark a nuclear revival here. Selin's comments promptedWatkins to dash off a letter--which quickly became public--taking issuewith Selin's statements, particularly his apparent endorsement of aproposed change that might make it easier for intervenors to get apost-construction hearing on a new plant.   Post-construction hearings are anathema to nuclear power's boosters,because of the uncertainty they create. Such hearings could drag on formonths or years, they argue, and the finished plant could sit idle,generating nothing but additional interest payments, as has happened in thepast.   Selin told Nucleonics Week last week that the difference in positions isonly apparent and that he was speaking in the abstract when he testified tothe House subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Peter Kostmayer (D-Pa.)    ''Kostmayer asked a number of questions about (whether) we wouldsupport certain kinds of legislation,'' Selin said. ''I'm sure he askedthem in the context of his interpretation of S. 1220, but they're notnecessarily our interpretation of S. 1220. So I just took them on the faceof it.   ''It did not seem appropriate...(to) argue with him as to whether hisquestions described a particular piece of legislation,'' Selin continued.''I answered them as, if faced with such legislation, what would ourreaction be. When Secretary Watkins wrote to me, he was talking about aspecific piece of legislation, which is somewhat different from the pieceof legislation described by Chairman Kostmayer in his questions to me andtherefore elicits somewhat different answers.''   In fact, the answers were sufficiently different as to appearcontradictory--supporting on the one hand S. 1220, which increases theburden on intervenors seeking hearings, and Kostmayer's suggested changesto S. 1220, which would lower those same thresholds.   Congressional sources found Selin's explanation lacking. ''ChairmanKostmayer's understanding is, and the transcript shows, that that is whathe was trying to get to,'' one source close to the matter said. ''He hasdeep concerns about the hurdles intervenors would have to jump under thelegislation.''   Selin said some of Kostmayer's questioning was aimed at trying ''to puta little daylight between the commission and the Administration in saying'you don't really support this bill that's up there, do you?'''   Selin reiterated NRC's support for S. 1220 last week, but toldNucleonics Week supporting the Administration's view is not NRC's job.''The commission's view, from a regulatory point of view, (10 Code ofFederal Regulations) Part 52 is quite adequate, and we still believe that.On the other hand, we don't have a judgment as to what it is going to taketo have the industry invest or for people to raise money. That's DOE's job.If it is their judgment that legislation would make it more likely tofoster an attractive competitive climate, we neither agree nor disagree,that's not our job. So when we make our statement that (Part) 52 isadequate, we're not making a business judgment, we're making a regulatoryjudgment.''   With that qualification, Selin said the commission could support S. 1220as it now stands, adding however that the commission is concerned aboutwhat will happen with legislation in the House. He said it's clearKostmayer wants the bill amended so that the opportunity for a second,pre-operational hearing would be mandatory--a requirement that would''displease'' the commission.   Some NRC sources believe S. 1220 would unduly tie the commission's handsby limiting its authority to make an overall, pre-operational determinationabout a plant's safety. In his letter to Selin, Watkins said S. 1220 doesnot diminish the discretion that the commission ''currently has underexisting authority'' to make safety determinations on its own initiative.   Though S. 1220 does not eliminate the long-standing authority for apre-operational hearing in Section 189(a) of the Atomic Energy Act (AEA),the bill establishes a whole new subsection, 189(b), which creates a higherthreshold for intervenors seeking hearings and restricts such hearingssolely to conformance with the requirements of the combined constructionpermit/operating license and its associated inspections, tests, analyses,and acceptance criteria (ITAAC).   Selin acknowledged that S. 1220 is ''sort of ambiguous'' on this point,but the ambiguity doesn't really bother him because courts have alwaysdeferred to NRC's broad authority to protect the public health and safety.''So, as a practical matter I don't think there's any difference betweenthe two, but it's helpful to have the executive agency (DOE) agree...thatnothing precludes our ability to find that a plant is or isn't healthfuland safe at the time of operation,'' Selin said.   Ron Simard, a spokesman for the Nuclear Management & Resources Council,said the new AEA section covering combined licenses would restrict NRC tothe ITAAC, but added that the agency has sufficient authority under Section161(b) and 161(p) ''to immediately shut down a plant or impose otherconditions'' at any time. That NRC authority applies only to plants alreadylicensed and operating. The purpose of the new Section 189(b) created bythe legislation is ''to establish some reasonable constraints on the issuesthat will be considered during the post-construction and pre-operationalstage,'' Simard said.   The removal of language from the new Section 189(b) which would requirea commission ''finding'' that the plant is ready to go on line was toaccommodate a DOE concern, Selin said. ''Their understanding is that, byputting in the word 'finding,' we require a hearing, or at least if someonechallenges, they have to be given a hearing. Our understanding--my GeneralCounsel--says that's not true. The hearing situation is not affected by thephrase.    ''Our General Counsel thinks the hearing situation is identicalwhether you call it a finding, or approval of an ITAAC, or a judgment,''Selin continued. ''It's still the commission's decision on whether ahearing is called for or not, subject to judicial review. So, at least inmy opinion...what they were nervous about was that, in putting in the word'finding,' we would make it more difficult for the commission to decide ina specific case that a hearing was unnecessary.''   Selin said the big difference between NRC and the Administration is''none of these things. Our main discomfort is none of these things we'vediscussed. If, in trying to get (S.) 1220 through, the Administration wereto inadvertently trash Part 52, we then might end up with neither (thenuclear power provisions) of (S.) 1220 nor a practical (Part) 52 and thenwe don't have a single-step license.''   He said, ''The Department...just as they think we've changed our publicpolicy a little bit, they've changed their nuances a little bit. In theirlast statement, I'm very comfortable with the letter Secretary Watkins sentus.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, KOREA PLANS 13 MORE REACTORS TO MAKE NUCLEAR MAIN GENERATORBy:Elaine Hiruo, London   An additional 13 commercial reactors will be constructed by the year2006 in South Korea under the government's revised long-term developmentprogram, according to Choi Dae Yong, vice president of procurement withKorea Electric Power Corp.   The units will be in addition to a 700-MW Candu plant Atomic Energy ofCanada Ltd. received a contract for in February (NW, 3 Jan., 1) and the two1,000-MW PWRs that will be constructed under a contract awarded to ABBCombustion Engineering in July (NW, 25 July, 1). The country plansincreasing domestic content of the new reactors and is aiming for completeself-sufficiency in nuclear construction and operation (NW, 11 Oct. '90,5).   Speaking at the Uranium Institute symposium last week in London, Choisaid two more 700-MW Candu pressurized heavy water reactors (PHWRs) and two1,000-MW PWRs will be constructed by 2001, and six 1,000-MW PWRs and three700-MW PHWRs are planned for construction by 2006.   ''The electrical share of final (all) energy consumption increased from3.7% in 1970 to 11% in 1991. It will be over 14% in 2001,'' Choi said.''Korea's (per capita) electricity consumption is still much less than thatof advanced industrialized countries, being one-quarter that of Japan andone-sixth that of the United States. There is therefore the potential for arapid increase in electricity demand in the future.''   He said that peak electricity demand in the country recorded an annualaverage growth of 15% during the last 30 years but that reserve capacityduring the 1991 summer peak was only 4.5%.   Nuclear accounted for 49.1% of electricity generation in South Korea in1990; the average capacity factor of its nine units exceeded 70%. Nuclearis projected to produce 54.6% of electricity in 2006, with coal producing29.8%.   The projections are a sharp contrast to 1981 when oil was the dominantgenerator, producing 79.8% of the country's electricity. Projections for2006 show a drastic drop in oil, with that fuel's power production at only2.6%. In 1981 nuclear was the No. 2 producer in South Korea with a 7.2%share. Coal--which was at the bottom, trailing behind hydro's6.7%--accounted for only 6.3% of the total power generation.   But in order for new units to be constructed in a timely manner, Choisaid, such hurdles as investment financing, securing sites for constructionand transmission equipment, and public opinion must be overcome. He pointedto a 1991 poll that showed that only 67.6% of the people surveyed supportedconstruction of nuclear power plants. A 1986 poll put support at 72.4%.   ''If Korea is to develop nuclear power continuously, and to achieveself-reliance in energy, the misconceptions among the public on the safetyof nuclear power must be cleared up and their understanding and supportsecured,'' he said. The public outreach campaign underway in South Koreainvolves the publication of booklets and pamphlets, conducting site tours,and making nuclear-related information available to the public, he said.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, ITALIAN REGULATOR GIVEN AUTONOMY AS ENERGY AGENCY CHANGES FOCUSBy:Marion Bywater, Rome   Italian nuclear regulatory agency DISP is to be rendered more''legitimate'' and financially autonomous under new legislation passed byParliament, although it will continue to be a part of state energy researchagency ENEA.   The new law also officially transforms ENEA from a predominantlynuclear-oriented entity to one focusing on the environment and alternateenergy sources and carrying out only limited nuclear research in the areasof plant safety and radiation protection. ENEA's full name--but not itsacronym--will change to ''Ente per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia el'Ambiente'' (Agency for New Technologies, Energy & Environment).   Officials at DISP (Direzione Centrale per la Sicorezza Nucleare e laProtezione Sanitaria) say the new legislation contains no great practicalinnovations but it ''institutionalizes our autonomy. We are very pleasedabout the change because it makes things clearer. It truly gives us acompletely independent identity.''   The changes have been under discussion by Italian legislators sinceItaly voted its nuclear moratorium in 1987. Initially it looked as if ENEAmight be abolished and DISP spun off as a stand-alone agency, butlegislators ultimately decided to leave the regulatory agency as adirectorate within ENEA, apparently because they felt establishing aseparate regulatory board could have sent the wrong signals innuclear-sensitive Italy.   The wording of the law, however, ''underscores our legitimacy,'' DISPofficials said. It provides a statutory guarantee that DISP should have''independence in carrying out its specific functions and full managementand organizational autonomy.''   Instead of having its budget allocated by ENEA, DISP has been given anannual allocation of 45-billion lire (U.S.$40-million) within the1.7-trillion lire ($1.3-billion) budget authorization for ENEA for theperiod 1991-1993.   DISP officials said that they expect to have enough funds within thisbudget not only to run the 290-person agency on a day-to-day basis, but tohave ''not much, but a not negligible'' margin left over for regulatoryresearch.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS LOOM ON IRAQI CENTRIFUGE EFFORTBy:Mark Hibbs, Bonn   A fifth IAEA inspection team will head for Iraq this month in search ofanswers to key unresolved questions about that country's clandestine effortto build and operate gas centrifuges. In October, a larger IAEA missionwill go to Iraq to follow up.   At present, there is no consensus at the IAEA about the extent to whichIraq relied on foreign assistance to build centrifuge components andassemble them at a facility known as El Pharat, located south of Baghdad.Official sources said that Iraq still refuses to disclose foreign sourcesfor centrifuge design information and components. ''They are notcooperating and they still claim they can make and operate centrifuges allby themselves,'' one official said (NW, 22 Aug., 7).   According to the IAEA inspection report on the fourth mission to Iraq,which was completed last week but has not been made public, beforeinspectors arrived at El Pharat, the labels had been scraped off importedequipment meant to be used for manufacturing centrifuge components, in anattempt to disguise their origin.   Iraqi experts previously told the IAEA that Iraq had designed itsclandestine nuclear program by building redundant facilities in order toprevent interruption should any one secret location be discovered ordestroyed. Thus, Iraq constructed two identical calutron enrichmentfacilities at Tarmiyah and Al Sharqat, although inspectors are not surewhether Al Sharqat, which was less complete when the Gulf War began, wasmeant as a backup for Tarmiyah or as a simultaneous operation.   During the fourth inspection, however, the IAEA was not shown a twin forthe centrifuge production facility at El Pharat.   The latest IAEA report states that, in the view of inspectors, Iraq,which claimed it could manufacture 200 centrifuges per year at El Pharat asof 1993, might have been able to manufacture as many as 600 centrifuges peryear later in the 1990s.   But that is viewed with skepticism by some western centrifuge experts.These sources say that the IAEA estimate extrapolates future centrifugeoutput in large part from the spatial dimensions of the workshops at ElPharat. These experts asserted that IAEA inspectors have seen no evidenceyet that Iraq can mass-produce key components such as spiral-grooved bottombearings and magnetic suspension top bearings, no evidence that Iraq hasaccess to sufficient quantities of centrifuge-grade maraging steel, and noevidence that Iraq has cascade engineering expertise.   For these reasons, these experts assert, Iraq would need substantialhelp from a foreign source to meet its goal of building and operating a500-centrifuge cascade by 1996. A cascade that large might have beencapable of producing about 5 kilograms of high-enriched uranium (HEU) peryear--about one-fifth the amount needed for an initial nuclear explosivedevice (NuclearFuel, 19 Aug., 12).Two Rotor Assemblies Operated   The IAEA report on the fourth inspection confirmed that no indigenouslymanufactured rotors shown to inspectors were of sufficient quality foruranium enrichment.   During the inspection, IAEA officials learned that Iraq had obtained 10carbon fiber centrifuge rotors, and test-operated two complete carbon fiberrotor assemblies using uranium hexafluoride feed material. However, theserotor tubes were supplied to Iraq by an outside source.   With the exception of some simple rotor tubes made of aluminum, allrotor tubes manufactured in Iraq were made of maraging steel. To producethese, IAEA inspectors found, Iraq had obtained 25 plates of 350-grademaraging steel from a foreign source. Iraq claimed that 19 sheets were madeinto preforms at the Al Nassr State Enterprise for Mechanical Industries atTaji, near Baghdad. Iraq also told inspectors that six more maraging steelpreforms for centrifuge rotors had been obtained from a foreign source.   According to IAEA documents, only nine sufficiently balanced maragingsteel rotors had been made using the 25 pieces of maraging steel. None wereof sufficient quality for enriching uranium.   Some Iraqi officials told IAEA inspectors they were confident that Iraqcould have evaded export controls on 350-grade maraging steel and couldhave imported sufficient quantities for building many centrifuges. However,IAEA inspectors found no other quantities of maraging steel in Iraq.   An interim IAEA report compiled during the fourth inspection stated thatIraqi officials ''claim to have had severe difficulties in obtainingmaraging steel yet they proceed with a plan that would require a dependablesupply.''   The interim report stated that Iraqi officials led IAEA officials tobelieve that Iraq planned to indigenously produce maraging steel. However,Iraqi suggestions that domestic production of this specialty steel waspossible were not supported by officials at the Al Badr GeneralEstablishment, located south of Baghdad at Mahmoudiya, which Iraq declaredto be a centrifuge production facility. Engineers at Al Badr ''complainedbitterly about the poor quality'' of carbon steel which Iraq had alreadyproduced.Cascade Engineering Primitive?   The three large-scale centrifuge enrichment facilities in Europe whichare owned and operated by the Urenco consortium were built only aftercentrifuge designs had been proven in extensive test programs and machinesassembled and operated in small pilot cascades.   One western centrifuge expert told Nucleonics Week he was ''astonished''that Iraq had planned to build two large cascades based on a centrifugedesign very similar to Urenco's G-1 centrifuge--a 100-machine cascade by1993 and a 500-machine cascade by 1996--without having first built andsuccessfully operated a pilot cascade with only a few machines.   Advanced countries ''wouldn't have done it that way,'' he said. InBrazil's clandestine centrifuge program, experts built and operated acascade with eight machines in the late 1980s before manufacturing severalhundred centrifuges for a larger cascade.   Iraq had considered building a cascade with 36 centrifuges after ittested single rotors, but then abandoned that plan and proceeded instead toconcentrate on a cascade design with 102 centrifuges, western sources said.Cascade designs shown to inspectors by the Iraqis for both the 36-machineand the 102-machine configurations were based on a separation factor of1.15-1.18 and a ''cut'' of 0.5. The separation factor quantifies the degreeof separation which can be obtained in a single centrifuge. The ''cut''describes the ratio of product flow to feed flow in a centrifuge stage.   However, one western expert said, Iraq's cascade designs were based ononly ''back of the envelope calculations'' for production of enricheduranium. Iraqi experts showed inspectors calculations for production of 3%U-235 only, using simple, ideal cascades, which provided no evidence ofextensive cascade engineering know-how.   Iraqi officials denied that they had tried to design a cascade forproduction of highly-enriched uranium (HEU). But that assertion is viewedwith skepticism by western experts.   Iraqi officials' confidence in their ability to proceed from singlecentrifuges to large cascades might have been illusory, and prompted bycompetition between task teams involved in Iraq's clandestine nucleareffort, sources said.   Alternately, Iraqi confidence might also indicate that the centrifugeprogram was guided by an outside expert,yet unknown to the IAEA or westernintelligence agencies, who had great familiarity with centrifuge design andmanufacture. The chief inspector during the fourth IAEA mission, David Kay,reported from the field last month that such a guiding hand ''must havebeen there.'' In evidence of this, inspectors found that Iraq had modifiedits centrifuge design, which closely resembled the Urenco G-1 centrifugebuilt in Germany, to include the spiral-grooved bottom bearing from G-2, animproved Urenco centrifuge.   During the fourth inspection, the most senior Iraqi official providinginformation to the IAEA was Jaffar Dhiah, a vice director of the IraqiAtomic Energy Commission. While Kay stated last month that he believedJaffar Dhiah was not the guiding light behind Iraq's secret program, theofficial inspection report completed by the IAEA last week asserted thatJaffar had been in charge of the program.   At the outset of bench testing of a G-1 rotor assembly, the ''cut'' ofthe centrifuge might be as low as 0.1, requiring optimization of scoopswhich are fitted inside the rotor tube. At a warehouse complex called AshShakyh, inspectors found a press for inserting baffles and scoops into therotor cylinder. But sources said that, even if Iraqi experts had managed tooptimize the ''cut'' of the G-1 centrifuge to 0.5 (which at Urenco mighthave taken only several weeks of careful and intensive testing), Iraq wouldstill have had to build 50 or more stages containing several thousandoptimized G-1 centrifuges in a cascade to make significant quantities ofHEU.   But Iraq had apparently not optimized the single rotors it hadflow-formed itself. Using the first of two test stands found in Iraq byinspectors, Iraq was able to spin a simple, so-called Beams-type or ''modelI'' centrifuge rotor at a velocity of 50,000 revolutions per minute (rpm).However, when the ''model I'' rotor assembly was used for test separationof product using light gases (not heavy uranium hexaflouride), speeds ofonly 20,000 to 25,000 rpm were achieved.   The ''model II'' centrifuge rotors which Iraq tested on a second teststand, and which officials described as very close to G-1, could spin at anoptimal speed of 60,000 rpm without feed material. However,mass-spectrometric examinations indicated that these rotors had apparentlynot been tested with uranium hexaflouride feed.   After inspectors arrive in Iraq on the fifth mission, they will pursueIraq's claim that it had manufactured magnetic suspension top bearings. AGerman firm, Inwako GmbH, exported some British-made components forsamarium-cobalt top bearings to Iraq last year, criminal justice officialssaid. On the last day of the fourth inspection, Iraq claimed it hadmanufactured 50 top bearings, but when the inspectors left for Vienna theyhad seen only a single top bearing, and no manufacturing equipment formaking the bearings.Al Qaqaa for Missile Testing?   Western intelligence reports in 1990 stated that the Al Qaqaa StateEstablishment, located about 30 miles south of Baghdad, was ''concernedwith the development of the nonnuclear components of a nuclear weapon''(NuclearFuel, 21 Jan., 3). But, according to the IAEA, Iraq has given a''plausible alternative explanation'' for secret work going on at AlQaqaa.   At Al Qaqaa, Iraqi experts had been working on bridge wires--a crucialelectronic component which can be used for precise detonation of highexplosives in a nuclear implosion device. According to Iraqi officials,however, the bridge wires were being developed at Al Qaqaa for so-calledfire-set components to separate missile stages within time tolerances of0.5 microseconds. Iraqi officials also stated that experts had been workingon development of so-called RDX explosives and metal cast explosives, andhad imported hundreds of tons of the explosive known as HMX. Theseexplosives can be used in a nuclear weapon.   For any nuclear weapon, Iraq would probably need a steady supply ofpolonium-210, which is used with a small amount of beryllium as a neutroninitiator (NW, 25 July, 12). Sources said that evidence of production ofPo-210, which has a half-life of only 138 days, would serve as ''indirectconfirmation'' that Iraq was working on nuclear explosives. IAEA inspectorsfound no indication of Po-210 production or handling at the TuwaithaNuclear Research Center, Al Qaqaa, or two facilities for materials researchand high explosives testing, Al Atheer and Al Musayyaib. However, Jaffartold IAEA officials during the fourth inspection that Iraq had made ''smallquantities'' of Po-210 for ''steady-state ion sources.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, USSR OFFERS UP RBMKS TO SCRUTINY OF WORLD SAFETY EXPERTS, VIA IAEABy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   The Soviet Union has proposed that the international community conduct asafety review of its RBMK graphite-moderated channel-type reactors in a newprogram managed by the IAEA. The offer, made at an international safetyconference in Vienna last week, marks the first time the Soviets have beenwilling to subject design and operation of the Chernobyl-type units tointernational scrutiny.   The USSR's existing 16 RBMK units provide about half of the country'snuclear-generated electricity. But their safety systems and basic design,even after post-Chernobyl backfitting, are considered by some in the Westas insufficient to justify long-term operation.   The Soviet offer was endorsed by the experts who were meeting in Viennato set a nuclear safety strategy for the next decade (see related story,this issue), and it seemed sure to be accepted by the IAEA Board ofGovernors at the end of this week and the agency's general conference,which convenes Monday, September 16. It would be modeled on the IAEA's''Study of the Safety of Older Reactors,'' a safety review offirst-generation Soviet-design VVER (PWR) units in central and easternEurope, which is due to wind up this fall.   Lars Hoegberg, director of the Swedish Nuclear Inspectorate (SKI),estimated that an RBMK safety study of the same scope as the VVER studywould require tens of engineering man-hours and up to $200,000 per unitexamined.   The Russians evidently believe their channel reactors will pass musterafter completion of a five-year program of safety improvements and upgradesfollowing the 1986 accident at Chernobyl. They hope that an internationalstamp of approval will allow them to finish RBMK units whose constructionwas frozen in the wake of the Chernobyl accident.   Separately, a senior Soviet official said regulators expect to rule byOctober on whether first-generation RBMK units can resume operation at fullpower. The Committee for State Supervision of Safety in Industry & NuclearPower (CSSSINP) imposed a ceiling of 70% power operation in June 1990because of concerns about the consequences of a fuel-damage accident at theolder plants if they operated at full power (NW, 12 July '90, 1). Butcommittee deputy chairman Anatoly Belyaev told Nucleonics Week last weekthat the Ministry of Atomic Power & Industry (MAPI), which operates Sovietnuclear reactors, is about to submit to the regulators a technical studyaimed at proving that the consequences of a severe core-damage accidentwould not be higher at 100% than at 70% power.   Belyaev said the ministry had stressed, in debating the RBMK matter withthe safety committee, that operating at reduced power means lower revenuesfor the power plants and thus ''eventually reduces the capability toimprove safety at those plants.'' MAPI had officially committed to investall additional income from full-power operation in improving safety at theunits, Belyaev said. ''We understand their arguments and are trying tolisten to them,'' he said. He cited ''very important changes'' maderecently to the first large RBMK at Leningrad, including rebuilding ofpressure tubes, which had kept Leningrad-1 off line for nearly two years,and said similar backfits were planned at other RBMKs.   ''The energy supply situation is still very difficult'' in the USSR,Belyaev said. ''We would like to make a final decision (on the RMBKfull-power operation) no later than October if there's enough evidence.''   The Soviet proposal for an RBMK safety review program was aired byAndrei Gagarinski, deputy director of the Kurchatov Atomic EnergyInstitute, on behalf of MAPI. The program would encompass work that is justabout to begin between safety experts in the USSR and four western Europeancountries.   MAPI first deputy director Viktor Sidorenko wrote August 22 to nuclearregulatory bodies and safety experts in Germany, Sweden, the U.K., andFinland to invite them to begin in-depth examination of RBMK safety in amultilateral effort that would encompass incipient bilateral work. Theexperts from those four countries, plus possibly Italy, are scheduled tomeet in Moscow next week to discuss how to proceed.   Up to now, the western world's influence in the RBMK program has beenlimited to certain technical points, such as Gesellschaft fuerReaktorsicherheit's (GRS) proposal to try to apply its thermohydraulicscodes to RBMK accidents. The Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI)recently signed an agreement with CSSSINP to study the safety of BWRs,while the U.K. Atomic Energy Authority has been discussing points of commoninterest concerning graphite-moderated reactors.International Financing Assumed   It is assumed that any changes deemed necessary in the RBMKs afterinternational scrutiny--like those now being worked out under a EuropeanCommunity program for the old Kozloduy VVERs in Bulgaria--would have to befunded through borrowing from international institutions like the WorldBank and the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development.   Last year, the International Advisory Committee (IAC) of senior nuclearexperts underlined the large contribution of the Soviet-design reactors tototal world nuclear power risk and recommended that, if nationalgovernments cannot fund them completely, then safety-necessary backfitsshould be supported by the west's nuclear industry and governments mostinterested in preserving the nuclear option (NW, 20 Sept. '90, 2).More recently, at the Andrei Sakharov Memorial Conference held in Moscow inlate May, an international expert panel recommended ''urgently'' thatfurther operation of the RBMK units ''be recognized as a temporaryemergency measure.''   Both the IAC and the Sakharov panel estimated that the risk of a severeaccident with major off-site consequences from the Soviet-design reactorswas as high as 50% over five years.   Meanwhile, Lithuanian independence poses special questions around theIgnalina RBMK station in that Baltic nation. The Ignalina units--twooperating and one in suspended construction--are the only RBMKs outside theRussian Federation, but they are also the biggest ones, at unit electricpower of 1,500 megawatts for a core the same size as the 1,000-MW Chernobylunits. They produce a substantial share of Lithuania's electricity andcould help generate export revenues for the republic. Following therecognition of Lithuania by the Nordic states, close cooperation on RBMKsafety and nuclear safety supervision is expected to be put in place bySweden and Finland.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, CZECHS WERE FORCED TO TAKE UNITS THEY KNEW WERE BELOW-STANDARDBy:Ann MacLachlan, Vienna   Czechoslovakia's senior nuclear regulator said last week his countryknew from the beginning that the reactors it imported from the USSR in the1970s did not meet prevailing nuclear safety requirements, but could donothing about it. He painted a stark picture of the situation of formerUSSR satellites, forced by politics to accept nuclear power plants theyrealized were below standards in force at the time in the West.   Zdenek Kriz, chief inspector of the Czechoslovak Atomic EnergyCommission, told a meeting of international nuclear safety experts at theIAEA in Vienna that the decision to buy two VVER-440 units at Bohunice fromthe Soviet Union ''was a purely political decision made by our government.Safety was not a criterion. There was no tender, no discussion aboutsafety'' before the sale, he said. The decision involved ''acceptance ofthe philosophy of the Soviet vendor, which at that time differedsignificantly from U.S. (safety) criteria,'' Kriz said. For example, theSoviet's defense-in-depth concept stressed accident prevention, and''suppressed other parts (of the philosophy) partially or totally.'' TheSoviet approach violated the spirit of IAEA nuclear safety standards aswell, he said.   Later, he said other central and eastern countries had been in the samesituation, and his remarks were meant to speak for all of them.   Karel Wagner, chairman of the Czech Atomic Energy Commission, later toldNucleonics Week that the eastern Europeans ''did a lot of things that werenot up to western standards'' in the years they spent as satellites of theUSSR.   ''The role of safety regulation was fully underestimated in our countryand others,'' Kriz said.   Czechoslovakia passed a law on state supervision of nuclear power in1984. ''But the two units (Bohunice-1 and -2, the early-design VVER-440s)were commissioned in 1978 and 1980. The law came too late,'' Kriz said.   ''From the beginning we were aware of the situation. Both operators andthe regulatory body made many efforts to enhance safety and improve thesituation'' at Bohunice, Kriz recounted. The ''most important obstacle,''he said, was that, since all significant changes had to be approved by thevendor, ''people said the vendor country was responsible for safety.''   A series of backfits was proposed to the Czech government in 1986. ''Butwe were aware the problem was not solved,'' Kriz said.   During the past year, Kriz said, the Czech Nuclear Inspectorateconducted ''a very extensive'' 10th-year safety assessment of the Bohuniceunits, advised by a government commission, and ruled that they should beupgraded over two years. The program, Kriz said, costs about one-quarterthe units' original price and is the prerequisite for their operation to1995. At that time, the operator either will propose further measures tobring the units up to acceptable safety levels or will have to shut them.   Wagner said that 60 of the proposed improvements are already made, and,of the 81 still to be realized, 17 should be finished by the end of thisyear and the others in 1992. Thereafter, the units will undergo yearlyregulatory review to 1995, with yearly extensions of their operatinglicenses if they pass muster.   After 1995, Wagner said, the two units must shut down unless their owneragrees to backfit a ''proven substitute for containment'' that includes aspecial primary circuit pressure suppression system and a large inventoryof primary coolant. Wagner reckons that the ''only way'' to do this is toadd ''some type of barbotage'' system similar to the bubbler-towercondenser systems that were added to the design for second-generationVVER-440s such as Bohunice-3 and -4.   The initial Bohunice units represent ''a young station,'' Wagner said,''with only 10 and 12 years of operation, or less than half their expecteddesign life. They could operate another 10 years'' if they areappropriately backfit, he observed.   Kriz told the Vienna meeting that ''although we are aware that thesafety level (of Bohunice) is lower than that at other PWRs, we, theregulatory body, took our responsibility and defined measures that must befulfilled by the operator'' at Bohunice.   ''I assure you,'' he told the IAEA delegates, ''that we are fully awarethat responsibility (for the Bohunice units' safety) is in our hands. Wemust achieve a level of safety acceptable for all in the world.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, EDF AND SIEMENS TO BID TOGETHER ON KOZLODUY DESIGN IMPROVEMENTSBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Electricite de France (EDF) and Siemens have formed a joint venture tobid on design studies of improving the Kozloduy nuclear power plant inBulgaria in the framework of the European Commission/World Association ofNuclear Operators (EC/WANO) program of aid to the Bulgarian nuclearoperators.   The joint venture agreement, which links Siemens and EDF's subsidiaryEDF International, was signed at the end of July. An EDF official said thatthe consortium agreement runs only for the length of the EC short-termprogram for Kozloduy; that is, to the end of this year. Nevertheless, theEC/WANO program could be extended into 1992, and in that case theEDF-Siemens venture could also be lengthened.   Any initiative past the Kozloduy work, however, would imply creation ofa new consortium or conclusion of an annex to the present consortiumcontract, the EDF official said.   The two companies will reply to a bid solicitation from the BulgarianEnergy Committee, which is managing the Kozloduy improvement program fromSofia's side. The first of four first-generation Soviet-design PWRs at thesite in northwestern Bulgaria was shut September 4 for near-term upgradesand a second unit is scheduled to be shut shortly.   The EDF official said that the initiative for the consortium came fromSiemens because of EDF's ''excellent contacts'' with the Bulgarian EnergyCommittee. The French utility had agreed with the Bulgarians in early June,before international attention was focused on Kozloduy after an IAEA auditfound serious safety deficiencies at the plant, on ''active twinning''between Kozloduy and EDF's Bugey nuclear power plant, and EDF staff were atKozloduy by the end of August.   On the other hand, said the EDF official, the French ''lackedknowledge'' of the VVER-440 reactor design, which could be supplied bySiemens because of its work on VVER-440s at Greifswald in the former GermanDemocratic Republic.   The EDF-Siemens accord has raised some eyebrows in France, where reactorvendor Framatome and EDF, as two monopolies, are condemned to get alongwith each other. But Framatome could not counter EDF's argument of Siemens'greater experience with the VVER reactor type. Moreover, it is no secretthat the Germans have far closer industrial contacts in central and easternEurope. If Siemens sees EDF as key to closer contact with the Bulgarianenergy production establishment--and perhaps counterparts in other easternEuropean countries--the German company may be one card for EDF to play inits drive to take positions in foreign markets. If the ''trial balloon'' ofthe Kozloduy partnership works well, the EDF official said, the experimentcould well be extended into other markets behind the former Iron Curtain.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, DIABLO CANYON-2 BREAKS RECORD FOR LWR CONTINUOUS OPERATION   On August 30, Pacific Gas & Electric Co.'s Diablo Canyon-2 broke by oneday the LWR continuous operation record set in July by GPU Nuclear's ThreeMile Island-1. However, Wolf Creek may break the new record this week.   Diablo Canyon-2 shut down after 481 days of operation, 10 days short ofits planned September 9 refueling outage, because of a leak in the reactorcoolant system. TMI-1 had broken the 477-day record, set by Omaha PublicPower District's Fort Calhoun in 1988, by three days but then scrammedautomatically because of a test procedure failure (NW, 1 Aug., 16).   Wolf Creek, owned by Kansas Gas & Electric Co., Kansas City Power &Light Co., and Kansas Electric Power Cooperative, reached 478 days ofcontinuous operation on September 10 and was still running. It is notscheduled to shut for refueling until September 19, giving it theopportunity to run 487 days. All are PWRs: Diablo Canyon-2 and Wolf Creekfrom Westinghouse; TMI-1 from Babcock & Wilcox; Fort Calhoun, fromCombustion Engineering.   Another kind of record is being claimed by Commonwealth Edison for itsByron station: the longest continuous U.S. run for both units of a two-unitstation. The two Westinghouse units were both on line for just over 258days, from December 21, 1990 to September 6.   A review of recent operations of two-unit stations as reported toNucleonics Week found the longest run internationally was chalked up in1990, when both Asea-Atom BWRs at Sweden's Barsebaeck station ran togetherfor 335 days. However, since statistics have not always been kept ontwo-unit station runs, there may be longer runs not reported.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NOTES PERTAINING TO THE GENERATING TABLE FOR JULY 1991   Cattenom-4 is being added to the table this month. The 1,362-MW PWR,operated by Electricite de France, achieved criticality May 4 and generatedits first electricity May 27. It is in precommercial testing and isscheduled for commissioning before the end of the year.   This month, statistics from all countries but Britain are reported onthe basis of 744 hours. In Britain, units owned by Nuclear Electric andScottish Nuclear are both reported for 672 hours. For the year-to-date,statistics are based on 5,087 hours of operation through July 31 in Europeand the U.S., except Britain's Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, whosefigures are based on 5,039 hours. Figures from all other countries arebased on 5,088 hours.   Belgium's Doel-3 was down for 287.18 hours for refueling.   In Brazil, Angra-1 was down for 26.5 hours for repair of the heatingline of the steam generator 1A feed pump on the secondary side.   Britain's Hunterston B-1 continued in shutdown the entire month for itsstatutory biennial outage. Torness-1 was down 136 hours for its statutorybiennial outage and 27 hours for a turbine/reactor trip. Torness-2 was downfor 336 hours for refueling.   In Canada, Pickering-3 restarted after being shut since 1989 for fuelchannel replacement. Pickering-5 was down for 675 hours for repair of agenerator hydrogen leak. Bruce-1 was forced down for 520.7 hours due to aboiler (steam generator) tube leak. Darlington-2 continued in its forcedoutage all month to repair cracked end plates.   In France, Electricite de France's nuclear plants generated 22.4-billionkilowatt-hours (KWH), or about 71% of total French electricity produced inJuly. EDF's 900-MW PWR series averaged 71.6% energy availability(capability factor) during the month and 74.2% over the 12 months endedJuly 31. During the month, the 900-MW-class units averaged unavailabilityof 18.5% for scheduled refueling and maintenance and 9.9% for unscheduleddowntime, of which 4.4% was forced outages caused by equipment problems.   The utility's 1,300-MW PWR series had average energy availability of57.6% in July and 72.2% over the 12 preceding months. Their unavailabilityduring the month was due 14.6% to scheduled outages and 27.8% tounscheduled outages, with 11% of the latter classified as forced outage.   EDF classified 13 incidents on the French nuclear event scale during themonth, two of them at Level 2 and the others at Level 1:   --Belleville-2, which had a Level 2 event in May, had another, unrelatedone July 10, when 10 cubic meters of non-borated water were injected bymistake into the reactor coolant system (RCS) because of an error inestimating the level of water in a feed tank that had been used for a test.Although the average boron concentration of the RCS remained abovespecified limits at all times, the incident was classified at Level 2because of its potential safety consequences.   --The problem of peeling paint on the inside walls of containment sumps,discovered the previous month, was reclassified from Level 1 to Level 2because a check showed it had affected a significant number of units in the1,300-MW PWR series. However, by mid-August EDF had remedied the peelingproblem.   --At St. Alban-2 on July 1, a fuel handling incident put a fuel assemblyoff balance, causing its head to strike the head of another assembly. Thetwo assemblies were removed to the fuel building for inspection.   --At Tricastin-2 on July 1, deterioration of a main coolant pump sealcaused the pump to trip and the reactor to scram. About 300 cubic meters ofprimary coolant leaked onto the reactor building floor.   --At Tricastin-3 on July 4, reactor protection signals from one of thefour ionization chambers were discovered to be unavailable because ofincorrect wiring in the associated data processing system. The anomaly wasnot revealed during the usual periodic testing of the measuring device butduring maintenance on the electric cabinet where the signals are produced.   --The volume of primary coolant at Gravelines-5 on July 5 was found tobe about 10 cubic meters lower than required. This happened because thereactor vessel vent valve, which allows expulsion of air during RCSfilling, had remained closed, leading to formation of an air cushion underthe vessel head and an erroneous measurement of primary coolant level.   --The boron concentration in a tank of the auxiliary boron circuit atChinon-B1 fell below the required level July 7, and operators took ninehours longer to rectify it than is required by technical specifications.The incident was traced to a failure of level alarms to switch on whileanother tank was being filled.   --At Tricastin-3 on July 12, a fuel handling incident caused slightdeformation of a fuel assembly. The fuel element was being lowered slowlytowards the upending device of the fuel storage pool when by mistake theoperation was switched to high speed. Although the operator stopped themaneuver immediately, the leg of the fuel element ended up pressing againstthe upending device and the element was slanted about 10 degrees offvertical.   --Paluel-1 was off line with fuel discharged on July 17 when, duringplanned maintenance on a switch, a second switch was opened by mistake,interrupting the off-site power source. The second diesel generatorswitched in immediately.   --An electric distribution panel on one power supply train was renderedunavailable at Gravelines-5 July 19 because of a mixup in preparingmaintenance on the other train. This caused startup of an emergency diesel.At the same time, spent fuel pool cooling was interrupted for about twohours, leading to a rise in pool temperature of about 4 degrees C, althoughit remained within prescribed limits. The maintenance file was revised toavoid recurrence of such an incident.   --An alarm indicating too-low boron concentration (below 2,000 ppm) inthe Dampierre-2 RCS on July 24 was not taken into account until six hoursafter it appeared. However, the concentration remained above the level of1,950 ppm covered by safety studies.   --One of the two pumps of the residual heat removal system atFlamanville-1 had to be stopped for 90 minutes on July 25 due to thepassage of an air pocket through the pump. The pocket had been entrainedfrom a pipe into the pump when a valve was opened.   --Operators took 50 minutes too long to stop Nogent-2 on July 29following a leak of primary coolant that exceeded the regulatory operatinglimit of 230 liters per hour. The plant had been kept operating for threehours after the leak was detected at the request of the power dispatcher.Nogent operators expected to need only one hour to stop the reactor(technical specifications require a reactor to be stopped four hours afterdetection of a primary coolant leak), but it actually took one hour and 50minutes.   Pre-commercial testing resumed at Cattenom-4 on July 22; the unit hadbeen down since June 12 for work on a reactor scram control train andrepair of a defective nozzle on the low-pressure safety injection system.Bugey-2 restarted July 26; it had been down since April 6 for refueling andmaintenance, but it was taken down again July 27 and 28 for work on a6.6-kilovolt electric cable. Bugey-3 restarted July 1 following completionof work on high-pressure turbine steam pipe supports. The unit was stoppedagain July 19 at the end of its regular duty cycle in anticipation of theprogrammed refueling outage.   Cattenom-3 restarted July 10; it had been down since June 27 for repairsto a low-pressure safety injection system nozzle. The unit was down againJuly 28-30 for work on a main coolant pump.   Chinon-B3 was down July 27-28 for work in the reactor building. Cruas-1came back on line July 4 following completion of its fifth-year inspectionand refueling outage, which began March 30. It was down again July 4-15 forwork on generator exciter control cabinets. Cruas-2 was down July 25-26 forwork on the generator hydrogen system. Nogent-1 was taken down July 27 forwork on thecooling modules of the atmospheric cooling tower. Nogent-2 wastaken down July 29 for work on a valve part of an RCS auxiliary system.Paluel-3 remained down (since June 29) for work on the sumps of the reactorbuilding and nozzles on the safety injection and containment spray systems.Penly-1 was down July 20-21 for work on the nuclear island fire protectionsystem. St. Alban-1 was down July 5-15 for repairs to a defective nozzle onthe containment spray system. Tricastin-2 was down July 1-25 for work onmain coolant pump seals.   The Creys-Malville breeder reactor remained down for various workassociated with purification of primary sodium and review of operating andmanagement measures by French safety authorities. The prototype breederPhenix, owned by the Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, also remained offline following the reactivity drop incident of fall 1990.   Gravelines-2 remained down (since May 11) for its 10th-year inspectionand refueling outage. Gravelines-5 remained down (since June 29) for itsfifth-year inspection and refueling, as did Chinon-B2 (since May 18). St.Laurent-B1, down since January 19 for refueling and maintenance, restartedJuly 1. The St. Laurent-A2 gas-cooled reactor was taken down July 31 forits annual inspection.   Bugey-1, a gas-cooled reactor, remained off line since June 24 becauseof low electricity demand. Dampierre-2 was taken down July 15 aftercompletion of its duty cycle in anticipation of scheduled refueling.Flamanville-1 was taken down July 4 at the end of its duty cycle and beganscheduled refueling/maintenance on July 29.   Units off line all or part of the month for regular refueling andmaintenance included Belleville-2, Blayais-3, Cattenom-1, Dampierre-1,Dampierre-3, Fessenheim-2, Paluel-1, Paluel-2, Tricastin-3, and St.Alban-2.   Hungary's Paks-1 returned July 16 from routine refueling andmaintenance, and Paks-3 was shut for its annual refueling/maintenance thesame day.   In Japan, down for refueling and maintenance all or part of the monthwere: Fukushima I-1 and II-4, Hamaoka-3, Kashiwazaki-Kariwa-5, Mihama-2,Ohi-2, Shimane-2, Takahama-2 and -4, Tokai-2, Tomari-1, and Tsuruga-1.Sendai-1 was down for 48 hours due to a neutron flux disorder.   South Africa's Koeberg-2 was down the entire month for refueling.   South Korea's Wolsung-1 was off-line for 220 hours for routinemaintenance.   Spain's Asco-1 was down for 407 hours for refueling. Trillo was down for305 scheduled hours for accommodating chemical parameters and to repair aleakage in a boron addition line.   In Sweden, Forsmark-2 was down for 464 hours for refueling. Ringhals-3was down 310 hours for refueling and maintenance.   Switzerland's Beznau-2 was in a scheduled refueling outage for 472hours. Goesgen-Daeniken, Leibstadt, and Muehleberg were down for 144.86,163, and 245 hours, respectively, for scheduled refueling outages as well.   In Taiwan, Kuosheng-1 was down for 73.75 forced hours due to an averagepower range monitor A/B upscale trip. Maanshan-1 was down for 46.05 forcedhours due to a typhoon and bad water chemistry. Maanshan-2 was down 113.92scheduled hours for the same typhoon.   Yugoslavia's Krsko went into hot shutdown and reduced power-leveloperation as a result of armed hostilities in its vicinity and threateningfighter-jet overflights (NW, 25 July, 6).   Baltimore Gas & Electric's Calvert Cliffs-1 was out for 417.9 scheduledhours for maintenance and testing. The outage was extended for 241.9 forcedhours to correct vibration on a reactor coolant pump.   Carolina Power & Light's Brunswick-1 was down for 182 forced hours dueto reactor scram because of a faulty instrument manifold valve.   Commonwealth Edison's Quad Cities-2 was forced down 75.44 hours torepair leaking condenser tube.   Consumers Power's Big Rock Point was down 49 forced hours to repairturbine generator main condenser tube leaks. Palisades was down for 148.9forced hours due to equipment failure.   System Energy Resources Inc.'s Grand Gulf-1 was forced down for 94.50hours when the reactor scrammed due to balance-of-plant load shedding.   GPU Nuclear's Three Mile Island-1 was forced down 51.9 hours when thereactor tripped automatically on low pressure after dropping Group 7 rods.   Philadelphia Electric's Peach Bottom-3 was forced down for 156.3 hoursdue to a lightning strike that affected the generator output breaker.   Washington Public Power Supply System's WNP-2 continued in its forcedoutage all month for an administrative shutdown to revise emergencyoperating procedures and to retrain operators.   Out for part or all of the month in the U.S. for maintenance and/orrefueling were: Boston Edison's Pilgrim, Consolidated Edison's IndianPoint-2, Duquesne Light's Beaver Valley-1, Louisiana Power & Light'sWaterford-3, Niagara Mohawk Power's Nine Mile Point-1, and Portland GeneralElectric's Trojan.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, INDEX, NEDS ARE OPERATING.A box on page 9 of the Special Report, ''Outlook on Security,'' includedwith the June 27 issue of Nucleonics Week, incorrectly said neither theIntegrated Nuclear Data Exchange (INDEX) or the Nuclear Employee DataSystem (NEDS) had ''received enough industry support to survive alone.''Both are now active. INDEX is a consortium of 14 nuclear utilities thatshare a computer data base listing some 20,000 reactor outage workers whomeet NRC standards for plant access as temporary workers. INDEX is headedby Hollis Hutchison, nuclear personnel manager of Texas Utilities Co., andhas offices at 150 South Spring Lake Drive, Itasca IL 60143, (708)825-3000. NEDS has been taken over and is being revived by GPU NuclearCorp. as a for-sale service, not a membership consortium. According to ChipFenton, GPU director of human resources and head of NEDS, NEDS has''letters of intent'' to join from seven other utilities, chiefly in thenortheast. Fenton is reachable at GPU Nuclear Corp., One Upper Pond Road,Parsippany NJ 07054, (201) 316-7044.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, Four BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly inFour BWR Mark IIIs operate in the U.S. Nucleonics Week noted incorrectly inthe August 29 edition, page 6, that three Mark III model BWRs had beencompleted in the U.S. The listing omitted the fourth station, Gulf StatesUtilities' River Bend.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEONICS WEEK via NewsNetSeptember 12, 1991   Vol 69, NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991Table: NUCLEAR ELECTRICITY GENERATION FOR JULY 1991 (This table is notavailable electronically. Please see the September 12, 1991 issue.)Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-4IA086-000616-B013-186http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001052 text/html 35097HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:08:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:58 GMTContent-length: 34910Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey18.html Sample Issue Copyright OCTANE WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES REGULATORY & LEGISLATIVE REPORT SEVERAL FUELS ISSUES REMAIN TIED-UP IN BUDGET DEBATE (1076 words) TOSCO BRACES ITSELF FOR COLD RECEPTION AT MARCUS HOOK (491 words) PIPELINES WARY ABOUT MMT BLENDS (308 words) ENERGY BIOSYSTEMS PATENTS DESULFURIZATION BREAKTHROUGHS (237 words) CHEVRON, VENEZUELA'S MARAVEN PARTNERSHIP TO PUSH ASPHALT (129 words) PARAMOUNT PETROLEUM CONTINUES DOWNSTREAM RESTRUCTURING (140 words) ASSESSING THE FUTURE OF CNG IN AN RFG WORLD (1035 words) INTERNATIONAL REVIEW SANCTIONS AGAINST NIGERIA COULD SEND OIL PRICES SOARING (387 words) ABB GROUP SCORES SUCCESSES IN FORMER SOVIET UNION (130 words) MARKET REPORT GASOLINE, HEATING OIL PRICES IMPROVE DESPITE INVENTORY BUILDS (443 words) CDTECH PIONEERS SAFER, SMARTER BENZENE UNIT FOR TEXACO (439 words) CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SEVERAL FUELS ISSUES REMAIN TIED-UP IN BUDGET DEBATE      A number of issues important to the refining and marketingindustry remain unresolved as Congress and the White House negotiatedover the budget and the federal government remained closed last week. The U.S. EPA remains unfunded, operating with a minimal staff, andofficials at the Agency warned that they're unable to enforceenvironmental statutes.      The Clinton Administration and Congressional Republicans appearto be far apart on a number of issues, including the taxable status ofkerosene for home heating and the depreciation schedule forconvenience stores operating in conjunction with gasoline stations.      Due to lack of appropriations for EPA, funds have also run outfor the Federal Leaking Underground Storage Trust Fund (LUST) and theSuperfund Trust Fund.  Below is a review of programs and tax issuesaffected by the Washington, D.C., stalemate, including federal motorfuels taxes as of Jan. 1 that may still be changed under final federalbudget programs.Clinton Seeks Tax On Kerosene For Home Use      One provision of a White House budget proposal would impose atax on kerosene mixed with heating oil.  Under the current law,kerosene is subject to the 24.4 c/gal diesel fuel tax when it is mixedwith dyed, on-road diesel fuel.  It is not subject to the tax when itis distributed to be used in home heating oil, as it is often in theNortheast to ensure that the fuel does not gel.      The White House is pursuing the change because "some wholesaledistributors of diesel fuel have not been paying the tax on kerosenethat they blend with diesel fuel for highway use," according to aWhite House memo.  "As a result, the government is losing tax revenuesand complying taxpayers are at a competitive disadvantage."      The Society of Independent Gasoline Marketers of America (SIGMA)concurs with the Administration on the kerosene tax.  "People areusing the kerosene for fuel, and that is a form of tax evasion -- andwe are always against tax evasion," said SIGMA counsel Tim Columbus.      Another gasoline marketer association, Petroleum MarketersAssociation of America (PMAA),  is "totally opposed to this," saidPMAA spokesman David Morehead.  "This is not something we want toallow to slip through."  PMAA is encouraging its members to contacttheir Congressmen on the issue.       House and Senate members from Northeast states have sent lettersto Senate Majority leader Bob Dole (R-KS), asking him to opposeClinton's proposal.  "This would be an extremely regressive tax thatwould have its greatest impact on low-income consumers of home heatingoil, many of whom live in trailer parks and cannot afford any increasein fuel costs," the House letter read.      "[The Clinton Administration] is charging that this is a tax-break for businesses. We think this is a good business deduction,"Morehead said.  "[Clinton is] taking the issue almost personally."       Taxation of aviation jet fuel also hangs in the balance.  OnOct. 1, 1995, the Treasury began to collect the 4.3 c/gal tax on jetfuel that had been exempted from the 1993 increase in the federalfuels excise tax.  Extension of that exemption was included in theCongressional budget bill that was vetoed last month, but it remainson the table as part of the budget negotiations.Congress Wants New Depreciation For C-Stores; Clinton Opposes      A provision in the budget bill passed by Congress and vetoed bythe president last month would give convenience store (c-store) ownersthat do more than 50% of their business in motor fuels and relatedservices the same 15-year depreciation schedule that gasoline stationshave.  Currently, those c-stores must use a 39.5-year depreciationschedule.      SIGMA, PMAA and the National Association of Convenience Stores(NACS) support quicker depreciation.  Acknowledging that the ClintonAdministration has opposed the new schedule, Lindsay Hutter, NACSspokeswoman, argues, "It has not been an issue of great contention inthe budget debate.      "We have had the commitment of the Republican leadership on thisissue," Hutter said.  "We continue to be very hopeful -- this is ournumber one issue."  Tax For LUST Fund Expires, Extension of Tax Unlikely      The 0.1 c/gal gasoline tax used to finance the LUST fund expiredon Dec. 31, and it appears no major effort is underway to restore it. Approximately $800 million is now in the trust fund, but it is notbeing properly disbursed for cleanups, according to PMAA's Morehead. "Money in the LUST fund is just sitting there --  it hasn't been spentvery vigorously," he said.      As for the tax, "we say 'let it expire' because the money is notbeing used for what it should be used for," said Morehead.  PMAA mightfavor restoration of the tax if the money was distributed to thestates, he said.        "SIGMA and NACS may try to reposition the LUST, but we wouldwant the federal government to give the money to the states, providedthey would use it for cleanup costs," concurred Columbus.Superfund Tax Expires;  Lack Of Appropriations Slows Cleanups      The tax collected for the Superfund Trust fund also expired asof Dec. 31.  The $9.7 c/bbl, or $0.0023 c/gal, tax is not currentlybeing collected, but it will almost certainly be re-imposedretroactively, according to Capitol Hill sources.      In the meantime, the Superfund program is undergoing a partialshutdown due to the lack of an EPA appropriations bill.  The trustfund currently has a surplus of $4 billion, but it is receiving no newrevenue, according to Paul Hirsch of the Chemical ManufacturersAssociation (CMA).      "Work is continuing at sites where construction has started,"Hirsch said, noting that there are two types of sites: those where thegovernment is performing the cleanup and those where the liableparties are cleaning the site.  Liable parties will continue theirclean-up efforts.      While some EPA Superfund employees are furloughed, the majorityof clean-up is performed by outside contractors, many of which arestill being paid through the trust fund, Hirsch said.  "The governmentisn't going to ask those contractors to pick up their shovels andleave," he said.  At sites that present an immediate threat to humanhealth, removal work will definitely continue.      EPA officials offer a less optimistic view, saying that the lackof funding will likey shut down most of the Superfund program.  Theagency is in the process of furloughing approximately 2,400 agencyworkers and 10,000 contractors in the program.  EPA officials didconfirm that cleanup will continue at approximately 100 emergencysites. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996TOSCO BRACES ITSELF FOR COLD RECEPTION AT MARCUS HOOK      BP is shutting down shop at Marcus Hook, PA, after anoverwhelming 83% rejection last Thursday of new owner Tosco's proposedlabor contract by union workers; and now Tosco says the prospect ofrestarting the cold 185,000 b/d plant may prove too chilly tocontemplate.       Since buying the Marcus Hook plant and a retail system from BPlast November for $75 million, plus the $160 million value of theinventories, Tosco expects to assume a cold refinery Feb. 1, when ittakes possession of the plant.      "Since the union voted to reject the Tosco proposal, we arecontinuing plans to suspend operations at Marcus Hook beginning inmid-January and transferring the suspended operations over to Tosco onFebruary 1," said BP spokesperson Marian Lowes, declining to commenton the unit's current utilization.       "We failed to reach an agreement with the union," said JeffersonAllen, Tosco spokesman.  "Although that does mean we can now hire newemployees, it doesn't mean that we will open the plant ever.  Weexpected to acquire an operating refinery, but we must now reevaluatethe costs and benefits of running the plant."      For now, Tosco expects to use its 215,000- b/d Bayway, NJ,refinery to supply the retail system in the Northeast it will alsoacquire from BP.  "We've reached no conclusions about what we're goingto do," Allen added.       The plant's union, which represents 320 of its 520 employees,sharply criticized the Tosco proposal presented on Dec. 31, and deniedthat the company made any attempt to bargain.  "It has taken laborrelations back 30-40 years," charged Bob Burdick, International OCAWrepresentative.  "The document was not negotiated, it was issued bythe company.  Tosco refused to negotiate."       Nevertheless, the plant's union agreed to hold a secret ballotvote on the plan last Thursday, at Tosco's request.  Chief among theunion's complaints with the proposal is the inclusion of mandatedselective hiring, which would "totally negate seniority -- a veryimportant subject for unions," explained Burdick. Also, the plan wouldremove 30 positions from the union's collective bargaining group, layoff 65 hourly-wage union members,  and eliminate 654 salariedmanagement-type positions.  It would allow some supervisors and othersalaried employees to bid on union jobs.          After the union membership rejected the plan, with only 16.8%voting in favor of it, the shop steward said the negotiations are nowin Tosco's hands.  "The membership is not willing to go to work underthese conditions," said Cathy Brady, Marcus Hook OCAW shop steward.      Employees at two of Tosco's other three refineries are alsorepresented by OCAW, and Burdick contends Tosco's Marcus Hook proposalcompares unfavorably with the union-Tosco contracts at Avon, WA, andFerndale, CA.  "This contract is much different and much morestringent," he said.  "The management-rights clause in the Marcus Hookproposal gives Tosco almost unlimited power, which is not normal forsuch a clause.  Normally, the company is subject to the conditions ofthe union contract."Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PIPELINES WARY ABOUT MMT BLENDS      Though Ethyl Corp. has received regulatory approval to marketMMT in the U.S., pipeline operators have yet to embrace theintroduction of yet another fuel additive into an already-stressedtransportation system.  No pipeline has yet changed its gasolinespecification to accomodate MMT blends, though none have indicatedopposition to the additive, either.      Colonial Pipeline, the key mover of gasoline from the Gulf Coastto the East, has requested input from its shippers as to whether itshould develop a set of specifications for MMT-blended gasoline. "Some shippers have indicated to us that they are not interested inMMT," said William Copenhaver of Colonial.  "We're just trying to becautious."       Colonial is not suggesting that it has found technical problemsin shipping MMT-blended gasoline, said Copenhaver, only that it'strying to understand the needs of its market.  The pipeline systemwould allow a segregated shipment of MMT-blended gasoline now, butCopenhaver said he is unaware of any customer requests.      MMT, which can be blended only into conventional gasoline, willbe added at the refinery gate, according to Ethyl.  This creates a"Catch 22" situation: Getting the support of common-carrier pipelinesis essential to broad market acceptance of MMT, but those pipelinesmay withhold their support until the market demands the product.  Inresponse, Ethyl has contacted pipelines and supports the polling ofcustomers about their MMT plans and concerns, said Ethyl's TechnicalManger, Fuels, Don Hollrah.      Allowing MMT blends into the fungible system would requireColonial to add another entire set of gasoline grades, which it isloath to do on top of the series of gasoline and diesel grades createdin response to new environmental regulations since 1993.      Responses are due from shippers by Jan. 12, and Colonial willannounce its intentions "soon after," said Copenhaver.  This decisionwill set the tone for other pipelines, add industry sources.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ENERGY BIOSYSTEMS PATENTS DESULFURIZATION BREAKTHROUGHS       A breakthrough in Energy BioSystems Corp.'s development ofbiocatalytic desulfurization is bringing a six-to-eight-fold increasein specific critical intermediate reactions, the company reported,predicting it will be ready for commercial demonstration in early1996.  The Houston-based company also received two new process designpatents for its proprietary biocatalytic desulfurization systems (BDS)that use bacteria to remove sulfur from petroleum.       While Energy BioSystems scientists were experienced with theinterplay of three factors in the intermediate reactions,  the recentenhancements in the process reflect the company's greater mastery overa fourth factor discovered in September.   Company scientists are nowworking to determine what effect the more prolific reactions will haveon the overall sulfur yield.       More development is required on a final reaction to produce theprototype biocatalyst necessary for pilot plant demonstrations plannedfor middle distillate streams at one of Total Petroleum's refineries,the company said.  BDS will be later be applied to crude, naphtha andother gasoline components.       As for Energy BioSystems' newest patents, the first (U.S. No.5,472,875) claims a new reactor design by which air or oxygen-enrichedgas is introduced into the oil prior to treatment with thebiocatalyst.  The second patent (U.S. No. 5,468,626) claims a methodby which a biosorption agent preferentially absorbs sulfur-containingcompounds from petroleum.  Such a process design could reduce the sizeof the bioreactor by concentrating on those compounds requiringdesulfurization, thus reducing capital equipment costs, the companyreported. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CHEVRON, VENEZUELA'S MARAVEN PARTNERSHIP TO PUSH ASPHALT       Maraven S.A. and Chevron Corp. have formed a 20-year alliancethat will bring Chevron substantial crude supplies to run its threeasphalt-oriented refineries in the U.S. and expand its marketing ofasphalt products in the western U.S.  The U.S. partnership is namedChevron Ven Asphalt Alliance.      Under the agreement, Chevron will operate Maraven's property inVenezuela's Boscan oil field and Maraven will in turn supply crude oilto Chevron's asphalt refineries in Perth Amboy, NJ, Portland, OR, andRichmond Beach, WA.  "Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees,is an excellent asphalt feedstock," said David O'Reilly, president ofChevron USA Products Co.       Chevron's investment in the heavy oil fields will improveproduction from 80,000 b/d today to 115,000 b/d, will reach about $2billion, the company estimates.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PARAMOUNT PETROLEUM CONTINUES DOWNSTREAM RESTRUCTURING      Paramount Petroleum launched the next phase of its operationsrestructuring to shift its emphasis away from light-end products toasphalt, jet fuel, diesel fuel and intermediate product refining.  Thecompany's latest efforts have idled certain downstream units, butParamount says it will retain the option of resuming hydro processing. "For now it is important that Paramount focus on its core business,and continue to provide high-quality products and customer service,"said Jerrel Barto, Paramount chairman.      Paramount's restructuring began last September when it acquiredEOTT Energy Corp.'s West Coast asphalt marketing operation, seniormanagement team and technical staff.  At the same time, Paramountterminated its processing agreement with EOTT, paid off its long-termdebt, entered into a long-term crude oil supply arrangement with EOTT,obtained long-term financing from Bank of Boston and received asubstantial capital investment from EOTT, Paramount reported. Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ASSESSING THE FUTURE OF CNG IN AN RFG WORLD      Compressed natural gas (CNG) has been studied and testedextensively as an alternative transportation fuel.  It has beeen usedin passenger car fleets, public transit vehicles and in some heavy-duty equipment with spark-ignition systems replacing diesel fuel.  Buteven so, the public understands the fuel characteristics of RFG anddiesel fuel far better than those of CNG.      Nevertheless, CNG must be considered as one of the backuptransportation fuels of the next century.  It has the support of theU.S. Department of Energy and is probably more compatible with the oiland automobile industries than battery power.  However, as long ascrude oil moves freely in commerce throughout the world, CNG vehicledevelopment will be slow.  Future RFG, along with advances inemissions control, can compete environmentally with CNG.Natural Gas As A Stable Energy Source: Economic Factors      As a fossil fuel, natural gas follows coal as the most plentifulenergy resource of the U.S.  Crude oil is in a distant third place,and the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on imports.  At thesame time, methane, the major constituent of CNG, can be generatedfrom coal, tar sands, crude oil and, to some extent, renewablesources.  It offers long-term stability as an energy source.      Today, the price of natural gas is set by competition withresidual fuel oil or coal as a burner fuel, and it varies considerablywith geography and season.  As a general rule, CNG is more economicthan RFG despite capital and operating costs for compression. Conversions to accomodate CNG are said to average about $4,000 perpassenger or van-type vehicle.      Fuel economy comparisons between CNG and RFG are confusing atbest.  On a theoretical BTU/gallon basis, CNG has much less to offerthan RFG.  On a BTU/lb of vapor basis, the heat content is morecomparable, but varies with individual CNG and RFG composition.  Onestudy with Caprice and Crown Victoria taxicabs conducted by Clean AirCab Co. indicated CNG "average fuel economy is equal to or better thangasoline."  The study also also indicated a 20-month payback onconversions.  Composition and Emissions Performance      In general, treated natural gas ranges from 80% to 98% methane,with varying amounts of ethane, propane, inert gases (carbon dioxideand nitrogen) and traces of heavier hydrocarbons.  EPA certificationfuel is specified at the bottom of Table I and is more restrictivethan some pipeline gas delivered for heating.  The heavierhydrocarbons are necessarily limited for CNG due to the danger ofliquid formation.      CNG's high methane content insures clean burning and a low levelof non-methane emissions.  Heavier hydrocarbons emitted, primarilyethane and propane, are low in photochemical activity.      Toxic emissions, such as benzene and 1,3 butadiene, are almostnon-existent, especially when catalytic converter controlled. However, the reactivity of emissions from compressed fuel can increaseif the C2 and C3 fractions contain olefins from refinery crackingoperations.  Olefin limits could be set on future CNG certificationfuel as an added environmental control.  (The California Air ResourcesBoard current limits the amount of propylene in LPG at 10 vol%, to bereduced to 5 vol% on Jan. 1, 1997.)Octane Quality      The octane quality of most CNG compositions exceeds 120 (R+M)/2. However, the inherent value of the excess octane is currently lostbecause vehicles converted to CNG are not designed with highercompression engines that could offer additional fuel economy orgreater performance.      An advanced natural gas vehicle developed by an industryconsortium, headed by Johns Hopkins University Applied PhysicsLaboratory, does incorporate a modified small displacement, high-compression engine.  The compact-sized, four-door sedan is said tohave a 315-mile driving range between refueling and fuel economy of 32miles per (equivalent) gallon.Fuel Tanks and Fueling      Two major disadvantages for CNG passenger cars are the largerspace needed for fuel tanks and the availability of compressed gas forfueling.  The Johns Hopkins prototype is said to retain 75% of theoriginal trunk storage space, which means that the rear has beenredesigned for fuel storage and lacks space for a spare tire and jack. Instead, the car is equipped with "run flat tires" which can be drivenup to 250 miles with no damage after puncture.      Fueling time and availability is a major problem that needsresolution before the average motorist can become serious about CNG,and limited fleet operations can be expanded.      Yet, in a world that would place a significant number of CNGvehicles on the road, solutions can be visualized.  For example,natural gas available through conventional systems for industrial andhome heating could be the fuel source.  Compression equipment andtankage could be installed at large service stations or vehicle repairshops.  Also, it is conceivable that compressors and small tanks couldbe installed in the home garage, assuming safety problems could beresolved.      However, in the home-supply case, the gas delivered through theheating system would need to meet CNG fuel specifications.  Naturalgas for home heating contains a minute amount of odorant, such asmercaptan sulfur.  The material is added to facilitate leak detectionand could probably be removed with a filtering device connected to thecompression equipment.Long-Range Outlook      Prospects are slim for a CNG share of vehicle transportationfrom the average motorist.  He or she is not likely to trade fuelingconvenience and trunk space for lower-cost mileage.  Further, theeconomic advantage for CNG over RFG would probably be lost (throughrising demand and added road taxes) if gas-powered vehicles weremandated in critical air pollution areas such as the Los AngelesBasin.  Also, as long as zero-emission vehicles are scheduled andmandated in California, the major emphasis of automakers will be ondevelopment of battery-powered cars.      Future RFG, along with more extensive catalytic conversion, isalso competition for CNG from the standpoint of cost-effectiveemissions reductions.      On the other hand, as long as fuel economics favor CNG andfacilitate a short-term payout of conversion equipment, as well asoffer long-term, low-cost mileage, compressed gas will be attractivefor fleet operation -- especially in critical air pollution zones. Therefore, CNG and CNG vehicles can be viewed as a niche market thatwill experience gradual growth.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SANCTIONS AGAINST NIGERIA COULD SEND OIL PRICES SOARING      Elimination of Nigeria's oil production from world marketsthrough a boycott would push oil prices sharply higher and have aparticularly severe impact on heating oil and diesel fuel because ofthe uniquely high distillate nature of Nigerian crudes, said CherylTrench, executive vice president, Petroleum Industry ResearchFoundation (New York, NY).  OECD countries, led by the U.S., would bemost affected, as they account for 90% of Nigeria's export market, ormore than 1.5 million b/d.      "As everybody is well aware, this is not an issue under hotdebate in the U.S. right now," said Trench.  "But it is underconsideration in the U.S. Congress and internationally."      With the world having perhaps 3.5 million b/d of spare oilproduction capacity today, two-thirds of that in Saudi Arabia, Trenchbelieves that prices would rise during the substantial time lag beforesupplies were redistributed around the world in accordance withdemand.  "Even if  it were, however, the incremental crude would notmatch the quality of Nigerian crudes, with their high yields of lightproducts in general, and particularly high yield of gasoil," shewrote.      The last time when light crudes were at a premium, during theU.S. Operation Desert Storm, refiners that had to use heavy crudeswound up increasing refinery runs to make up deficits -- and the samething would occur in this case.  "Uncertainty over the availability ofincremental supplies will encourage inventory holding, the phenomenonthat unbalanced markets in 1979," she added.      Even a unilateral embargo by only the U.S. would affect themarket noticeably, Trench predicted.  For one thing, U.S. East Coastgasoline and heating oil inventories are lower this year than in yearspast, so any production shortfall would be felt "quickly and stronglyin product prices."  The redirection of near-substitutes for Nigeriancrude (such as North Sea production) to the U.S. would change tradepatterns and contribute to a widening of crude-grade splits.      The impact of a boycott in the U.S. would falldisproportionately on several refiners, PIRF found: Sun, which is 100%dependent on Nigerian crude to run its Philadelphia refinery complex;BP, which relies on the crude for 70% of its feed at Marcus Hook, PA,a facility it is soon turning over to Tosco; and Hess, which useslarge volumes of Nigerian crude at its Virgin Islands complex.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ABB GROUP SCORES SUCCESSES IN FORMER SOVIET UNION      During the last few months, Switzerland's ABB Group moved aheadof other Western engineering companies backing the growth of therefining industry in the former Soviet Union.      In November, ABB Lummus Global, a division of ABB Group, helpedarrange a $96 million loan from the U.S. Export-Import Bank forfurther modernization of a refinery in Perm, Russia.  ABB Lummus willmanage the project, which will expand production of low-aromatics (10vol%) diesel fuel, increase yield of high-value products and reduce SO2emissions by 30%.  The refinery is already Russia's top producer oflubricant oils and has been making an all-unleaded gasoline slatesince March 1993.      Separately, ABB Simcon signed an agreement with Petrocom ofMoscow, to cooperate in supplying the refining industry withautomation systems, dynamic simulators and related services.  Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996GASOLINE, HEATING OIL PRICES IMPROVE DESPITE INVENTORY BUILDS      Fuel traders appeared to shake off American Petroleum Institute(API) data that indicated gasoline and distillate inventoriesincreased substantially in the last week of 1995, instead driving GulfCoast gasoline up nearly 4 c/gal since late December.  For the weekended Dec. 30, 1995, gasoline inventories incresaed 5.1 million bbl.      Distillate stocks increased 1.2 million bbl, but that wasentirely due to a rise in on-road diesel, as the cold weather took alarge bit out of heating oil inventories.  As a result, spot pricesfor high-sulfur diesel fuel ended last week even with on-road dieselat 61 c/gal in New York and 55.6 c/gal in Houston.      Concentrating on a huge drawdown in crude oil inventories of11.4 million bbl, traders said that the trends of higher productdemand are more important than a one-week fluctuation in productstocks at a time of year when inventories are sometimes manipulatedfor tax purposes.        News Friday morning that refinery workers at BP's Marcus Hook,PA, facility rejected the contract offer by Tosco helped gasolineprices in the East as the week ended.  If BP proceeds with itsdecision to close the refinery in the absence of a new contract whenit turns it over to Tosco on Jan. 31, product from the172,000-b/dfacility would come to a halt.  However, sources indicate that theplant has been running "at maybe half capacity" for a considerableperiod of time and that the new owner, Tosco, could increaseproduction at its Bayway, NJ, refinery to make up for any shortfallsfrom the Marcus Hook plant.      Also aiding the market late last week were stoppages in somecrude shipments  because of severe winter storms.  Coastal  announcedthat its Corpus Christi, TX, refinery was scaling back operationsabout 20% due to reduced crude shipments from the Gulf of Mexicobecause of the weather.  Shell reduced operations at Deer Park, TX, byan undisclosed amount for the same reason.      MTBE prices have stalled in the past several weeks, due to lighttrading interest and sufficient supplies, after performing strongly inthe first three weeks of December.  Spot Gulf Coast MTBE held at 92c/gal last week, said sources, who added that they do not see anyevents on the mid-term horizon that will affect prices.  Methanolcontracts rolled over unchanged from December to January at 42 c/gal,with spot prices at discounts of as much as 10 c/gal from thoselevels.      Ethanol prices were also unchanged at spot levels, though someMidwest marketers reported that rack rates increased by 1-2 c/gal in areflection of stronger rack gasoline prices.      Crude price gains were attributed to expectations of continuedstrong product demand.Back to Headline List CopyrightOCTANE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CDTECH PIONEERS SAFER, SMARTER BENZENE UNIT FOR TEXACO      CDTECH is licensing its first application of CDHydrosm for theselective hydrogenation of benzene in reformate feedstocks for TexacoRefining and Marketing Inc.'s Bakersfield, CA, plant to provide a lessexpensive way for the refiner to meet its CARB Phase 2 RFG gasolinerequirements.      The technology provides an economic way for Bakersfield toproduce a high-octane component, since it lacks a catalytic cracker. The plant has 16,000 b/d of low-pressure catalytic reforming capacity.      CDHydro technology, said to be the first of its kind, isdesigned to replace the standard fixed-bed hydrogenation andconventional distillation units in one single proprietary catalyticdistillation unit.  The Texaco contract will mark the first commercialuse of a combined, single-step reaction and fractionation of benzene,allowing cheaper, lower-pressure and safer operating conditions, saidTom Hickey, director of marketing and operations, CDTECH.        While gasoline benzene specifications continue to be morestringent worldwide, CDHydro hydrogenates benzene into cyclohexane,considered to be more environmentally innocuous.  The new technologyoperates isothermally, thus eliminating the concern of temperature-rise common in fixed-bed reactor systems.  Another advantage is thatthe technology utilizes commercially available catalyst.      Also,  standard fixed-bed units require a larger volume ofhydrocarbons in processing because they use more equipment forprocessing them.  CDHydro utilizes just one column already present inthe refinery eliminating the need for additional hydrocarboninventory.  "This reduces the ultimate residence time of the liquidand limits hydrocarbon holdup," Hickey said.      The technology has been commercially available since mid-1994,and may be installed either as a retrofit or a new column.  Althoughit may not be universally useful to all refiners, Hickey said, "weexpect to see a fair number of applications, but that really dependson a case-by-case basis.  However, 100%" of everyone that has to builda new reformate splitter can benefit.       "We will probably see wide utilization in Europe because of thestrict new environmental regulations on benzene," Hickey said.  "Manyrefiners will require new reformate splitters to remove benzene, andin those applications, CDHydro is a natural."       Texaco recently installed a new, 7,200-b/d reformate splittercolumn at Bakersfield to produce California Phase 2 RFG, which willutilize the CDHydro technology.  Currently, the 56,000-b/d refinerydoes not produce any RFG, either Federal or California.  Texacodeclined to comment on the projected savings it expects to glean fromthe CDHydro technology or the amount of RFG it plans to produce.  Theupgrade won't alter the plant's overall crude capacity, however.       Other options for eliminating benzene include pre-fractionationfor precursors, post-fractionation, removing the benzene for sale, andalkylation.  CDTECH developed the technology based on its similarapplications for butadiene hydrogenation for C4 streams.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-5IA086-000616-B013-239http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001121 text/html 107815HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:09:12 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:02 GMTContent-length: 107627Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey04.html Sample Issue Copyright OIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL OVERLOOK (811 words) ENERGY COMPANY ACQUISITIONS (631 words) PRODUCING PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS (2138 words) WORLDWIDE PRODUCING ACQUISITIONS (1720 words) OILFIELD ACQUISITIONS (2099 words) TAKEOVER ATTEMPTS (1243 words) RESERVES ON THE MARKET (463 words) MAJOR STAKES (555 words) BANKRUPTCIES AND RESTRUCTURINGS (1826 words) MERGERS AND JOINT VENTURES (1503 words) NEW COMPANIES, NAME CHANGES, MOVES (492 words) FINANCING AND REDEMPTIONS (2268 words) GAS PRICES (709 words) EDITOR'S COMMENTARY (247 words) CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL OVERLOOK     Independents still splitting and combining, some surprises, somesignificant deals in property acquisitions, majors stillrepositioning, usual yearend rush to buy and sell reserves.Canadian takeover market just keeps heating up, three or four majordeals.      In the oilfield sector, offshore rigs remain hot items as dopipelines. Government steps in against one major deal, another getsrespectable.      Another large independent hits the market; restructurings amongmajors still going strong; Mobil cuts more E&P. Execs are moving tonew jobs. Seismic related exploration JVs continue to proliferate.      Gas goes bonkers, if you are in the right place.In specific:      Tom Brown to acquire KN Production for common stock andconvertible preferred, sets up a gas services JV with KN Energy, willcontinue to try for Presidio. Key and Brock merge; PrimeEnergyto acquire Saratoga for stock; Sharpe acquires Figgie assets.      MCN makes a couple of big acquisitions for $120 millioncombined, principally coalgas. Plains      Resources to acquire Marathon Illinois Basin properties for $46million; KCS makes a production payment to Hawkins and picks upadditional reserves in the wells for a combined $31 million.      Whiting buys out Wainoco's Conroe interests for $19.5 million;Harken makes a $19.6 million buy in Texas Panhandle. Stocker removesChevron burr in California. Phillips sells a slew of Californiaonshore operated, also some in Oklahoma; buyers are Oakland andCalumet. Panaco agrees to buy Bayou Sorrel from Shell for $10.5million. Sonat group pays $29.25 million for Gary-Williams interestsin North Crowley and Rebel interests in Neale for $6.3 million. Callonbuys Amerada interests in Chandeleur 40 for $9 million, sells part toWilliam G. Helis. Energy Development sells mineral and royaltyinterests for $6.2 million. XCL, Arakis, Petrofina, Shell, Koch sell;Cody, American Resources, Forcenergy, McFarland, Fortune, PMC,British-Borneo, Continental, Empiric, Inland, Maynard, Oilex andChesapeake buy.      In Canada, Alberta Energy makes a C$1.1 billion bid for Conwest;Forest to acquire ATCOR Resources for C$186 million; Rigel bids C$380million for Inverness and Pembina makes a C$354 million hostile run atMark Resources. Lots of Canadian properties change hands, mostly insmaller deals this time. Texaco sells 15% of North Sea Captain fieldto Korea Petroleum for $210 million.      Other deals of interest. Shell sells out of E&P in Turkey.Diamond Offshore to acquire Arethusa Offshore for $516 million, addssix semis. FTC nixes sale of Tenneco's 50% stake in Kern River toQuestar in a testing flag floater, Tenneco salutes, torpedoes deal;Williams gets the other 50% for $205 million. Giant picks upfractionation plant from Meridian for $10 million. Williams Pipe Linejoins the Longhorn Partners to purchase the Exxon Baytown-to-Cranepipeline. M-I agrees to acquire Anchor Drilling Fluids for about $110million.      Panhandle picks up the other 50% in the cryogenic plant at PortArthur and two Permian Basin plants from Mitchell. CMS buys Petal fromChevron; El Paso buys Premier; Dresser buys Instech; TransCanada looksat Farmland refinery; Trident keeps buying. Oceaneering buys the M.T.Swift from Mobil for an FPSO at Zafiro. Stena to purchase two semisfrom Ben Line; Odjfell purchases a stacked semi. Other vessels sell.Franks buys Tubular Inspectors assets; Global acquires ROV.Environmental assets change hands; Caltex sells out of Nippon Refineryfor $2 billion. British utility assets still hot, updates.      Another try for Tesoro; Wells battle for First Interstate rageson, gets very bitter. Melrose Energy and Pentex merge. Talisman bidsfor Goal Petroleum. New bids in the services sector.      Public Service puts Energy Development and its 900 BCFGEreserves on the market. Enserch to sell Rockies; Parker & Parsley tosell Australia (didn't you know?); oilfield assets on the market.Snyder sells out of American Exploration; NAGIT sells out of Alliance;others just sell out.      Texaco E&P consolidates California operations in Bakersfield;Wainoco cuts out of Houston; Pennzoil Products goes to Hamburg andBarcelona. Coplex to float off Philippines assets.      PetroEcuador in a shakeup. Chevron restructures U.S. gasoline;Chevron Chemical reorganizes. Mobil cuts 500 more E&P jobs. Stocksplits. American Exploration JVs with Louis Dreyfus and Seisgen inLavaca Co. KCS JVs with Hawkins and Savoy execs on Shell Niagaranblock. Frontier looks for bright spots on vendor's data.SK and Hillman Company JV in East Texas. Other JVs report,      Pittencrieff disappointed. Forest looks at 470 feet of pay inGulf; Hunt, Mobil and PanCanadian cut a Newfoundland deal. NorthwestNatural and NIPSCO JV in Canada. Some scattering of foreign JVs.Panhandle Eastern now PanEnergy Corp. New offices and moves.Fortune, Forest, Seacor, Star Gas, Coastal Caribbean, TN, Harken,Snyder, Tatham and U.S. Energy place US equity and 28 Canadiancompanies offer equity. Tenneco, Saba, Vintage,Union Texas, UnitedCities, Apache, KCS, GATX, Star Gas, Clark, Norsk Hydro, Tullow andAlpine offer debt. New debt facilities. Gas spots hit $3.10; cashprices hit $3.50 at Henry. Houston area only $2.10 and Opal at $1.20.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ENERGY COMPANY ACQUISITIONS      Tom Brown Inc. (Midland) and KN Energy Inc. (Lakewood, CO) agreefor Tom Brown to acquire KN Energy's oil and gas sub, KN ProductionCompany, in exchange for 900,000 common shares and 1 million shares ofnew convertible preferred stock of Tom Brown. The preferred to have aliquidation value of $25 per share with a 7% coupon and be convertibleinto 1.666 shares of Tom Brown common per. Tom Brown currently tradesin the $15.675 per range, up from the $14.25 range before theannouncement. Tom Brown currently has about 16.153 million sharesoutstanding. Tom Brown and KN Energy will then form a new gas servicescompany, owned 55% by KN to provide gathering, processing, marketing,storage and field services to Rocky Mountain oil and gas producers. Itwill also pursue construction or acquisition of those type of assetsin areas where the E&P companies own reserves, principally portions ofthe Wind River Basin and areas of western Colorado and SW Wyoming. KNwill operate the new company and both will have equal representationon the managing operating committee. Tom Brown to dedicate gasproduction to the new company, combined reserves initially dedicatedwill be about 180 BCFGE.      KN Production has proved reserves estimated at 45 BCFGE (90% gasand 80% developed) located primarily in the Piceance Basin, WesternColorado and the Moxa Arch area of Wyoming. KNPC also holds about170,000 net undeveloped leasehold and mineral acres.       Tom BrownTom Brown has reserves estimated at 180 BCFG, 4.5 MMBOand 648,000 undeveloped acres. Tom Brown owns an average 28% WI in 800wells and a 45% interest in a JV with KN Energy that owns a 110-milegas pipeline and related gathering systems in North Dakota andMontana.Tom Brown also reports it intends to continue to pursue theacquisition of all of the assets of Presidio Oil Co.      Key Production Company Inc. (Denver) agrees to acquire Brock Exploration Corporation (New Orleans) by merger, offering one ofits shares for each 1.45 Brock shares. Key will open a regional officein New Orleans staffed by some of the Brock employees. Shareholdersmeetings to be held in February.      Sharpe Energy Company, a sub of Sharpe Energy & Resources Ltd.,(Toronto) purchases a major portion of the assets of Figgie NaturalResources (Wickcliffe, OH) from Figgie International. Sharpe acquiredproperties in Ohio, Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, New Mexico, North andSouth Dakota, Wyoming, Montana and Colorado.      Current production acquired was 300 to 350 BOEPD, 80% oil.PrimeEnergy Corp. (Stamford, CT) agrees to acquire the shares ofSaratoga Resources Inc. (Houston) in exchange for an undisclosednumber of PrimeEnergy shares. PrimeEnergy operates about 1,500 wellsin five states. Saratoga operates about 195 wells in the Gulf Coastand South Texas, with assets valued at $17 million.      Garnet Resources Corp. and Aviva Petroleum Inc. agree to mergesince they have mutual interests in Colombia. However, onDec. 5, they report they were unable to agree on terms for the merger.Aviva hires  Dillon Read to evaluate finding another merger partner orbuyer.      Hawkins Oil of Michigan (Tulsa) acquires Savoy Oil & Gas Inc.(Traverse City, MI) in a merger. No other details released.## UPDATES## DECEMBER Meteor Industries Inc. closes the acquisition of Capco Resources Inc.from Capco Resources Ltd. (Calgary) for 1.745 million, or 58% of itsshares.## DECEMBER AND SEPTEMBER Coda Energy Inc. and JEDI (an Enron affiliate) agreed to amodification of the merger agreement whereby JEDI acquires Coda.The new agreement removes the condition requiring the sale of Codasub, Taurus Energy Corp., and reduces the per-share merger price to$7.75 from $8 per share.## SEPTEMBERUtiliCorp reports it sold the assets of Aquila Energy ResourcesCorporation to Apache for about $205 million in cash.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PRODUCING PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS      MCN Corporation (Detroit) reports one of its subs agrees toacquire a 100% WI in 130 coalgas wells, and the rights to drill onapproximately 100,000 acres of Virginia coalgas properties from CONSOLCoal Group. Deal includes 80 miles of gas gathering lines and a 5%interest in a 40-mile transmission line. Part of the production hasSection 29 tax credits.      MCN Corp. also reports the sub agreed to acquire undefinedproperties in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado and North Dakota fromunspecified parties. Total costs of the deals, including the CONSOL Coal Group deal above, is $120 million. MCN to acquire provedreserves of 250 BCFG, 1.9 MMB of oil and probable and potential gasreserves of 250 BCF.      Plains Resources Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire Marathon OilCompany's producing and non-producing oil and gas assets in theIllinois Basin for about $46 million, $5 million in Plains common andthe rest in cash. Deal includes three Marathon operated fieldsproducing 4,500 BOPD (4,200 BPD from the 1,100-well LawrenceField). Deal will make Plains the largest Illinois Basin producer.Plains in turn cuts a deal with Crete Oil Company, one of the fivelargest Illinois Basin producers, for Crete to perform dailyoperations on the properties and to form an AMI over parts of thebasin. No reserves reported.      KCS Energy Inc. (Houston) makes a volumetric production paymentdeal with Hawkins Oil of Michigan Inc. for 13.7 BCFG and 1.1 MMBO, tobe produced primarily from 89 wells in the Niagaran Reef Trend. Thesewells acquired by Hawkins in the merger with Savoy Oil & Gas Inc. Production to be delivered through January, 2006, at about 5.3 MMCFGPDand 630 BOPD. KCS also purchases escalating working interests in 30 ofthe 89 wells, rising from 10% at present to 30% around 1997. Reservesacquired in this deal estimated at 3.4 BCFG and 225,000 BO. Dealincluded an ORR in the related exploration JV. Consideration combinedin the two deals was $31 million.      Whiting Petroleum Corporation (Denver) agrees to purchase Wainoco Oil Corporation's (Houston) 18% WI in the Conroe Field Unit,Montgomery Co., Texas Gulf Coast, for $19.5 million in cash. Wainocoto use proceeds to pay off bank debt and reduce other debt.      Harken Energy Corporation (Dallas) agrees to acquire producingoil and gas properties in the Texas Panhandle. Reserves not reported,but 80% gas. Properties have "substantial" proved undeveloped reservesand deal includes a pipeline and gathering system. Gas currently sellsfor $3.30/MCF. In consideration, Harken to issue 2.5 millionrestricted common shares, $2.5 million in cash and a non-recourse notepayable to the seller for $13 million. That note repayable inrestricted common at the option of Harken. Total deal valued at $19.6million.      Stocker Resources, a Plains Resources Inc. sub, agrees toacquire a production payment held by Chevron Corp. on Stocker's LosAngeles Basin producing properties. The payment has a face amount of$30 million and comes due when California posted prices exceed $15/BO.Stocker also acquires a 15-year term mineral interest in certain ofits Los Angeles Basin properties and about 10 acres of surface feeland in Los Angeles County. In consideration, Stocker to forgivecertain funds due it, dismiss lawsuits and issue Chevron a $4.6million 10-year note. Deal includes deferment of plugging obligationsuntil 2000.      Phillips Petroleum Co. sells all its onshore owned-and-operatedproperties in California to Oakland Petroleum Operating Co. (Tulsa).The properties were in the Buena Vista and Midway-Sunset fields inKern County, the Monroe Swell Field in Monterey County and otherinterests in Madera County. Oakland estimates reserves purchased at2.5 MMBO. No consideration reported. Current production is between 325and 700 BOEPD. Deal leaves Phillips with non-operated interests in afew onshore fields and the offshore Point Arguello Field.      Phillips Petroleum also sells its interests in the Shilder,North Burbank, Cushing and other fields in Osage, Kay and Creekcounties, Oklahoma, to Calumet Oil Company (Tulsa). Current productionsold was about 1,000 BOPD. No reserves or consideration released.Beacon Exploration Company (Tulsa) purchases the interests of Ogle Production Corp. in two leases in the Yowlumne "B" Unit in thenorthwestern part of the Yowlumne Field. No reserves or considerationreported.      Panaco Inc. (Kansas City, MO) agrees to purchase a 100% WI from Shell Oil in the Bayou Sorrel Field, Iberville Parish, S. Louisiana,for $10.5 million. Field has production from 28 sands and 37reservoirs. Current production is from 31 wells, ranging indepth from 7,000 feet to 11,000 feet.      Sonat Exploration Company and partners, including TaurusExploration Inc., sub of Energen, purchase the working interests of Gary-Williams Production Co. in the 9,300-acre (1,300 developed) NorthCrowley Field in South Louisiana, for about $29.25 million. Reservesacquired estimated at 5.25 MMBO and 6.5BCFG, about 70% undeveloped. Taurus expects to spend about $4 millionadditional for its 40% stake to develop the proved reserves acquired.Taurus to also hold a 25% stake in future exploration on the tract. A3-D seismic survey has been completed over the acreage.      The Sonat group also purchases the 2,300-acre Neale Field inSouth Louisiana from Rebel Drilling Company for about $6.3 million.Reserves acquired estimated at 2.3 MMBO,about 80% undeveloped. About $6 million additional will be spent todevelop the reserves.      Taurus to have a 33% stake in this acquisition.      Callon Petroleum Company (Natchez, MS) purchases a 66.7% WI(55.5% NRI) in the Chandeleur Sound 40 Field from Amerada HessCorporation for $9 million in cash. In turn, sells a 22.2% interest inthe property to the William G. Helis InterestWilliam G. HelisInterest. The field has two wells, including one dual completion,producing 5.5 MMCFGPD. Callon estimates the field has remainingreserves of 27.9 BCFG (10.3 BCF to acquired interest after theresale). Deal ups Callon to 52.3% WI (43.6% NRI) in the field. Initialinterest was purchased from W&T Offshore in September 1994.      Energy Development Corp. sells a package of non-operatedproperties in late November, principally 55,000 acres of mineral androyalty interests in the White Lake/Lac Blanc area of SouthLouisiana, for $6.2 million.       Madison Energy Advisors provided technical and marketingservices to EDC. Purchaser not released.      XCL Ltd. (Lafayette) agrees to sell its Mestena Grande Fieldinterests in South Texas to Cody Energy Inc. (Denver) for $4.3 millionin cash. Deal to be effective September 1. Reserves not reported.American Resources of Delaware (Scottsdale, AZ) sub, Southern Gas Co.of Delaware Inc., agrees to purchase certain oil and gas assets of AKSEnergy Corp., an Arakis Energy Corp. sub, in Whitley and Claycounties, KY, and in Tennessee, for $3.6 million in cash, commonshares and stock warrants. Properties include producing properties inKentucky.      Deal also calls for the purchaser and seller to form anexploration JV on the remaining undeveloped acreage in the Enpro,Sugar Creek and SMEPA fields, whereby Southern can also earn a 50% WIin that acreage.      Forcenergy Gas Exploration Inc. (Miami) trades its interests inthe Eugene Island Block 24 Field to an unnamed major oil company forthat company's 30% working interest in Vermillion Block 261 and 100%working interest in the Vermillion Block 262 field. Forcenergyacquired operatorship of the blocks in the deal. Forcenergy alsopicked up another 20% WI in Vermillion Block 261 from anothermajor oil company for an undisclosed amount of cash, bringing itsinterest in the block to 75%. Forcenergy estimates it acquired provedreserves in the two deals of 6.8 BCFGE for about $2.45 million.Current production acquired is 184 BOPD and 1.9 MMCFGPD.      McFarland Energy Inc. (Santa Fe Springs, CA) agrees to acquireinterests in 19 oil wells in Santa Barbara County, CA, for $3.4million in cash. Reserves and seller not reported, but currentproduction acquired is about 250 BOPD.      Fortune Petroleum Corp. (Agoura Hills, CA) acquired a 16.67% WI(12.5% NRI) in the 5,000-acre South Timbalier Block 76, offshoreLouisiana, from Petrofina SA for $2.9 million. Deal effective July 1,1995. Fortune offers an unnamed private company an option to acquire a4.167% WI in the block for about $790,000. The block has oneproducing well on a platform with a transmission line as part of thedeal. The well has already produced 30 BCFG and 2 MMBO and iscurrently producing 16 MMCFGPD and 1,150 BOPD.       CNG holds 50% WI in the block and operates while Oryx Energyholds a 33.33% WI.      PMC Reserve Acquisition Co. (Dallas) and its institutional andutility partners, which includes Taurus Exploration Inc., with a 18.7%partnership interest, complete two acquisition deals.      PMC purchases the Meridian Oil Inc. interests in 18 fields, orunits, principally in the Permian Basin for $5.74 million.      PMC also purchases the interests of American Exploration Companyin four wells and surrounding acreage in the Elm Grove Field,Bossier Parish, Louisiana, for $375,000. The two deals representreserves of about 6.95 BCFG and 560,000 BO, nearly all developed.Columbus Energy Corp. (Denver) agrees to acquire additional workinginterests in 107 producing gas wells (6.23 net wells), which itoperates in several fields in Webb and Zapata counties, SouthTexas, for $2.63 million. Sellers and reserves not reported.British-Borneo Petroleum Inc. acquires the operatorship and a 100%working interest in Ewing Bank Blocks 921, 964, 965, the Klamath orMorpeth Field, from Shell Offshore. British-Borneo agrees to drill athird well on the prospect for about $10 million in 1996. The fieldlies in about 1,650 feet of water and has reserves estimated from theinitial wells at 50 MMBO and 50 BCFG. Shell to retain a net profitsinterest and the right to recover the tracts if British-Borneo doesn'tdrill the well or complete drilling up the field.      Continental Resources (Enid, OK) purchases all of KochExploration Company's operated oil and gas properties in Harding Co.,South Dakota and Bowman Co., North Dakota. Deal involves 154 activewells, 144 in four air injection/in-situ combustion units. Reservesacquired are estimated at 8 MMBO from the Red River "B" zone. Noconsideration reported. Deal makes Continental the fifth largest oilproducer in North Dakota.      Enex Resources Corp. and its Enex Program 1 Partners LP fundsold a portion of their interests in the HNG properties for acombined $1.136 million.      Empiric Energy Inc. (Dallas) agrees to acquire producing oil andgas properties in Jack and Clay counties, west Central Texas, from Taureaux Corp. In one deal, Empiric will acquire a 20% NRI in twowells and an option to increase its WI in surrounding areas. In theother deal, Empiric to acquire a 60% NRI in a 1,240-acre tract withone producing well and 11 shutin wells. Empiric to pay an undisclosedamount of cash, shares and a short-term note.  Inland Resources Inc.(Denver) acquires an option from its major shareholder, Randall D.Smith, to purchase oil and gas properties in Utah. The properties wereacquired by Smith in a farmout agreement. Option to be exercised byInland prior to March 10, 1997, for about $5.3 million of itsstock or about 10.6 million shares. Smith already controls about 20.6million shares, or 50% of Inland equity.      Parker & Parker & Parsley Petroleum Co. (Midland) agrees toacquire certain undefined oil and gas properties from Wallace Oil &Gas for 214,339 of its shares. If certain title defects are corrected,the price will rise to 314,070 of its shares.      Chesapeake Energy Corp. (OKC) purchases Union Pacific Resourcesinterests in 19,500 gross acres in the Navasota River area of thedowndip Austin Chalk play in Texas for $3.9 million.       Belco Oil and Gas Corp., its partner in the area, takes a 30%stake in the deal for $1.7 million.      Maynard Oil Company (Dallas) agrees to purchase the interest of Energy Development Corp., sub of Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.,in 250 producing wells in Garza County, West Texas.      Consideration and reserves not released, but current productionacquired is about 775 BOPD.      Oilex International Investments Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire100% of the mineral rights to 83,751 acres in Greenbriar andPocahontas counties, West Virginia, for 1.256 million of itsrestructured common, valued by Oilex at $1.256 million.      Kish Resources PLC reports agreeing to sell its Irvine Furnaceoil leases in Kentucky to an unnamed buyer. No other details released.## UPDATES## DECEMBERThe minerals purchased from Petro-Corp. Inc. by Panhandle RoyaltyPanhandle Royalty and Farmer's Union were in 13 states butconcentrated in the Anadarko and Arkoma basins and had 174 producingwells (five with working interests) on the acreage, representing about10.8% of the package, which produces about $420,000 per year inincome. Total price was near $4.23 million.## DECEMBERDelta acquired interest in six wells in the Moneta Hills Unit inFremont County, Wyoming.## DECEMBER Panaco Inc. cancels its deal to acquire properties from Gulfstar.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996WORLDWIDE PRODUCING ACQUISITIONS## CANADAAlberta Energy Company Ltd. cuts a good deal to acquire ConwestExploration Company Ltd., offering either 1.25 AEC shares or C$28.00in cash per Conwest share, up to 24.2 million shares and C$361 millionin cash. Total deal valued at C$1.1 billion. Deal would create thesecond largest, publicly traded, upstream oil and gas company inCanada. Conwest has reserves estimated at 920 BCF (601 BCF proven and319 probable), 45 MMBL (27 MM proven), 800,000 acres of explorationproperties and C$500 million in tax pools.Conwest produces some 14,000 BPD of liquids and about 185 MMCFGPD.Deal boosts Alberta Energy's gas reserves by 49% and conventionalliquids reserves by 110%, gives it twomillion net acres of undeveloped lands and defers its taxable positionby about three years.      Alberta Energy proposes to sell off all of Conwest Exploration'snon-oil and gas assets, which include an investment portfolio, a zincmine and small hydroelectric plants; total value about C$165 million,or about 75% of Conwest's total debt.      Three of Conwest Exploration's directors will join the Alberta Energy board and key Conwest execs will join AEC management.As reported last month, the  ATCO Group was negotiating to sell itsATCOR Resources Ltd. sub.       Forest Oil Corp. (Denver) agrees to offer C$4.88 for each classA non-voting share and class B common share, or about C$186 million.ATCO and its other subs hold 29.4% of the class A shares and 85.9% ofthe class B shares of ATCOR. Forest to fund the acquisition with thesale of its equity to the market.      ATCOR has proved net reserves of 13 MMBL and 132 BCFG, nearlyall developed. Current production is about 4,000 BO and 46 MMCFGPD. Italso owns gas processing and gathering facilities in most of itsfields and 253,000 acres of undeveloped leases, as well as interestsin 441,000 gross acres of frontier lands, which include interests in22 significant discoveries. ATCOR also markets an average of 800MCFGPD for itself and third parties. As part of the deal, ForestOilForest will sell back certain assets to the controllingshareholders of ATCOR for C$22 million.      These include 50% of ATCOR's Beaufort Sea assets and 50% of itsoffshore Sable Island properties, 54% of its 33.33% interest in a 315MMCFPD ethane extraction plant in south Edmonton and a 50% interest inthe remaining frontier lands.      Forest Oil also completes the acquisition of a 56% controllinginterest in Saxon Petroleum Inc. in a deal first reported in theNovember issue. Saxon will sell the 5.3 million Forest shares itacquired in the deal as part of Forest's registration of 60 millionshares.      Rigel Energy Corp. agrees to acquire Inverness Petroleum Ltd.,offering .625 of its shares for each Inverness share, or about C$7.73per share, in a deal valued at C$380 million, including debtassumption. Deal subject to 66.67% acceptance, but Rigel has alreadylocked up Inverness board approval and 35% of its shares.      Inverness would also have to pay Rigel about C$5.35 million ifthe deal falls through.      Deal ups Rigel Energy to 8,400 BLPD and 91 MMCFGPD, a 74% and144% increase respectively. Deal ups gas reserves by 79% and liquidsreserves by 58%, and gives it 1.4 million net undeveloped acres, a140% increase.       Nesbitt Burns will act as dealer/manager.In relation to a report above, Conwest Exploration sells its 2.67million shares of Asquith Resources Inc. to United Reef Ltd. forC$100,000. Shares represent a 51.34% stake in Asquith. United Reef, inturn, trades 1.002 million Asquith shares for the equity of 1153731 Ontario Inc., a mining company, which holds C$135,828 ofAsquith debt.      Clayoquot Resources Ltd. and Newgate Resources Ltd. terminatetheir merger discussions. Alberta Oil and Gas Ltd. and partnersacquire various working interests in several properties inthe east central area of Alberta. AOG itself pays C$10 million forproduction of 242 BOPD and 3.2 MMCFGPD with proved and probablereserves of 1.36 MMB and 12.4 BCFG. AOG also acquires33,000 net acres of undeveloped leases. AOG takes over as operator of90 wells and two gas plants.      Pengrowth Gas Income Fund agrees to acquire a 2.785% WI in theHanlan Swan Hills Pool Gas Unit No. 1 for C$9.7 million from Beau Canada Exploration Ltd. Deal subject to right of first refusal bythird parties.      Olympia Energy Inc. purchases properties in the Bottrel,Winchell Coulee and Wild Cat Hills areas of Alberta for C$3.85 million(C$2.58 million net). Included in the deal are two producing gaswells (1.139 net), one dual zone well and two shutin wells. Productionis currently 560 BOEPD. Deal includes 41,600 gross acres (27,900 net)in the Bottrel area.      Cirque Energy Ltd. acquires an additional 29% WI in the BattleCreek Field in Saskatchewan from Minorca Resources Inc. (Toronto) forC$1.04 million in cash, 700,000 of its shares and 350,000warrants. Deal ups Cirque to an 84.5% WI in the property and adds 150BOPD.      New North Resources Ltd. agrees to acquire properties in fourareas of Alberta from Alberta Gas Products Ltd. for C$443,700.Brigdon Resources Inc. purchases reserves and exploration acreageinterests in the Buffalo Lake, Alberta, area, raising its reserves by32%.      Best Pacific Resources Ltd. acquires a majority interest in anoil field in the Richdale area of east central Alberta for C$462,800.Property produces 22 BO and 235 MCFGPD.      Panatlas Energy Inc. acquires a 70% WI and operatorship of anoil field at Whitebear, Saskatchewan. Deal includes 2,400 acres witheight wells. Current production is 38 BOPD.Spire Energy Ltd. acquires interests in the Abee area of Alberta forC$700,000. Deal includes a 35% WI in 18,720 gross acres, a 43% WI infour gas wells and 35% interest in the 11 MMCFPD Abee Gas Plant.Scarlet Exploration Inc. agrees to trade its interests in the Helmetarea of British Columbia to Beau Canada Exploration Ltd. for BeauCanada interests in the Sullivan Lake Gas Unit and theCainwood Cardium Oil Unit in Alberta.      Deep Basin Energy Inc. picks up minor interests in itsproperties at Clive in Alberta and Weyburn in Saskatchewan frompartners and acquires a 21.63% WI in the Workman Frobisher VoluntaryUnitNo. 1.Rosebay Resources Inc. acquires interests in 48 properties forC$980,000.New Energy West Corp. sells its entire interest in one property in theLloydminster area of Alberta.Southlake Energy Inc., sub of NIPSCO Energy Services Inc., acquiresoil and gas properties in south central Alberta from Gentra One Resources.## UPDATES## DECEMBERThe Lateral Vector Resources Inc. acquisition of International PedcoEnergy Corporation is defined. Each Pedco share to receive .994 sharesof LVR, or .6959 LVR shares and the equivalent of C$.418 per.## DECEMBERPanCanadian will acquire over C$200 million in tax losses with theacquisition of Lasmo Nova Scotia Ltd.## NOVEMBERCimarron Petroleum Ltd. closes its acquisition of Canadian PioneerEnergy Inc.## OCTOBERThe merger of Dalton Resources Ltd. and Piper Petroleums Ltd. isapproved by shareholders.## NORTH SEA AREAHolland Sea Search Holding NV, a Cairn Energy PLC sub, picks up anadditional .69% WI in Dutch North Sea license P/12,increasing its interest to 6.94%.Oryx Energy Co. completes its previously announced sale of its 33.6%WI in UK Block 48/15a to PowerGen PLC for $120 million.Texaco Ltd. agrees to sell a 15% interest in its UK North Sea Captainoilfield, UK Block 13/22a, for $210 million to Korea PetroleumDevelopment Corp. Texaco retains 85% interest. Field is expected tocome on stream late in 1996 at 60,000 BOPD. Field reserves estimatedat 300 MMBO.Neste Oy agrees to sell its 50% interest in Sovereign Exploration Ltd.to Northgas Ltd., a Northern Electric PLC sub. Northern owns theremaining 50% of Sovereign.## LATIN AMERICA## UPDATES## DECEMBERVintage Petroleum Inc. closes the acquisition of a 35% WI in sevenconcessions in the southern flank of the San Jorge Basin, Argentina,from Astra Compania de Petroleo SA for $17.85 million, and a 65% WI inthe same properties from Shell's Argentine sub, for $32.8 million incash and a $5.9 million note. Properties produce 3,960 BOPD withestimated proved reserves of 22.6 million BO.## SE ASIA AREAAmpolex Ltd. sells its interests in the Lufeng 22-1 oilfield, offshoreChina, to Statoil for an undisclosed sum, probably between A$6.7million and A$14.4 million.  Ampolex gets approval to sell a 40% stakein the Wandoo oilfield, offshore Western Australia, to aJV of Mitsui subs and Indonesia Petroleum Ltd. Ampolex holds theremaining 60% interest.British Gas PLC and the Coplex/Cophill-Pacrim JV cut a new deal for BGto acquire interest in the Manila Bay, Philippines, JV. BG topay an additional $500,000 to extend its option to 60 days beyond theredrill and fund 47.5% of the costs of a work program to earn a 25%working interest.Reportedly, the Cophill group also puts Oriental Petroleum & MineralsCorp. in default for failure to pay $700,000 to cover its 25%share in the costs of the project so far. Claims right to acquire theinterest.PT Medco Energy Corp. purchases all of the equity of PT StanvacIndonesia, the oldest oil company in the country. Stanvac waspreviously owned by Mobil Oil and Esso Oil, an Exxon sub. Stanvacoperates the Kampar concession in central Sumatra, Indonesia, and theRimau and Pasemah exploration licenses in north Sumatra. Areascurrently produce 13,000 BOPD and 40 MMCFGPD.  Southern PacificPetroleum NL and Central Pacific Minerals NL acquire the remaining83.67% interest in the Yaamba oil share venture near Rockhampton,Queensland, Australia, from Acadia Resources Ltd. in trade for theirinterest in the Yaamba magnetite JV.## UPDATES## DECEMBERAmerican International drops out of the Lapangan Hargeulis part of thedeal with P. T. Pelangi Niaga Mitra. However, will pay $300,000front-end and fund about $3 million for the development of theLapangan Pamanukan Seletan Field, West Java, Indonesia. Field reservesestimated at 20 BCFG.## OTHER AREASShell Petroleum NV agrees to sell its upstream activities in Turkeyand its stake in NV Turkre Shell, which operates 27 fields insoutheast Turkey to Perenco, formerly Kelt Energy. Production to besold is about 13,400 BOPD.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996OILFIELD ACQUISITIONSDiamond Offshore Drilling Inc. (Houston) agrees to acquire Arethusa(Offshore) Ltd. for about $516 million in its stock, offering .88 ofits shares for each Arethusa share. Arethusa will pay a 25-cent pershare dividend prior to closing of the offering.Arethusa has 13 offshore rigs including six semis and ranks as theworld's third largest in that category. Diamond has 22 semis and ranksfirst. Diamond's total fleet is 47 units, 14 jackups, onedrillship and 10 land rigs. Arethusa's major shareholders, Alphee SA and Forvaltnings AB Ratos, had put the company up for sale.Agreement calls for exclusive negotiations. Arethusa had revenues forthe first nine months of $93 million.Tenneco Energy and Questar Corp. call off the sale of a 50% interestin Kern River Gas Transmission Co. to Questar after the FTC sued tostop the sale, citing decreased competition in the Salt Lake Cityindustrial sales market. "It's a victory for thecustomers," reports the FTC. Of course, it's a defeat for freebusiness, but we know how the Clinton Administration feels about that.At press time, Tenneco Energy accepts the offer of the  Williams Cos.(Tulsa), its 50% partner in Kern River, to buy Tenneco's stake for$205 million, $20 million less than the QuestarQuestar offer. Tennecoreported it wanted to complete the sale before yearend. Effective dateof sale will be Dec. 31, which means Tenneco will recoup $10 millionin earnings since the Questar closing date of Sept. 1. Williams alsoto purchase Tenneco's parntership interest rather than its stock inKern River, which will save Williams money on the deal.Giant Industries Inc. (Scottsdale, AZ) agrees to purchase the 25,000BPD Wingate gas liquids fractionation plant and associated pipelineand storage facilities from Meridian Oil Production Inc. for $10million plus the cost of inventories. The plant is located10 miles from Giant's Ciniza refinery in Gallup, NM. Deal includes 200miles of pipelines transporting feedstock and 115,000 barrels ofstorage.Longhorn Partners Pipeline L.P. (Dallas) agrees to purchase the450-mile, 18-inch Crane, TX, to Baytown, TX, crude pipeline from Exxon PipelineExxon Pipeline Co.. Longhorn plans to reverse the flow,construct an extension of the line to El Paso and modify the line forrefined products transportation. The system should be able totransport 100,000 to 120,000 BPD of products from Gulf Coastrefineries to terminals near Austin, Midland/Odessa and El Paso.Longhorn consisted of the Axis Gas Corp. (Dallas) and the Beacon Group Energy Investment Fund LP (NYC). Now Williams Pipe LineCo. joins the group and will take over operation of the pipeline. Noconsideration reported.M-I Drilling Fluids LLC (Houston) agrees to purchase Anchor DrillingFluids A/S from Transocean A/S for NKr 695.75 million, or about $110million in cash. The deal will give M-I about a 40% to 45% share ofthe worldwide market. Anchor had 1994 revenues of about $144million, principally from North Sea and Malaysian sales. It employsabout 517 worldwide.Transocean and M-I agree to enter into future cooperate agreements,including integrated contracts. M-I is owned 64% by SmithInternational and 36% by Halliburton.ANGC Corp. (Associated Natural Gas), a sub of Panhandle Eastern Corp.(Houston), purchases the remaining 50% interest in its 150-MMCFGPD,cryogenic gas-processing plant in Port Arthur, TX, and a 100% interestin two 40-MMCFPD plants in Eddy County, NM, (Pecos Diamond and DaggerDraw) from Mitchell Energy and Development Corp. for $13 million.Kaneb Pipe Line Partners LP acquires seven petroleum productsterminals and the pipeline and associated tankage serving Andrews AirForce Base from Steuart Petroleum Co. and its affiliates for $68million. Deal includes 9 MMB of storage capacity, the largest at PineyPoint, MD (5.5 MM) and Jacksonville, FL (2.1 MM).Phoenix Energy Services Inc. (Houston) acquires SlimDril InternationalInc. and BecField Drilling Services (Houston). BecField also has anoffice in Hanover, Germany.BecField specializes in short-radius horizontal drilling services.TransCanada Pipe Lines Ltd. (Calgary) is negotiating to acquire a 50%interest in the 75,000-BOPD refinery in Coffeyville, KS, from Farmland Industries Inc. Farmland to increase capacity to 125,000BOPD. TransCanada and Alberta Energy Co. Ltd. are partners in the$530-million, 170,000-BPD Express oil pipeline from Alberta toWyoming. CMS Gas Transmission and Storage Co., sub of CMS Energy (Dearborn, MI)agrees to acquire Petal Gas Storage Co. from Chevron USA ProductionCo. As part of the deal, Chevron to retain storage services fromPetal. The company owns a 3.2 BCFG peaking facility in Forrest County,MS, with a 320 MMCFGPD withdrawal capacity. The facility is connectedto two major interstate pipelines. No consideration reported.The DMD division of Dresser Industries acquires the business of Instech, Ltd. (Hamble, UK). Instech designs, produces and manufactureselectronic instrumentation and communication equipment for the gastransmission, distribution and petrochemical industries. Noconsideration reported.McJunkin Appalachian Oil Field Supply Co. purchases Target OilToolsTarget Oil Tools (Kalkaska, MI). Renames unit MCA Oil Tools Inc.El Paso Natural GasEl Paso Natural Gas Co. and its Eastex Energy Inc.sub purchase 100% of the equity of Premier Gas Co. (Tulsa). Premiermarkets about 435 MMCFGPD to utilities in the Great Lakesarea and industrial and commercial customers in the Mid-Continent.Premier to continue as a separate marketing sub of El Paso.TridentTrident, sub of NGC Corp. (Houston), purchases the 180-mileO'Keene gas gathering system from ONG Gas Gathering Co., a sub of Oneok Inc. The system gathers 18.5 MMCFGPD, extending across fourcentral Oklahoma counties. Trident will install compression facilitiesto reduce line pressure and consolidate the purchase with its othersystems in the area.Oceaneering International Inc. (Houston) sub purchases the 268,191 dwtVLCC oil tanker, M. T. Swift, from Mobil Shipping and TransportationCo. Oceaneering will convert the tanker to a FPSO system in a $70million conversion. The FPSO will be the second largest in the world,with storage capacity of 1.2 MMBO. The production process trains willhandle 80,000 BOPD. The vessel, renamed Zafiro Producer, will beinstalled in 600 feet of water offshore Equatorial Guinea, inWest Africa, over Mobil's Zafiro Field. Deal calls for Mobil to have athree-year option to repurchase the vessel.Stena Drilling Ltd. (Aberdeen), sub of Stena AB, reports plans topurchase two semi-submersibles from Ben Line for SKr 585 million.Stena to also take over management responsibility for threeoffshore rigs currently managed by Coflexip.Odjfell purchases the semi, La Muralla, from Daysland Inc. The semihas been stacked in Mexico for over a year. No consideration, butreports are that the unit has a contract to drill for StatoilStatoilin the North Sea. Odjfell will rename the unit the Deepsea Trym. Gulfshore NS Ltd., sub of Gulfmark International Inc., agrees toacquire the supply vessel, Atlantic Warrior. Consideration notreleased.Global Industries Ltd. (Lafayette) purchases the heavy-lift derrickbarge, Hercules, for $10.9 million from J. R. McDermott.Shell Expro sells its multi-purpose vessel, Stadive, to Safe Jasnienia (Grand Cayman).Frank's International (Houston) acquires certain inspection assets of Tubular Inspectors Inc. and Thread-Tech Inc. No other detailsreleased.Global Industries Ltd. also acquires ROV Technologies Inc. ROVspecializes in deep water projects and offers intervention and ROVconsulting services. The unit will operate off of Global's new SWATHvessel.CogniSeis Development acquires the equity of Photon Systems (Calgary).Photon develops and markets seismic and geological interpretationsoftware. Appoints Diana McSherry as president and CEO.Cooper Cameron Corp. sells its Wheeling Machine Products division(Pine Bluff, AR) to Nassau Holding Corp. for $15 million. Wheelingmanufactures threaded couplings for tubulars.The crane barge, Noble Lifter, sold at public auction in December bythe U.S. Marshall's office in New Orleans. The unit was owned by Glenway Americas before being seized by creditors.  Trinity IndustriesInc. acquire certain assets of the inactive Chicago Bridge and IronCo.'s shipyard in Pascagoula, MS. Facility gives Trinity some 21 GulfCoast shipyards. Trinity to upgrade and expand the 88.5-acre facilityon Bayou Casotte Channel.  No consideration reported.McDermott International Inc. sub, Babcock & Wilcox Power GenerationGroup, purchases the assets of Joy Environmental Technologies Inc.from Harnischfeger Industries Inc. No consideration reported.Fluor Daniel Inc. reports agreement to recapitalize GroundwaterTechnology Inc., acquiring a 54.51% stake in GTI. Fluor to merge itsenvironmental services unit into GTI, renaming the entity FluorDaniel/GTI Inc.  Fluor to contribute $33.35 million in cash and itsunit to GTI. Current shareholders of GTI to receive $8.62 per share incash and exchange each share for .5274 per of the new company.Core Laboratories Inc., sub of Core Laboratories NV (Amsterdam),acquires the assets of four environmental testing laboratories in theEastern U.S. from Pace Inc. (Minneapolis) for an undisclosed amount ofcash. The labs have revenues of about $10-$12 million per year. Dealgives Core 11 environmental testing labs to go along with its eightcore testing labs.Arkla Inc., sub of NorAm Energy Corp., agrees to purchase a 3,200customer gas distribution system in southwest Arkansas and NorthwestLouisiana from Louisiana-Nevada Transit Co. The system principallyserves Hope, AR, and nearby towns.Gulfside Industries Ltd. (Somerset, TX) sells its gas distributionassets to Entex Inc., also a sub of NorAm, for more than $2 million.United Cities Propane Gas of Tennessee Inc., sub of United Cities GasCo., agrees to acquire the propane assets of Duncan Gas Service for$4.337 million, acquiring 2,000 customers in the Johnson City, TNarea.  In the energy banking area, Norwest Corp.Norwest Corp. agreesto acquire Victoria Bankshares (Victoria, TX) for 1.05 of its sharesfor each Victoria share.Caltex Petroleum Corp. agrees to sell its 50% interest in NipponPetroleum Refinery Co. to its partner, Nippon Oil Co., for 200 billionyen (about $2 billion). NPRC operates refineries in Nigishi andMuroran, Japan, with a total capacity of 255,000 BOPD. As part of thedeal, Caltex agrees to continue to supply certain types of crudes tothe refineries. Caltex wanted out, and Nippon reluctantly agreed tothe deal.Westcoast Energy Inc. will purchase the outstanding 50% interest in Pacific Coast Energy Corp. from Alberta Energy Co. as part of acomplex deal with the British Columbia government. PacificCoast operates the Vancouver Island gas pipeline project.Pennzoil Products Co. purchases a 45% equity share in Isopetrol SA(Lima, Peru), a lubricants marketing and manufacturing company.Mobil Oil Australia purchases the Amgas service station and wholesaledistributor business in Western Australia. Amgas owns 46service stations and six wholesale distributors. Amgas holds 8% ofPerth's gasoline market.Barrington Petroleum Ltd. (Calgary) agrees to sell some of its gasprocessing plants for C$10 million. Barrington to continue to operatethe plants for a fee.Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. sells a gas plant at Okotoks,Alberta, to Continental Waste Conversion Inc. Consideration notreleased.Mission EnergyMission Energy, an SCE Corp. sub, acquires First Hydro Co. from the National Grid Company PLC (UK) for about $1billion. First Hydro consists of the pumped storage business of NGC,principally two stations in North Wales, which have 10 units with acombined capacity of 2,088 MW. For those of you unfamiliar with pumpedstorage, it consists of units whereby water is pumped to a higherreservoir during low electric demand periods and released throughgenerating turbines during peak demand periods. Mission financed thedeal with $400 million of equity and $600 million of non-recourse debtunderwritten by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd.## UPDATES## DECEMBERWilrig AS sells its semi, Treasure Searcher, to a JV of Deep TechInternational, Highwood Partners LP and Deepwater Drillers LLC. Unitto be renamed FPS Bill Shoemaker after minor modifications andthe addition of a Varco top-drive system.## DECEMBERDiamond Shamrock Inc. completes the takeover of National ConvenienceStores Inc. under the terms reported after 94% of NCS shares weretendered to its offer.## DECEMBERAmerican Western Refinery LP, which purchased assets of the IndianRefinery from Castle Energy for $3 million in cash and a $5 millionnote, was set up by Gadgil Western Corp. American assumed theenvironmental obligations of Indian Refinery and purchased therefinery's platinum catalyst for $500,000 in cash and a $1.8 million,8% note.  Proceeds of the sales to repay creditors of Indian Refinery.## NOVEMBERDresser Industries' instrument division completes the acquisition ofthe product lines and assets of the Weksler Instrument Co. (Freeport,NY).## OCTOBER AND AUGUSTWeatherford Enterra Inc. completes the acquisition of the Energy Industries gas compression division from Zapata Corp. for about$130 million and the assumption of certain current operatingliabilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TAKEOVER ATTEMPTSTakeover mania continues unabated outside our borders. Internally, somany companies and/or oil and gas divisions are being placed on themarket, hostile efforts are usually not necessary.Of course there are exceptions. A group of dissident shareholders tryfor the umpteenth time to unseat the Tesoro Petroleum board. Thegroup, which includes Kevin Flannery, James Stone, GeorgeBaker, Alan Kaufman and Robert Washburn, own about 5.7% of the Tesoroshares. Group files a 13-D with the SEC notifying it that the groupwill mail a proposal to shareholders to elect its slate of five boardnominees, which include Gale Galloway and Douglas Thompson. Groupproposes to sell the Alaskan refinery and other assets, possiblyincluding all of Tesoro.  The takeover battle for First InterstateBancorp continues to rage on.  After Wells Fargo increased its offerto .667 share for each First share, and First had rushed into thearms of First Bank Systems (Minneapolis), Wells reported a plan topurchase up to 5% of First's shares.First Bank reported Wells couldn't do that under takeover laws. Thatpoint is still up in the air.Meanwhile, the market price of Wells shares keeps rising, making theiroffer even higher, up to $1 billion more. Wells to ask Firstshareholders to reject the First Bank offer and accept its offer. Thewhole deal may still come down to whether the SEC allows First Bank touse the pooling accounting treatment of its merger with First ratherthan the purchase accounting treatment, which Wells has to use. As oflast word, the SEC accountants hadn't decided, but heavy-dutyanalysts argue both sides of the proposal. Near press time, FirstInterstate sues Wells in Delaware court, charging securities lawsviolations.Other bank mergers include Fleet Financial Group's $3 billion offerfor the U.S. commercial banking unit of Westminster Bank PLC. Dealmakes Fleet the eighth largest in the U.S. The Royal Bank of Scotlandwill merge its U.S. unit, Citizens Finance Group, with First NH Bank,the third largest in New England and a sub of Bank of Ireland, givingRoyal Bank of Scotland a 76.5% share in the combined bank.## UPDATES FROM NORTH OF THE BORDERThe Murwell Resources Ltd. board recommends acceptance of the takeoveroffer from Icon Energy Ltd. of two Icon shares for each Murwell commonas reported last month. Offer mailed early in December.Other takeovers reported herein include the C$380 million Rigel offer for Inverness the merged company to have reserves of 572BCFG and 58.9 MMBL; the C$1.1 billion offer by Alberta Energy for Conwest Exploration; and the C$186 million offer by Forest Oil for ATCOR Resources.Another new takeover attempt that turns hostile is made by aconsortium of a Canadian energy company, a pension fund, a Canadianbank and a U.S. investment firm. On Dec. 17, Pembina AcquisitionCorp., which is owned 51.5% by Pembina Resources Ltd., 30% by the Ontario Teacher's Pension Fund, 10.8% by Allen & Company Inc., and7.7% by T D Capital Group Ltd., an affiliate of the Toronto-DominionBank, reports its intention to offer C$7 per for the shares of Mark Resources Inc. Hints at a possible higher offer. The groupcurrently holds 2.88 million Mark shares, or about 5.2%. Deal subjectto review of financial data and 66.67% acceptance.  Asks Mark for alist of its shareholders. Group retains T D Securities Inc. and RBCDominion Securities to act as financial advisors. Deal currentlyvalued at C$354 million.  By next day, Mark shares trade above theoffer price at C$7.125 per. On the 19th, Mark board calls the offertoo low and approves a shareholders rights antitakeover plan with a20% trigger. Mark hires CIBC-Wood Gundy Securities as financialadvisor. Pembina reports disappointment with the board maneuvers,plans to proceed with the offer. Analysts expect a higher offer, up tothe C$8 range. Mark acquired Hillcrest Resources in a hostile takeoverearlier in 1995 and was expected to be a target.Pembina is privately owned by the Mannix family of Calgary.Pacalta Resources Ltd. offers C$.55 per for shares of Trax PetroleumLtd. Trax board sets up committee to review offer and hires CIBC WoodGundy Inc. as financial advisor.  In the UK, Melrose Energy PLCcontinues its takeover offer for Pentex Oil PLC. Melrose offers 81 newshares for every 20 Pentex shares, or about $31.2 million, based oncurrent market prices. Deal would give Pentex shareholders a 29.5%stake in Melrose. Melrose to also issue a rights offering to raisecapital for the group, offering one new share at 34 pence for eachfive shares held. Pentex board approves the deal.  Basically PentexOil management (Pentex has 67 employees) will take over management ofMelrose Energy. Pentex chairman, Henry Cameron, will become chiefexecutive and Pentex managing director will take the same job atMelrose. Robert Adair, a geologist who owns 60% of Melrose, will seehis stake reduced to 40% and will take the deputy directorship and CFOjob.  Melrose has few employees, but manages oil and gas interests inTexas, New Mexico and Wyoming.  Pentex produces 6,000 BOPD from itsinterests in two North Sea fields and produces about 500 BOEPD from 12onshore UK fields.In other European news, Statoil extended its offer for Aran EnergyAran Energy after receiving only 83.78% of Aran shares byDec. 6 in response to its 76 Irish pence per offer. By the 13th,Statoil had received 85.43% and declared its offer unconditional.Talisman Energy Inc. (Calgary) makes a takeover offer for GoalPetroleum PLC (London). Offers 97.5 pence in cash per share, or aboutC$275 million, and agrees to assume about C$40 million of Goal debt.Institutional investors holding 45.5% of Goal agree to tender theirshares to the offer. Goal has 20 employees with production of about20,000 BOEPD from a 5% interest in the Wytch Farm, 32% in Blenheim,2.5% in Mangus and interests in 47 other British and Dutch licensesand fields. Proved and probable reserves estimated at 31.1 MMBO and83.9 BCFG. Deal gives Talisman 49,000 BOEPD from the North Sea andquadruples its exploration acreage there. Talisman to borrow the C$315million from the Royal Bank of Canada.Central and South West Corp. extends its offer for shares of Seaboard PLC to January 11 after receiving only about 44.42% ofSeeboard shares, or 109 million shares to its offer. Including sharesit held, that gives CSW about 74.31% of Seeboard.Abbot PLC, parent of KCA Drilling (Aberdeen) makes a $8.25 milliontakeover offer for OIS International Inspection (Aberdeen). OISservices the oil, gas and petrochemical industries.Kvaerner A/SKvaerner A/S makes a hostile takeover offer of 100 penceper for Amec PLC, which is involved in the development of the NatunaField, offshore Indonesia.In other areas Fletcher Challenge Ltd. ups its ownership of SouthernPetroleum NL to 98.6% with responses to its new NZ$.75 per offer.## POISON PILLSHartwell Petroleum Ltd. (Calgary) adopts a shareholder rights planwith a 20% trigger.NUI Corporation adopts a plan with a 15% trigger.  LyondellPetroChemical Co. adopts a plan with a 15% trigger.And in a series of plan renewals: McDermott International Inc. adoptsa new plan with a 15% trigger.Sonat Inc. adopts a replacement plan with a 15% trigger.Mobil Corp. updates its plan with a 15% trigger replacement.Halliburton extends its current plan for another 10 years with a new15% trigger.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RESERVES ON THE MARKETPublic Service Enterprise Group Inc., in lockstep with other utilityholding companies, decides to sell off its Energy Development Corp.,one of the largest independents. EDC has been selling someproperties already in anticipation of the divestiture. EDC operates in13 states, in the Gulf of Mexico, and onshore and offshore in the UK,Argentina, Senegal, Tunisia and China. Net reserves estimated at 900BCFGE, 67% gas. EDC has 230 employees. Morgan Stanley hired to do the deed.  Enserch Exploration Inc. hires Chemical Securities Inc. to assist in the sale of its Rocky Mountainarea properties, acquired earlier this year in the Dalen Corp.acquisition.Parker & Parsley Petroleum puts its Parker & Parsley Australia unit onthe market. P&P hasn't decided whether to float out the company orsell it directly. The assets were initially acquired in the Bridge Oilhostile takeover, but have been enhanced by additional capital anddiscoveries since.  Expected price is around A$200 to A$300 million.The unit has assets in the Surat Basin in Queensland, the Cooper Basinin South Australia, the Ottway Basin and Gippsland Basin in Victoriaand the Barrow Basin in Western Australia, along with a 22.5% interestin permit ZOCA-13 in the Timor Sea, on which the Bayu discovery wasmade. The last time I checked, it also had substantial interests inthe Harriet Oilfield, offshore Western Australia.Alliance Resources PLC reports plans to sell off its U.S. oil and gasproperties.Equis Energy Corp. hires Peters & Co. Ltd. to find a merger partner oracquirer after its bank puts it into default under its creditfacility.Aviva Petroleum hires Dillon, Read & Co. to find a merger partner orbuyer.Talisman Energy Inc. plans to sell off 100 to 125 of its properties topay down debt.## OILFIELD ASSETS ON THE MARKETTotal Petroleum North America puts its 56,000 BOPD refinery in ArkCity, KS, on the market.  Hires Smith Barney Inc. Reports it willclose the refinery if it cannot find a buyer. That would be thefifth refinery to close in Kansas in the last 10 years. The refineryemploys 200.Texaco Inc. reports it is still looking at downstream asset sales,mergers and joint ventures.Helmerich & Payne Inc. hires Smith Barney Inc. to consider the sale ofits chemical operations, Natural Gas Odorizing Inc. (Baytown, TX).Hanson PLC reports it will sell 62%, or about 18.8 million shares, of Suburban Propane it acquired in the 1993 acquisition of QuantumChemical. Suburban to restructure as Suburban Propane Partners LP.Suburban to also issue $425 million of debt. Hanson figures togain about $771 million in the two deals.Ecopetrol plans to sell its stakes in eight gas, petrochemical andthermoelectric plants to raise about $250 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MAJOR STAKESCentennial Associates LP, Centennial Associates and Joseph H. Reich &Co. sell 97,000 shares of Abraxas Petroleum Corp. on Nov. 27 and 28 at$6.597 to $6.625 per, reducing their stake to 265,700 shares, or4.59%.Trinity 1 Fund purchases 303,700 shares of Kirby Corp. for $16.56 to$17.56 each in November, raising its stake to 2.187 million shares, or8.3%.Snyder Oil Corp. sells its remaining 916,040 shares of AmericanExploration in early December at $10.075 to $10.70 per.Gamco Investors group purchases 304,700 shares of National ConvenienceStores in late November at $26.76 to $26.88 per, giving it a 5% stake.MacKenzie Financial purchases 416,000 shares of Serenpet on Nov. 30for $2.72 per, giving it 1.19 million shares, or 5.4%.Gordon Barry sells 453,525 shares of Breakwater Resources Ltd. inAugust, reducing his stake to 11,975 shares.Murray Edwards sells 70,000 shares of Canadian Natural Resources Ltd.,reducing his stake to 2.3 million shares held indirectly.Richard Bonnycastle sells 50,000 shares of Gulfstream Resources CanadaLtd. for C$5 per, reducing his stake to 150,000 shares heldindirectly.Woodland Venture Fund group sells 80,000 shares of TN Energy ServicesAcquisition at $5.20 per, reducing its stake to 4.8%, or 90,000shares.FMR Corp. purchases a net 689,500 shares of Renaissance Energy Ltd.for $21.99 to $23.44 per, raising its stake to 12.9 million shares.Heartland Advisors Inc. ups its stake in International Colin EnergyCorp. by 1.1 million shares through mid-October at $5 to $5.675 per,giving it 2.39 million shares, or 18.5%.A group of nine buyers purchased 2.475 million common and 98,000preferred shares of Eagle Energy Corp. from two directors andofficers. Common represented about 33% stake in Eagle.Conwest Exploration Co. Ltd. purchased 203,000 shares at C$1.75 toC$1.80 per of Paragon Petroleum Corp. to raise its stake to 5.3million shares.Trimark Investment Management Inc.-directed funds purchase 1.25million shares of and Tarragon Oil and Gas Ltd., raising their staketo 4.26 million shares, or about a 10.2% stake.The British government sells its remaining 101 million shares of British Petroleum PLC, a 1.8% stake, to the market through SBC Warburg, receiving  5.08 per.  CMB NV trades its 26% stake in Arethusa (Offshore) to Diamond Offshore Drilling for a 7% stake inDiamond.North American Gas Investment Trust PLC sells its entire 63.035million share stake (19.45%) in Alliance Resources PLC on Nov. 29 to Trans Arabian Energy Ltd. for 2.5 pence per. Trans Arabian is aconsortium of Middle East investors led by Patrick Maley, ex-Mobil andTransworld exec. Maley takes over as executive chairman of Allianceand a new managing director is appointed.Terry Alexander, president of Arakis Energy Corp., sells 198,387shares of the company in August, acquiring same from options at C$4.71per and selling next day, August 4, at C$9. per (some otherinteresting maneuvers by other directors at the same time).Boral Ltd. continues to lower its stake in Magellan Petroleum Corp.,selling 297,848 shares between Nov. 22 and Dec. 6 at $2.31 to$2.82 per, reducing its stake to 1.42 million shares, or 5.8%.Banco Bilbao Vizcaya SA ups its stake in Repsol SA from 4.5% to 5%.The consortium of Agip, Shell and Conoco finally is assigned the 49%stake in Czech Refinery Co. it negotiated for some months ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BANKRUPTCIES AND RESTRUCTURINGSDiamond Trading and Pipeline Corp. takes Chapter 11 bankruptcy inDallas.Yancey Bit & Tool Inc. takes Chapter 11 in Houston.BVM Corp., dba BV Oil Tool, takes Chapter 11 in Denver.Polaris Resources Inc. takes Chapter 7 in Denver.Basic Earth Science Systems Inc. (Denver) reports that due tounscheduled shutdown of several of its wells and an unsuccessfulworkover of another, it failed to satisfy the liquidity covenant inits loan agreement with its bank. Doesn't expect to satisfy thatcovenant until the end of March at the earliest.Kish Resources PLC (Ireland) has been suspended from trading, pendingclarification of its financial position. Kish is negotiating withlenders and creditors to restructure loans and trade debt.  HuntwayPartners LP misses a debt payment on its debentures and is placed indefault on Nov. 30, 1995.## RESTRUCTURINGSTexaco E&P Inc. reports it will consolidate its Bakersfield Division,which operates its Kern River Field, with the West Coast Business Unitof its Denver Division, which operates the rest of itsCalifornia properties, in Bakersfield under Stephen Hadden. AlanKleier is appointed assistant division manager to lead the WesternCalifornia Business Unit. About 35 Denver employees will be offeredtransfers to Bakersfield. (I personally like both places, but expectsome cries of anguish.)Wainoco Oil Co. begins a corporate office reorganization. Willeliminate all remaining oil and gas personnel in the Houston office,transfer corporate accounting and tax responsibilities to its Calgaryoffice and move the few remaining Houston employees to smaller officesafter the sale of its Conroe Field property.Pennzoil reports all European operations of Pennzoil Products Co. willbe managed from new offices in Frankfurt, Germany. Newwarehousing and sales offices will be built there and an increasedsales staff will be hired. In addition, a third European division willbe created, the Eastern Division, to handle opportunitiesin the former Soviet Union. Pennzoil to also consolidate all of itsproduction facilities in Europe to its plant in Barcelona, Spain. Willclose its plant in Zaandam, Netherlands.Denison Mines Ltd. shareholders approve a restructuring of its shares.New common shares will be issued to existing shareholders on the basisof one common share for each existing class A and classB share and 25 new common shares for each existing preferred share.Corporate and mortgage lenders to also receive 18% of the new commonshares and promissory notes aggregating C$38.6 million,interest free until July 2000.Coplex Resources NL (Australia) will float off its Philippines assetsthrough a new company, Coplex Energy Corp. Inc., which will list onthe Philippine exchange. The new company will pay A$40 million for thecurrent assets; money to be raised in a public offering in 1996.Coplex hires Belson-PrimeEast Capital Asia Inc. and Shadforths Ltd. toimplement the float. Coplex to acquire a 25% to 40% stake in Capital Drilling Ltd., which owns the semi, Pioneer Driller, and willtransfer that interest to CEC in the future.Ecuadorian President Sixto Duran orders a total restructuring of PetroEcuador and accepts the resignations of its president and all ofthe managers of its subsidiaries. Appoints General Patricio Lopez aspresident of the state company.Potomac Electric Power Co. and Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. announcethe organizational structure and senior execs of the combined company,Constellation Energy Corp., to be formed after regulatory approvals ofthe merger, probably in 1997. Gas functions and electric functions ofgeneration, transmission and distribution will be separated intodistinct units. A special District of Columbia unit will handle all ofthe peculiarities of that location.San Diego Gas and Electric execs report formation of a holding companycalled Enova Corp. for SDGE and its unregulated subsidiaries. Alsoannounce new executive management for both companies. Enova will havefive unregulated subs: Enova Energy Management, Enova Financial, Enova Technologies, Califia and Pacific Diversified Capital. StephenBaum, exec VP, will take the jobs of president and CEO ofEnova Corp. Executive VP Donald Felsinger will become president andCEO of the utility.Chevron to restructure its U.S. gasoline marketing business. Willcombine its 210-employee SanRamon, CA, office into the 155-employee La Habra, CA, office, forminga Western Sales office to handle the West Coast, Nevada, Arizona, NewMexico and West Texas. Will combine its Houston andAtlanta offices in Atlanta to form a new Eastern Sales Center.Headquarters and specialized support will remain in San Francisco. Thenew reorganization will be titled Retail Marketing. Approximately130 positions will be eliminated, about a 6% cut. Operations, businessservices and station development will be consolidated and managed on anationwide basis. Some of the 150 employees in the San Franciscooffice to be transferred.Chevron Chemical Corp. also will be reorganized. Two Houstondivisions, Aromatics and Olefins, will be merged into one about 240employees affected to create a U.S. Chemical Division.Some job cuts to be experienced. The Oronite division to remain in SanRamon. A new international group will be formed in San Ramon to focuson marketing products worldwide.Conoco Inc. will merge its worldwide upstream and downstream businessdevelopment units under Michael Stinson as VP.Xavier Mines Ltd. registers with the SEC to transfer its incorporationfrom Ontario to Delaware.Bounty Group Inc. shareholders to vote on whether to take companyprivate, becoming a wholly-owned sub of Norse A/S, sub of BountyFinance A/S, which owns 68 of Bounty Group.Energen will float off 45% of its E&P division, half to be sold inSouth Africa and half to be sold internationally. New company to benamed Energy Africa Ltd.## IN A LITTLE NEWS ABOUT EMPLOYMENTThe American Management Association reports in response to a recentlyconducted survey, large and medium-size companies report plans forsome hiring, and half of the survey's respondents plan tocut some staff. Jobs to be created require less supervisory andmanagerial expertise (less money), but require a more technicalknow-how. Middle managers continue to feel the brunt of the cuts,amounting to 15% to 20% of total cuts. However, professional andtechnical employees account for 22% of the planned cuts, while 32% ofnew jobs created are in the professional and technical areas.In a bit of a surprise to unions worldwide, West Australian PetroleumPty Ltd. negotiates an agreement with its unions to revise paymodels. Pay raises to be based on individual employee performancetogether with a company-wide productivity bonus. Agreement runs forthree years. Unions cautious.Shell induces a profit-related bonus scheme for the top 1% of itsstaff worldwide. Payments worth up to 20% of salary for about 1,000senior execs. In addition, execs get share options.MobilMobil Corp. plans to cut an additional 530 jobs, about 500 from Mobil E&P USMobil E&P US and the rest at Mobil Drilling. Cutsrepresent a 16% reduction. Cuts on top of recent announcements.Occidental PetroleumOccidental Petroleum cuts at Oxy USA give Tulsaemployees of at least five years with the company a severance packageof up to 72 weeks of pay based on years of service. Oxy to pay out theseverance over a series of months, continuing the savings plan,retirement plan and medical benefits while the checkscontinue.HS Resources Inc. plans to cut 40 jobs.Shell Chemical to cut 700 jobs over the next two years.Scottish Power PLC will cut 350 jobs at its new Manweb utility sub. Cosmo Oil Co. will cut 700 employees, or about 19% of its staff, by1999.## STOCK CHANGESInput/Output Inc. board authorizes a two-for-one split of common.Chesapeake Energy Corp. board declares a three-for-two stock split.The Madison Gas and Electric Co. board authorizes a split of itscommon, in the form of a one share dividend for each two shares held.Concord Energy Inc. announces a one-for-five reverse split.Hallwood Energy Partners LP declares a dividend of one new Class Cunit for each 15 HEP units currently held. Units will tradeindependently from current units and will have a set distribution of25 cents per.Forest Oil Corp. announces a one-for-five reverse split of its commonfollowing its 60 million share offering.## EXEC GYRATIONSCanadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. president and CEO, BernardIsaultier, resigns "to pursue other interests," principally a newconsulting company. Board elects David Hentschel, formerly vicechairman to the job.Tom Brown Inc. welcomes back William R. Granberry into the fold,naming him president and COO. Company also names exec VP Peter Schereras CEO of its Retex Gathering Company Inc. sub, and William Munn IIwill serve as president and COO of Retex.Phillips Petroleum Co. announces the retirement of Sr. VP and generalcounsel, Bill Paul, and exec VP of E&P, John Whitmore. Bryan Whitworthappointed to the former job and Knut Aam, currently president of Phillips NorwayPhillips Norway, will assume the job of Sr. VPworldwide E&P. Bill Parker promoted to Aam's old job, and LaveleFrantz, formerly operations manager in Norway, takes over as VPworldwide drilling and production.John Whitmore immediately moves over to be named chairman and CEO of Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc., succeeding Clark Johnson, who isretiring.Continental Land & Fur Co. Inc. (New Orleans) appoints R. PaulLoveless as general manager of exploration and development, primarilymanaging its oil and gas working interest activities.Company has about 80 MMCFGEPD net production, with working interestsin 70 platforms and 300 wells, principally in the Gulf.Valero Energy Corp. moves Joe Becraft up from exec. VP to Presidentand COO.James Hackett, Sr. VP of NGC Corp. and president of its Trident NGLTrident NGL, resigns, takes over as exec VP of businessdevelopment and strategic planning for Panhandle Eastern. BruceWithers Jr., chairman and CEO, will assume the jobs until areplacement is found.Hawkins Energy Corp. (Tulsa) chairman, John Hawkins, resigns theposition to study international projects for Hawkins Oil & Gas Inc.Thomas Ostrye, president, also takes the chairmanship.Arakis Energy Corp. chairman and president, Terry Alexander, resigns.John McLeod was named president and CEO. Arakis also will moveincorporation from BC to Calgary, Alberta (bet you canfigure this out easily).Pennzoil Co. ups titles on three execs. Thomas Hamilton promoted fromgroup VP of the oil and gas division to exec VP. David Alderson, groupVP of finance and treasurer, to group VP finance, accounting andtreasurer. Linda Condit, corporate secretary, to VP and corporatesecretary.Eastern Group (Alexandria, VA) announces promotions. Clifton A. Brownto exec VP, directing the E&P business unit. Mark Eisenhower to execVP, head of Power Systems business unit. BenMescher to Sr. VP of Power Systems; Michael Decker to VP, industrialmarketing of the energy marketing unit. Ben Hadden to VP of themarketing unit. Directors appoint for various units are RonaldCoe for info technology, John King to gas trading, Charles Schultz toassociate general counsel and Lisa Yoho to regulatory affairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MERGERS AND JOINT VENTURES## JOINT VENTURESAmerican Exploration Co. (Houston), Louis Dreyfus Natural Gas Corp.and Seisgen Resources LLC form an exploration JV for Wilcox prospectsin Lavaca Co., Texas Gulf Coast. American has leased or acquiredseismic options covering 20 Upper and Lower Wilcox prospectsidentified with 2-D seismic data. The JV will begin a 137-square mileproprietary 3-D seismic survey in early 1996 and plans a drillingprogram after interpretation is completed.American to hold a 52.5% WI in the JV; Louis Dreyfus, 35% and Seisgen,12.5% (that's a lot of dough for seismic). American and Dreyfus arealready drilling Wilcox shots in nearby areas.Petrobank Energy and Resources Ltd. (Calgary) acquires a seismicoption on the 16,350-acre McGill-Stewart Ranch in Kenedy County, SouthTexas Gulf Coast. No wells have been drilled on the ranch since the1970s. Petrobank will pay $50,000 in cash for the option and commit toa seismic acquisition and reprocessing program estimated at $150,000.By March 20, 1996, the company must exercise its option to take a1-year, 74% NRI lease for $150,000 in cash and 400,000 of its sharesand commit to a 9,000-foot depth or greater well. Lease has asix-month continuous drilling clause.KCS Energy Inc. (Houston) joins a three-year exploration JV with Hawkins Oil of Michigan Inc. (Tulsa) and the former principals of Savoy Oil & Gas Inc., who retained the rights to explore on150,000 gross acres (56,250 net) acquired from Shell in the heart ofthe Niagaran Reef fairway in the northern part of Lower Michigan, andthe rights to 17,000 miles of Shell proprietary seismic data. Savoyreports plans to redrill the State Kalkaska H 1-3 near Shell'sabandoned 1-3 well.Frontier Natural GasFrontier Natural Gas Corp. (OKC) reports anagreement with a "sizable" seismic vendor to reprocess and interpretover 1,100 line miles of 2-D seismic data over the Breton andChandelier Sound areas of the Gulf of Mexico. Frontier is looking forbright spots.SK Resources and The Hillman Company form a JV, Broughton Associates,to explore in the hot East Texas patch reef play. SK has reportedlyaccumulated some 30,000 acres in the play. Acreage prices in the playarea are going through the roof; some talk of $1,500 per acre offers.Delhi Gas Pipeline Corp. plans a 275 MMCFGPD expansion of its EastTexas pipeline system to accommodate the production from the aboveplay. Delhi will construct 85 miles of 20-inch pipe and8,000 hp of compression and increase the capacity of its existing Akerand Teague treating facilities.Texaco reports it will spend $20 million for its share of the355-square mile 3-D seismic exploration JV with LL&E Exploration inthe Terrebonne Bay area of South Louisiana. Expects results of thesurvey by mid-1997.United Petroleum (Knoxville, TN) sub, Jackson-United Petroleum Corp.,forms a JV to farm out acreage from Penn Virginia Oil & Gas Corp., subof Penn Virginia Corp. Jackson-United to drill three wells on PennVirginia leases in Pike Co., KY.Deal includes an option to extend the JV for three additional wells.Penn Virginia keeps rights to purchase the gas produced from thewells.Equity Oil Co. reports the first three wells in the exploration JVwith Slawson Exploration Inc. based on the 41.5-square mile 3-Dseismic survey in the Orion area of the Sacramento Basin of northernCalifornia were all successes. Two of the wells tested over 3MMCFGPD. Twenty anomalies were defined by the survey.The Flextrend Development Co. and Tatham Offshore Inc. JV on theformer Tatham Gulf properties found 100 feet of vertical pay at4,800 feet in the Viosca Knoll 817 A-1 well. The high angle well isproducing 30 MMCFGPD.3DX Technologies Inc. reports that the Yearwood No. 1 Frio test flowed1.15 MMCFGPD with a FTP of 1,600 psi. The well is the fifth completionin the 3-D seismic JV led by Cox & Perkins in the Texas Gulf Coast.Cox & Perkins holds a 55% WI in the well while 3DXholds a 17.5%.Pittencrieff Resources reports disappointment with the results ofdrilling in the Flour Bluff-Pita Island fields near Corpus Christi. InAugust, the Newsletter reported that Pittencrief had put its NorthAmerican assets on the market. The Netherland, SewallNetherland,Sewall & Associates engineering estimate cut proven reserves by over50%, to 17 MMBOE. Chief Executive Officer Heneaghan blames the Corpusproperties for the majority of the drop. Pittencrieff sets up a 3-Dseismic study of the fields to try to better develop remainingreserves and will halt drilling until the results of the survey arestudied. No comment from the other 50% partner, Fletcher Challenge,which purchased its interest from Enron for $45 million late lastyear.Forest Oil Corp. reports that the West Cameron Block 615 wildcat found333 net pay in the vertical hole and 472 TVT feet of pay in thesidetrack. Forest holds 25% WI in the block, having soldanother 25% to Santa Fe Energy Resources after the block was acquiredin the 1995 lease sale. Forest has a 50% WI in two adjoining blocks:West Cameron 616 and 617. Plans a 3-D survey on those tracts.Alberta adopts a uniform province royalty on all oilsands projects.All projects to pay a minimum royalty of 1%; after companies haverecovered all costs, including a return allowance equal to thefederal long-term bond rate, the royalty rises to 25% based on netproject revenues. The revision to be phased in over 10 years. Provincehopes the change will kickstart new projects.The Hunt Oil Co. Inc. and PanCanadian Petroleum Ltd. JV, along with Mobil Oil Canada Ltd., cut a deal with the Canadian and Newfoundlandgovernments to combine the four exploration licenses they hold inoffshore and onshore Western Newfoundland and to extend their rightsthrough January, 2000 four years beyond the original term of two ofthe licenses. The JV has drilled on one of its two licenses from anonshore location in extreme southwestern Newfoundland and by allreports has discovered major reserves. The JV then farmed-in the Mobilblocks and currently is drilling a deviated hole from a land locationat the extreme northern tip of the Port au Port Peninsula. The JV hasalready committed to drilling another well in 1996, probably offshorefrom its first well using Rowan Company Inc.'s Gorilla IV jackup. Thegroup commits to at least four wells to get the consolidation.The above has set off a frenzy of activity in the area, includingseismic and drilling plans.Talisman Energy farms into the 178,000 hectare block owned by Vinland Petroleum Inc. and plans a directional well from an onshorelocation in the near future. Oilexco Inc. reports cutting a deal with Vinland to hold a 25% WI inthat well. All that activity causes the Newfoundland government to putup 1 million hectares of its western onshore acreage for bid. Acreageto be divided into 31 parcels and bids due in March 1996.Northwest Natural Gas Co. (Portland, OR), through its Canadian E&Psub, Canor Energy Ltd., and NIPSCO Energy Inc.'s Canadian affiliate,Southlake Energy Inc., form a JV to develop oil and gas properties inWestern Canada. Canor will manage the properties and both parents willinject additional capital with the objective of combining their subsinto a new company by the end of 1997.Circle Energy Inc. joins United Compass Resources Ltd. in a JV programin SE Saskatchewan to earn a 50% WI in several thousand acres byexploration and exploitation drilling.According to the Rocky Mountain Oil Journal, TransTexas has changedits mind about shooting a major 3-D survey on its 110,000 acres in theLodgepole trend that it acquired in a JV with Phoenix Energy Co. TheRMOJ reports TransTexas has hired First Union Corp. to find a buyerfor the block.Shell Offshore, Amerada Hess and Pennzoil pool assets and plandevelopment of five Garden Banks block discoveries. Shell's Enchiladasub-salt discovery in Block 128, along with its discoveries in Blocks83, 84 and 127, and Amerada's discovery in Block 172 will be developedtogether, with platforms in Block 128and later in Block 172. Shell will operate the project, which isexpected to produce about 300 MMCFGPD and 40,000 BLPD when fullydeveloped.Mike Baugh, president of BHP's Australia/Asia region, reports in anarticle in the December Journal of Petroleum Technology thatgovernment takes of discoveries vary widely in the region. Malaysiaand Vietnam have about 15% to 20% higher takes than the ZOCA areabetween Australia and Indonesia, and 30% higher than Australia proper,35% higher than the Gulf of Mexico and 60% higher than inthe U.K. He gives an example of net cash flow to companies fromproduction from a 160 MMB field in 300 feet of water is about $300million in Australia, $200 million in Papua New Guinea,$100 million in China, less than $80 million in Thailand, Indonesiaand the Philippines and about $50 million in Malaysia.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996NEW COMPANIES, NAME CHANGES, MOVESThe Williams Companies Inc. and Panhandle Eastern Corp. (now PanEnergyCorp.) form a new company, Altra Energy Technologies LLC, to combinePanEnergy Information Services Co. and the energy networks, electronictrading system and energy information management systems operated byWilliams Information & Trading Systems Co. Headquarters will be inHouston. David Tolson will be president and CEO.Doug Rosentreter forms The Phoenix Center to provide seismic dataprocessing services in Houston. Phone is 713-974-6907.Hydro Texaco Holdings A/S and OK Petroleum AB form a new company,Scanlube, to supply lubricating oil to Scandinavia andthe Baltic states. Hydro Texaco is a JV of Norsk Hydro A/S and Texaco Inc. Scanlube to be headquartered at the old OK Petroleum plantat Gothenborg. Hydro Texaco to phase out its plant in Copenhagen.Clearwater Inc. (Pittsburgh) forms a new division to specialize in gasprocessing, to develop, manufacture and market chemicals and productsfor gas processing. New division under Matthew Vavro as generalmanager.Panhandle Eastern Corp. changes name to PanEnergy Corp. Its pipelineunits will retain their names while unregulated units will adopt thenew name.Smalls' Oilfield Services Corp. changes name to Superior EnergyServices Inc. after the merger with the Superior Group.The merger of Public Service Co. of Colorado and Southwestern PublicService Co. will create New Century Energies (give me a break!).Dawson Geophysical Co. sets up a new district office in Houston underMike Pruitt.Unit Drilling Co. opens a new office in Houston under Dennis Brandl asVP and operations manager. Unit operates three rigs in South and EastTexas and Louisiana and plans to expand into the market for deeperdrilling rigs. Unit also has offices in Tulsa and Moore, OK.NorAm Energy Corp. opens a new office in Tulsa, operated by NorAm Field Services Inc. under Kevin Holder.Equitable Resources Inc. opens a Washington DC office to coordinatedealings with federal agencies and legislators.Chevron's Natural Gas Business Unit opens a new marketing office inBirmingham, AL under Joe MacLean.The Expro Group establishes a new U.S. operating arm, Expro AmericasInc., in new regional offices in Houston under Sandy Hunter.GeoQuest moves its data management engineering group from CorteMadera, CA, to Houston.Shell Oil Co. will cause construction of a 30,000-square footbuilding, Shell Learning Center, taking a four-year lease.Exploration Technologies Inc. leases 8,188 square feet in theWestchase Business Center in West Houston.Woodside Petroleum board bows to pressure and approves a move ofcorporate headquarters from Melbourne to Perth, Australia. Only abouthalf of its 50 employees expected to accept transfer.Chevron renews its lease on 242,000 square feet in 2 and 4 HoustonCenter, downtown Houston.Enron Corp. renews its lease on 235,000 square feet in 3 Allen Center,downtown Houston.OxyChem will relocate 60 employees from Niagara Falls, NY, to itsoffices in 5 Greenway Plaza, West Houston, renewing its lease thereand upping space to 120,000 square feet.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FINANCING AND REDEMPTIONS## EQUITYFortune Petroleum Corp. private places approximately 628,000 shares ofits common stock to finance its acquisition offshore Louisiana fromPetroFina S.A.Forest Oil Corp. files to offer 69 million shares of its common stock,including 54 million offered by the company, 5.3 million sharesoffered by Saxon Petroleum and 9 million shares subject tounderwriters' overallotment options.Vintage Petroleum, Inc. sold 2.79 million common at $21 per. Vintageplans to use the net proceeds of approximately $49.6 million to fundits acquisition of producing oil and gas properties in Argentina.Seacor Holdings, Inc. sold 3.162 million shares at $24.25 per. Seacorplans to use part the net proceeds of approximately $37 million tofund a part of its acquisition of five vessels from CompagnieNationale de Navigation.General Public Utilities Corporation sold 4 million shares of commonat $32.875 per, resulting in net proceeds of $127.9 million.Star Gas PartnersStar Gas Partners offers 2.6 million units via Lehman BrothersLehman Brothers.Coastal Caribbean Oils & Minerals files to offer 4 million commonshares to the company's shareholders. The price per share and otherterms are not determined. Coastal Caribbean plans to use the proceedsfrom the sale for general corporate purposes and to continuelitigation against the state of Florida.TN Energy Services Acquisition Corp. files to offer 3.9 million sharesof common stock and 781,255 shares of preferred stock.Harken Energy Corp. files to offer 1 million shares of common stock.Snyder Oil Corp. files to offer $1.567 million in common stock.Tatham Offshore, Inc., a sub of DeepTech International Inc., offersrights, exercisable to purchase a warrant at $0.50 per.U. S. Energy Corp. files to offer 893,486 shares of common stock,valued at $3.4 million.## WORLDWIDE EQUITY## CANADANufort Resources Inc. private places flow-through shares with netproceeds of C$300,000. Funds will be used for two drilling projectsOntario, Canada.Deep Basin Energy Inc. private places 1.125 million common shares atC$0.70 per. Each share has a one-year hold on trading and included awarrant for option to purchase a share at $0.90 per before Oct. 30,1997. Funds from the sale will be used for drilling and seismic work.United Tri-Star Resources Ltd. private places 4.09 million commonshares at C$1.50 per. Oban Petroleums Inc. private places 2 million shares to 667349 AlbertaLtd. for C$200,000. Shareholders of Oban to sell additional shares to667349 to give it a 50.1% stake in Oban.Barrington Petroleum Ltd. private places C$5 million in flow-throughcommon stock.Search Energy Inc. private places 233,337 units for gross proceeds ofC$140,000, or C$0.60 per.Each unit is one common and one-half purchase warrant. One wholewarrant entitles holder to purchase an additional common share at C$1per until Nov. 30, 1997.Baytex Energy Ltd. sold 1.428 million units for gross proceeds ofC$4.998 million. Each unit consisted of one flow-through class A shareand one-half class A share purchase warrant. Each warrant convertibleto class A share for C$3.75 until Dec. 1, 1996.Abacan Resource Corp. files to offer 11 million common shares atUS$2.4375 per via Oppenheimer & Co. and Howard Weil LabouisseFriedrichs. Plans for US$36.6 million gross proceeds from the saleinclude funding an exploratory well on concession Block 309 in theBenin basin region in western Nigeria.Grad and Walker Resources Ltd. private places 2 million specialwarrants, exercisable to Grad and Walker Energy Corp. common shares atC$7.75 per. Also offers 2 million warrants exercisable into a treasuryGrad and Walker share at C$7.75 per.Claude Resources Inc. sells C$3 million worth of treasury units atCC$2.15 per. Each unit was one common share and one-half sharepurchase warrant exercisable for two years at C$2.50 per share.Pursuit Resources Inc. to issue 3 million common shares at C$0.62 per,725,000 share purchase warrants and a C$2.25 million, 6.75%convertible subordinated debenture. Share purchase warrantsentitle holder to acquire common shares at C$0.75 per until March 1,1999. The debenture is convertible into 3 million common shares atC$0.75 per.Pengrowth Gas Corp. files to offer trust units via RBC DominionSecurities Inc. Pengrowth to use proceeds from proposed offering topurchase working interests in oil and gas properties in Alberta.Cephalon Resource Corp. private places 2 million flow-through commonshares at CC$0.20 per.Blue Range Resources Corp. private places C$2.9 million flow-throughshares, and may offer an additional C$1 million of flow-throughshares.Startech Energy Inc. to issue 1 million special warrants at C$6.25per. Each warrant entitles holder to one common share. Plans for theproceeds from the offering include funding an acquisition insoutheast Saskatchewan.Camberly Energy private places up to 1 million flow-through commonshares at C$1.25 per, for gross proceeds of C$1.25 million.Torrington Resources Ltd. private places 652,000 flow-through sharesat C$3.65 per for proceeds of C$2.38 million.Golden Trump Resources Ltd. increases its private placement offeringto 1.5 million units, up from 1 million units, at C$0.35 per, insteadof C$0.50 per. Each unit consists of one common share andone non-transferable share purchase warrant, convertible to one commonshare at C$0.35 per until the end of 1996.Gothic Resources Inc. private places 2 million warrants at C$1 per.Each warrant is one common share and one-half of a non-transferablecommon share purchase warrant. Each full warrant convertibleto one common share at C$1.25 per during a one-year period.Tappit Resources Ltd. sells 815,290 units consisting of 4.07 millioncommon shares, 1.6 million purchase warrants convertible to commonshares and 407,645 agent's warrants. Gross funds raisedwere C$978,348.Transwest Energy Inc. private places C$2.7 million flow-through commonshares at C$1.09 per.Proceeds to be used for its oil exploration program in the Provostarea of Alberta during the next three months.First Star Energy Ltd. private places 1.07 units at C$0.15 per for netproceeds of C$161,500.Each unit is one class A common and one warrant convertible to a classA common share at C$0.20 per before Dec. 15, 1996.Elk Point Resources files to offer 3.3 million flow-through common at C$0.47 per via James Capel Canada Inc. and FirstEnergy Capital Corp.## WORLDWIDE EQUITYCairn Energy PLC places 4.37 million ordinary shares at 111.5 penceper.Northern Petroleum private places $1.5 million worth of shares.Stolt Nielsen SA files to offer 7.475 million class B shares,including 975,000 shares subject to underwriters' overallotmentoptions, Lazard Freres & Co., NatWest Securities Ltd., Smith BarneyInc., Fearnley Fonds A/S and Pareto Fonds AS.Coplex Resources N.L. private places 23 million shares at A25 centseach.ENI S.p.A. (Italy) offers American Depositary Shares, eachrepresenting 10 ENI shares via Morgan Guaranty Trust Co.Sands Petroleum (Sweden) issues shares, raising net proceeds of SKr176 million. Sands to use proceeds to finance its acquisition of NorthSea oil assets from Finland's Neste group.## DEBTTenneco issues $600 million in long-term debt to refinance theshort-term debt it took on in its $1.27 billion purchase of the MobilMobil Corp. plastics division. The offering includes $300 millionof 6.5%, 10-year notes and $300 million of 7.25%, 30-year debentures. Saba Petroleum Co. offers $11 million of 9% convertible seniorsubordinated debentures due Dec. 2005 via Van Kasper & Co. Debenturesconvertible to common stock at $8.75 per.Vintage Petroleum, Inc. offers $150 million of its 9% seniorsubordinated notes due 2005, with net proceeds of $145.3 million.Union Texas Petroleum issues $100 million in medium-term notes withterms of seven and twelve years and interest rates varying from 6.51%to 6.81%. Proceeds to repay outstanding debt. Ohio Resources Corp. announces that a financing agreement with C. M. Oliver and Co. has been terminated.Apache Corp. registers $250 million in remarketed notes. Terms andtime of sale to be announced.Xavier Mines issues C$29 million in non-guaranteed corporate bonds dueNov. 17, 1997 at an interest rate of 12%.GATX Capital issues $300 million in notes via Salomon Brothers.Enron Corp. issues 10.5 million exchangeable notes at % for $21.75per via Goldman, Sachs & Co., Merrill Lynch & Co. and Salomon BrothersInc.Star Gas Propane, L.P. offers $85 million of first mortgage notes due2009 via Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette and Lehman Brothers.KCS Energy Inc. private places $150 million aggregate principal ofsenior notes, due 2003.United Cities Gas Co. issues an aggregate of $22 million inmedium-term notes at rates ranging from 6.2% to 6.67% with varyingmaturity dates via Smith Barney, Paine Webber and AG Edwards.Clark USA, Inc. places $175 million of 10 7/8% 10-year senior notes.Norsk Hydro files shelf for $650 million in debt securities.The sub of Tullow Oil PLC (Dublin), Tullow Pakistan (Developments)Ltd., issues $10 million of convertible loan notes.Alpine Oil Services Corp. signs a letter of intent to issue up to $3million of convertible, redeemable subordinate debentures with afive-year term at 9% and convertible into common shares at$1 per.## CREDIT FACILITIESOilex International Investments, Inc. terminates its letter of intentwith Northridge Capital to raise $1 million, because it needs a largerfacility.Plains Resources Inc. finances its acquisition of all of Marathon Oil Co.'s upstream oil and gas assets in the Illinois Basinwith a $42 million loan from Internationale Nederlanden (U.S.) CapitalCorp. It also ups its revolving credit facility to $75 million from$65 million. The banking group for the revolving credit facility isINCC as agent, Den norske Bank AS, First Interstate Bank of Texas,N.A., The First National Bank of Boston and Texas Commerce BankNational Association.Reading & Bates Corp. gets a five-year revolving credit and letter ofcredit line of $55 million with Christiania Bank. It also sells aten-year lease of semi MG Hulme Jr., with a provision to buyback therig at the end of the lease. Some proceeds from both transactions tohelp repay loans with Internationale Nederlanden Bank N.V.Universal Seismic Assocs. Inc. gets a $7 million financial packagefrom Resources Investors Management Co.Geokinetics Inc. gets approval for a 10-year, $5 million debtfinancing for its wholly owned Quantum Geophysical, Inc. sub.Purcell Energy Ltd. gets a C$1.8 million revolving credit facility torepay its C$1.02 million convertible debenture. It also acquired allits 1.2 million common shares allowed under its normal course issuerbid, at an average of C$0.32 cents per.The Islamic Development Bank backs $30 million worth of crude oilimports to Morocco from Saudi Arabia and $15 million to Pakistan fromSaudi Arabia.NorAm Energy Corp. closed two credit facilities totaling $550 million,including an amended $400 million revolving credit facility and a $150million term-loan facility.PanAtlas Energy Inc. converts its remaining debenture into 750,000common shares, and issues 1.2 million common shares on all outstandingshare-purchase warrants, for proceeds of C$372,000.Ultra Petroleum Corp. to conclude negotiations for mezzanine andproject financing for development of its South Ceder Creek Field.LaTex Resources Inc. retains Rauscher, PierceRauscher, Pierce andClark to develop and implement a consolidated financial plan.Triton Energy gets an extended comprehensive loan guarantee to supportabout $45 million from the Export-Import Bank of the U.S. and fundedby NationsBank N.A. United Cities Propane Gas of Tennessee, Inc.places a $5 million term loan through NationsBank of Tennessee.Lomak Petroleum Inc. increases its credit facility to $250 millionfrom $150 million, gets its interest rate lowered and has somecovenants favorably amended with future borrowings on an unsecuredbasis.Oil Capital (New York), with a consortium, gets $2 billion infinancing to fund the construction of a 930-mile oil pipeline fromBaku in Azerbaijan to Yumurtalik.Columbia's state oil company, Ecopetrol, signs a $566 million loanwith 26 foreign banks to help finance construction of a pipelinelinking Cusiana and Cupiagua oil fields in the eastern plains with theCaribbean coast.Saudi-based oil company, Nimir, gets a $150 million, seven-year termloan from Chase Manhattan for oil purchases from Colombia. Repaymentschedule based on cash flow from oil reserves, with an approximatefour-year average life.Natural Gas Corp. (New Zealand) $174 million revolving credit facilitywith Westpac.## REDEMPTIONSMichigan Consolidated Gas Co. redeems its outstanding redeemablecumulative preferred stock, $2.05 series at $25.5125 a share.Midas Resources Ltd. buys up to 282,188 of its common shares, or 5% ofoutstanding.Cliffs Drilling Co. to redeem all of the issued and outstanding sharesof $2.3125 convertible exchangeable preferred stock on January 17,1996, for $25.69 per plus $0.218403 per in accrued and unpaiddividends.Edisto Resources Corp. to repurchase up to 1 million shares of itscommon stock from time to time on the open market. Edisto has 12.95million outstanding shares. Also, Edisto retains investment bankingfirm James D. Wolfensohn Inc.Quanex Corp. offers to buy 10.77% senior notes at 107.5% of par valueplus accrued interest.National Power PLC to buy back up to 57 million shares in the market,representing approximately 4.4% of its outstanding shares.Panatlas Energy Inc. converts $174,375 debenture into 750,000 commonshares, resulting in the issuance of 1.2 million common shares for$372,000.Kaneb Services Inc. to redeem on January 26, 1996, all of the 989,162outstanding shares of its 12% convertible class A preferred stock,series D at $8.33 and accrued and unpaid dividends.Nabors Industries to buy back up to $40 million of its common stock.## ISSUER BIDSBallistic Energy Corp. files for a normal course issuer bid underwhich Ballistic can buy back up to 1 million common shares, or about5% of its outstanding common shares.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GAS PRICESWell gas prices did some mighty strange things in December. The coldweather in the Northeast caught everyone by surprise and pipelinesupply just wasn't enough to keep up with demand. The bottleneck atthe Henry hub appears to be the main culprit as producers in Texas andthe Rockies were unable to get enough gas through that interchange,while Louisiana and SE state producers opened the taps wide.Therefore, as pressure mounted for more gas to fight the cold, theshort players had to scramble to cover their positions. The capacityrestraint, the short positions and the perceived low storage levelsdrove eastern U.S. and local city gate prices through the roof. Somecity gates hit $6 in the crunch. Meanwhile, the Midwest states,although just as cold, were able to draw down their more-than-adequatestorage volumes instead of bidding in the market. Thus Chicago gatesdidn't get much above $2, although that began to change at month-end,rising to about $3.50.The overall effect was to raise prices, but expect the effect to betemporary. Everything depends on the weather, of course, after theshort-players get covered.Delivered-to-pipeline spots started December in the $1.85 to $1.90range in Oklahoma, about 25 cents to 30 cents higher than last monthand last December. By January 1, prices had moved up only slightly asOklahoma gas was squeezed out of the rush to the east. Prices rose tothe $2 level on an average.Texas Gulf prices didn't fare much better. Prices started the month inthe $2.05 range, up 40 cents from last month and 45 cents to 50 centsfrom last year. By January 1, prices at some points had actuallyslipped to the $2 range as Texas gas also got squeezed out. Even asthe pinch got worse in early January, Texas Gulf prices only increasedabout 10 cents.However, Louisiana spots were a different game. At the start ofDecember, Louisiana spots were in the $2.20-$2.25 range, up 45 centsto 50 cents from last month and 55 cents to 65 cents from last year.By January 1, prices varied widely from the Koch Gateway in the $2.60range to most other points paying $3.30 to $3.55. The Henry hub saw$3.50 in early January.West Texas prices mirrored the rest of the middle states. The Waha hubsaw early prices in the $1.75 to $1.80 range, up 25 cents from lastmonth and 15 cents from last year. By month-end, prices had edged upto the $1.90 to $2.05 range.Rockies prices couldn't even see the rally. The Opal hub started themonth in the $1.30 range, up 5 cents from November and down 30 centsfrom last December. By month-end, prices had actually slipped about 5cents. In the southern Rockies, prices weren't much better, hitting$1.30 to $1.35.California border prices went nowhere, ending the month in the $1.50range.Canadian border spots stayed in the $1.10 to $1.25 range in the Westand soared to the $2.85 to $3.50 range in the East.Appalachian fared better naturally, rising to the $3.70 to $3.85 rangeby month-end.Futures prices were a different story. Early December quotes forFebruary delivery were in the $2 to $2.15 range. By late month, thathad soared to the $2.05 to $2.35 range and by early January, futureson the NYMEX hit the $3 to $3.10 range for February deliveries.Gas storage volumes, of course, began to plummet. On December 1, theAGA estimated storage at 83% full with 2.66 TCFG, down 9% from lastDec. 1, some 73 BCFG pulled out in the last week of November. By theend of the third week of December, storage had dropped to 70% ofcapacity, after 154 BCF was pulled the week before, down 15% from lastyear. No later figures were in, but you can bet Northeast storagevolumes were hitting rock bottom.The above classically illustrates the dangers of speculative tradingin gas futures. It also dramatically puts the finger on problem areasthe Henry hub and the still low volume of peaking gas storagefacilities in the Northeast. This is one time when the LDC buyers gotcaught short trying to drive down gas prices.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL & GAS INTERESTS NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EDITOR'S COMMENTARYInteresting article in the December JPT called "Heterogeneity,Geostatistics, Horizontal Wells and Blackjack Poker," by DennisBeliveau dealing specifically with horizontal wells, but moreparticularly about predicting outcomes when dealing with wells andreservoirs.I see a study of average annual pay for various industry groups inHouston listed oil and gas extraction workers at $35,848/year.Security brokers led the list at $87,747 followed by electric, gasand sanitary services at $42,052 (!). Transportation equipment workerscame in at $37,765 per.Louisiana reports monthly state employment in oil and gas extractionaveraged about 48,100 workers over the first nine months of 1995, upfrom 44,700 in 1994. Experts expect that to increase to about 50,000in 1996.The Oklahoma Geological Survey reports that half of the state's gas isproduced by 3,200 small operators from leases that produce less than 1MMCFGPD.Exxon to help pay for an equipment upgrade on Sonat Offshore'sDiscoverer Seven Seas and has contracted the drillship for deep waterwells worldwide over the next two years.The deepwater royalty relief in the recently signed bill endingAlaskan crude export restrictions is a nice boon to Gulf producers.All new leases in waters of 200 meters or better qualify. No royaltydue on first 17.5 MMBOE in depths of 200 to 400 meters, on the first52.5 MMBOE between 400 and 800 meters and on the first 87.5 MMB deeperthan 800 meters.And, where do these utilities get these new names? Yikes!Back to Headline List WT02-B36-6IA086-000616-B013-259http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001135 text/html 14609HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:09:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:55 GMTContent-length: 14422Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey22.html Sample Issue Copyright OPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNet JANUARY 16, 1995 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENERGY: UP-TO-DATE OPEC PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY DATA -- DEC. 1994 (93 words) ENERGY: OPEC BASKET PRICE RISES TO $16.34 (151 words) ENERGY: CRUDE OIL PRICES END LOWER ON WORLD MARKETS JAN. 13 (271 words) ENERGY: IRAN-PARTICIPATED GAS PIPELINE PROJECT MAKES PROGRESS (321 words) ENERGY: CONOCO EXECUTIVES VISIT VENEZUELA (200 words) ENERGY: NORWEGIAN ENERGY MINISTER CONCLUDES GULF TOUR (89 words) ENERGY: OCCIDENTAL INKS BANGLADESH PRODUCTION-SHARING CONTRACTS (163 words) ENERGY: WORLD BANK APPROVES $150 MILLION LOAN TO ALGERIA (198 words) ENERGY: OIL PRICES SUFFER LOSSES IN ASIA, MIXED IN LONDON (199 words) CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  UP-TO-DATE OPEC PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY DATA -- DEC. 1994   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Production and supply data for themonth of December 1994 received to-date by the OPEC Secretariatfrom member countries is as follows (in 1,000 b/d):COUNTRY           PRODUCTION           SUPPLY-------           ----------           ------Algeria             751.0                750.0Indonesia         1,328.9              1,329.8Iran              3,595.0              3,595.0Iraq                775.0                775.0Kuwait            2,007.2              2,005.3Libya             1,393.0              1,403.0Nigeria           1,785.6              1,860.5Qatar               381.3                378.9Saudi Arabia      8,246.3              8,000.0UAE               2,192.7              2,190.3Venezuela         2,396.0              2,371.2   Supply, as defined by OPEC, is calculated as domesticconsumption, plus net export sales of crude and products, pluswithdrawals of stocks held outside national boundaries.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OPEC BASKET PRICE RISES TO $16.34   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The price of OPEC's basket of sevencrudes improved to $16.34 a barrel last week, compared with $16.22in the first week of January.   According to figures released by the OPEC secretariat heretoday, the price of the basket so far this year (up to Jan. 12)has averaged $16.28 a barrel.   For the month of December, the basket price stood at an averageof $15.83 a barrel, as opposed to $16.72 in November and $16.13 inOctober.   For the fourth quarter of 1994, the basket price averaged $16.27a barrel, as against $16.68 in the third quarter.   For 1994 as a whole, the price of the basket averaged $15.53 abarrel, compared with $16.33 the previous year.   The OPEC basket comprises Algeria's Saharan blend, Indonesia'sMinas, Nigeria's Bonny light, Saudi Arabia's Arabian light, Dubaiof the United Arab Emirates, Venezuela's Tia Juana and Mexico'sIsthmus crude.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  CRUDE OIL PRICES END LOWER ON WORLD MARKETS JAN. 13   VIENNA, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Energy futures prices ended mostlylower in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) onJan. 13.   West Texas Intermediate (WTI), the American benchmark crude,lost 20 cents to close at $17.52 per barrel for February delivery,while the March contract stood at $17.46, down by 18 cents.   Refined petroleum products finished mixed with February homeheating oil dropping by 1.17 cents to rest at 46.68 cents pergallon, while unleaded gasoline for the same month added 0.08 centto end at 55 cents.   NYMEX natural gas for February delivery lost two cents to finishat $1.32 per 1,000 cu. ft. of gas.   Traders attributed the weakness in the energy market tounusually higher temperatures in the northeast and mid-west of thecountry.   They said the weakness was led by the home heating oil andnatural gas markets.   On the United States Gulf Coast spot market on Jan. 13, WTI was20 cents down at $17.50 a barrel, while on the New York Harbor spotmarket, unleaded gasoline improved by 0.08 cent to 51.50 cents.   In European spot market trading on Jan. 13, the United ArabEmirates' Dubai light crude lost 35 cents to settle at $15.65 abarrel, while Britain's North Sea brent crude stood at $16.35, aloss of 25 cents.   On the London-based International Petroleum Exchange (IPE),brent for February delivery was lower by 25 cents at $16.38 abarrel.---------------------- OPEC BASKET PRICE -----------------------   The price of the OPEC basket of seven crudes stood at $16.32 abarrel on Jan. 13, compared with $16.54 the previous day, accordingto OPEC secretariat calculations.----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  IRAN-PARTICIPATED GAS PIPELINE PROJECT MAKES PROGRESS   NEW YORK, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The pipeline project to export gasfrom Turkmenistan to Europe via Iran and Turkey has made progress,according to China's news agency Xinhua.   It said a meeting held to discuss the project would be chairedby Turkmen President Saparmurad Niyazov and attended by the oil andenergy ministers of Turkmenistan, Turkey, Iran, the RussianFederation and Kazakhstan.   It is reported that representatives at the meeting will discusswhether to join a company to build the 845 km pipeline, estimatedto cost $2 billion.   As there are some problems in the gas transportation through theRussian pipeline to Europe, Turkmenistan initiated a project to laya pipeline as an alternative export route for it to sell its gasto Europe.   It is estimated that Turkmenistan has gas reserves of 21trillion cu. meters, the third largest in the world. But its gasexports to Western Europe have fallen from 11 billion cu. metersin 1992 to almost zero now.   Turkey and Turkmenistan signed a natural gas transportationaccord in May 1992 and Ankara is interested in the project as itis greatly in need of gas to meet domestic consumption.   It is believed the financing of the ambitious project will befinalized at talks in the Turkish capital, starting today.   The Itar news agency confirmed that the meeting was alsoexpected to fix the date to begin construction of the pipeline.   Turkmen President Saparmurad Niyazov will meet Turkish PresidentSuleyman Demirel to discuss mutual seller-buyer guarantees.   "A managerial body capable of mastering substantial financialand technical resources to implement the pipeline project will beset up," according to Khekim Ishanov, the Turkmen minister for oiland gas.   "The Turkmen transcontinental pipeline will be able to transportfrom 15 billion to 28 billion cu. meters of gas a year. Itsconstruction is expected to begin next may after the package offinancing documents is signed," he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  CONOCO EXECUTIVES VISIT VENEZUELA   CARACAS, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- High-ranking executives from Conocoof the United States have made a two-day visit to Venezuela toanalyze progress in a joint-venture association with Maraven, aPetroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA) affiliate.   The delegation met with Maraven president Emilio Abouhamad andother board members to monitor progress in the association for thedevelopment, production, transportation and upgrading ofextra-heavy crudes from the Orinoco oil belt.   The Maraven-Conoco strategic association is aimed at producingsome 120,000 b/d of nine degrees api extra-heavy crude, which willbe transported along a 210 km pipeline to installations at Jose,Anzoategui state for upgrading.   These installations include a delayed choking plant, designedto produce some 113,000 b/d of upgraded 20 degrees api crude thatwill be shipped to Conoco refineries in the U.S.   The delegation included Conoco's executive vice president ofcorporate strategy, Robert E. Mckee, vice president for businessdevelopment and exploration and production resources MichaelStinson, vice president of business development and optimizationDonald Unruh and the association project manager, David Griffith.   The group also met with Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA)president Luis Giusti and PDVSA vice president Claus Graf.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  NORWEGIAN ENERGY MINISTER CONCLUDES GULF TOUR   RIYADH, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Norwegian Energy Minister JensStoltenberg yesterday wrapped up his a tour of gulf oil producersthat took him to the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and lastly SaudiArabia.   Stoltenberg met leading government officials and oil companyexecutives in the countries visited and discussed ways to furtherbilateral energy cooperation.   Saudi Arabia's Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources,Hisham M. Nazer, said the topics he discussed with Stoltenbergincluded the potential threat posed to the oil industry by energytaxes in the major oil-consuming nations.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OCCIDENTAL INKS BANGLADESH PRODUCTION-SHARING CONTRACTS   NEW YORK, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Occidental petroleum has announcedthat it has signed production-sharing contracts with Petrobangla,the state oil company of Bangladesh, to explore a 3.4 million acrearea in the gas-producing region of northeastern Bangladesh and toappraise a large gas discovery made in 1989 by another operator.   During the initial exploration period, Occidental will conducta 1,250 km seismic program, beginning this year, and will drilltwo exploratory wells.   The contracts are the first to be signed under the country's newpetroleum laws, which recently were changed significantly.   The exploration area is composed of blocks 12, 13 and 14, whichare served by a pipeline system with sufficient capacity for newdiscoveries.   More than 25 trillion cu. ft of natural gas has been discoveredin 17 fields in Bangladesh, which has a growing need for the fuel.   Currently, gas production is around 600 million cu. ft per day.Occidental is operator with 100 percent of the contractor'sinterest.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  WORLD BANK APPROVES $150 MILLION LOAN TO ALGERIA   ALGIERS, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- The World Bank has approved a $150million loan to Algeria, the Algerian News Agency (APS) hasreported quoting a World Bank statement.   The loan would offer support to financial reforms and social aidprograms in Algeria, the statement said.   Algeria was currently facing economic stagnation, a populationgrowth rate of 2.5 percent per year, a fall in its per capitaincome of 25 percent, and an unemployment rate close to 25 percent,the statement added.   To counteract these problems, the government had undertaken astabilization program aimed at stimulating and transforming theeconomy with support from the International Monetary Fund, itnoted.   Inflation was currently under control and the budget deficit wasscheduled to be reduced from nine percent to three percent of grossdomestic product in 1995.   The World Bank loan is repayable in 17 years, including afive-year grace period, under usual World Bank conditions.   Additionally, the African Development Bank has granted an 83.57million loan to the Algerian firm Sonelgaz (electricity and gas).   The loan will finance electricity projects, notably connectingsome 350,000 new users.   Since 1971, the African Development Bank has financed 22Algerian projects worth $1.4 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightOPEC DAILY BULLETIN via NewsNetJANUARY 16, 1995ENERGY:  OIL PRICES SUFFER LOSSES IN ASIA, MIXED IN LONDON   SINGAPORE, Jan. 16 (OPECNA) -- Fuel oil prices on the SingaporeInternational Monetary Exchange (Simex) closed on a slightly softernote today, unflattered by the firmer tones adopted by domesticbunkering trade.   Traders here said the market was mostly cautious with thefront-month February fuel oil contract being discussed between alow of 95.60 dollars a ton and a high of 96.40 dollars.   Fuel oil futures trade was mostly under the influence of weakcrude and mixed prices on the International Petroleum Exchange(IPE) in London today.   The Simex February fuel oil contract settled the day at 96.20dollars for a loss of 10 cents, while the March position fell by50 cents to 94.50 dollars.   Trading volume was a mere 165 lots, based on initially computedfigures.   In bunkering trade, cst 180 was still maintaining a higher moodat 103 dollars a ton, while cst 380 was in the 93 dollar range.   Meanwhile, in early trading on the IPE, Britain's north seabrent crude for March delivery was fetching 16.14 dollars a barrel,up by one cent from Friday's close.   However, gasoil on the exchange for February was being quoted1.25 dollars lower at 140.75 dollars a ton.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-7IA086-000616-B013-280http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001149 text/html 34347HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:09:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:58 GMTContent-length: 34160Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey19.html Sample Issue Copyright OXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OXY-FUEL NEWS MARKET REPORT DROPPING ETHANOL INVENTORIES SIGNAL TIGHT SUPPLY, SAYS MARKETER (339 words) INDUSTRY GEARS UP FOR INTRODUCTION OF CARB PHASE 2 RFG -State Tests Show No Problems in Vehicles or Off-Road Equipment- (528 words) SOUTH AMERICA RANKS IMPORTANT IN GLOBAL METHANOL MARKET -Region Will Be 30% of World Trade in 1998- (479 words) SOUTH DAKOTA ETHANOL SUPPORTERS CONSIDER YEAR-ROUND OXYGEN (236 words) API PETITIONS EPA TO REPEAL NOx REDUCTIONS IN PHASE II RFG (598 words) GOVERNORS' ETHANOL COALITION SUPPORTS RFG IN ATTAINMENT AREAS (234 words) THIRD QUARTER MTBE, METHANOL PRODUCTION OUTPACED 1994 RATES (149 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS UPDATE E-95 SHOWS "SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS" IN TAILPIPE EMISSIONS, SAYS STUDY (234 words) PITTSBURGH COMES CLEAN BY JOINING DOE PROGRAM (141 words) AGENCY EXPLORING WAYS TO CONTINUE FEDERAL FLEET PROGRAM (235 words) ASSOCIATION CHARTS EV RECHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE (235 words) ENVIRONMENT CANADA TO EXPAND ECOLOGOtm PROGRAM FOR OXYGENATES (904 words) CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996DROPPING ETHANOL INVENTORIES SIGNAL TIGHT SUPPLY, SAYS MARKETER      Fuel ethanol stocks across the U.S. have been dropping sinceSeptember, and marketers believe that the decrease in inventories isan indication of supply tightness throughout the system.  Ethanolstocks at the end of November were about 2.1 million barrels,according to the latest Energy Information Administration (EIA)report.  This is only a  slight decrease from last year's level of 2.3million barrels, but a substantial drop from the 4.2 million barrelsEIA reported in September 1995.      MTBE stocks have also dropped in the last few months, but thedecrease is not as dramatic as that seen in ethanol.      While EIA does not show a dramatic decline in ethanol productionsince September, marketers say ethanol is beginning to show the signsof a tight supply market.      "A lot of the tightness has to do with the amount of supply thathas been removed from the market," said one ethanol marketer.  Fourethanol plants have been closed due to poor production margins earlierin the year and others have cut back fuel ethanol production, he said. "Right now we are in the middle of a heavy demand period, with theoxygenated fuel seasons, and we are faced with a contraction of supplybut demand is still at about normal levels -- leaving a definitetightness in the market."      Ethanol prices continued to respond to the tightness last week,with prices increasing 1-2 c/gal.  Gulf Coast spot ethanol traded at$1.18/gal and export was in a range of $1.18-$1.22/gal.      However, the current price support is expected to be short-lived.  "We have about 30-40 days of strength left in this market,"noted the marketer.  "The demand will begin to fall off in mid-February, and prices should fall as well."      After a strong showing in December, MTBE prices seemed to havestabilized, according to traders.  Gulf Coast spot MTBE remained in arange of 92-93 c/gal.      Methanol prices also remained steady last week, though there wassome speculation in the market that contract list prices may increaselater in the month. Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996INDUSTRY GEARS UP FOR INTRODUCTION OF CARB PHASE 2 RFG-State Tests Show No Problems in Vehicles or Off-Road Equipment-      With less than two months until the production of CARB Phase 2RFG is required in California, refiners, oxygenate producers and stategovernment officials are reporting no problems with the implementationof the program.   Supplies of CARB RFG and the oxygenates required toproduce it are expected to be sufficient to meet demand.      The start of the California Phase 2 RFG program will be the lastbig regulatory boost for oxygenates, according to Jim Thomas, vicepresident of market analysis for Bonner and Moore Associates, Inc. "After CARB Phase 2 begins, oxygenate demand will only grow with thenormal growth rate of gasoline -- which is usually not very large," hesaid.      MTBE will be the oxygenate of choice for most refiners producingCARB Phase 2 RFG, predicted Thomas, though some ethanol, TAME and evenETBE will be used to meet the increased demand for oxygenates.      Demand for MTBE will gain an additional 40,000 b/d for the lastsix months of 1996, when CARB Phase 2 RFG is required at the retaillevel, said Thomas.  "If you look at the average annualized demandincrease in 1996, it is about 20,000-25,000 b/d," he said.      Oxygenate supply should be sufficient to meet the new demand,and non-U.S. suppliers will be aggressively seeking their share of thenew business, Thomas said.  "There is a lot of volume available thatcan be moved around," he said.  "There are new plants coming online inKorea that will help, and product is available from Brazil, SaudiArabia and Europe."      Oxygenate pricing should strengthen due to the greater demandstructure and remain strong until the market adjusts to the newdemand, Thomas said.  However, large price spikes, like thosepreceding the start of the federal RFG program, are unlikely sinceMTBE contract pricing is now more closely tied to market factors, hesaid, adding that such spikes are very difficult to predict.      Many refiners are already beginning to stockpile MTBE for use inCARB RFG, said Thomas.  "Some of the current strengthening in MTBEprices is a reflection of that inventory building," he said.State Tests Show No Vehicle or Equipment Problems      CARB's test program, done in conjunction with some of thestate's key refiners, gave Phase 2 RFG a clean bill of health, saidCARB officials recently.  The tests involved 829 vehicles in eightprivate and government fleets that drove about five million miles onPhase 2 RFG from February through August 1995.      "There was no meaningful difference between the frequency offuel-system problems in vehicles using cleaner-burning gasoline andthe pre-1996 (conventional) gasoline," CARB Chairman John Dunlapannounced.  "Cleaner-burning gasoline has been thoroughly tested andhas broad-based support within industry."      The few problems noted were on vehicles with mileage above theaverage of the fleet (95,000 miles) or vehicles that used anespecially low-aromatics fuel Texaco developed but does not intend tosell commercially.  Separate, smaller tests on various off-roadconstruction vehicles, lawnmowers and farm equipment found noperformance problems, Dunlap added      Mileage for the Phase 2 vehicles was about 1% less than FederalRFG now sold in Southern California and 3% below conventional gasolinesold in the state, CARB found.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SOUTH AMERICA RANKS IMPORTANT IN GLOBAL METHANOL MARKET-Region Will Be 30% of World Trade in 1998-      While demand growth for methanol in South America is notexpected to be great through the end of the century, growth in theregion's production capacity is projected to be one of the largest inthe world, according to experts.  "The South American region is one ofthose strategic offshore locations on which increasing emphasis mustbe placed if any realistic prognosis of the future direction of the[methanol] industry is to be made," said Rampersad Motilal, divisionalmanager of manufacture and marketing for the Trinidad and TobagoMethanol Co. (TTMC).      South America's share of world methanol export trade continuesto grow, making it even more critical to the global methanol industry. "At present, the South American net share of world trade is close to2.5 million metric tons, which represents approximately 20% of theworld total," Motilal told attendees of CMAI's World MethanolConference in Phoenix.  "By 1998, South America will account for closeto 4.4 million metric tons of world trade -- over 30% of the worldtotal."      With a capacity growth rate of more that 18% from 1989 through1995, South America led other regions of the world in productionincreases, Motilal said.  From 1995 through 1998, the region'sproduction capacity is expected to grow another 16.5%, he said.      The five largest methanol-producing countries in South Americaare almost all expected to see continued growth in production capacitythrough the end of the century.  At the same time, demand for methanolis not expected to keep pace, leaving more product available forexport.      Chile and Trinidad & Tobago will be doubling or nearly doublingtheir production capacity between 1995 and 1998, according to Motilal. Methanex is constructing a second methanol plant in Chile.  The926,000-metric-tons-per-year plant is expected to be online late in1996.  Trinidad & Tobago is expecting the addition of three newproduction facilities -- making it the largest methanol producingcountry in the region with 2.1 million metric tons per year ofcapacity.  Methanex, TTMC and Saturn Methanol are all planing to buildfacilities in the island nation.      Brazil and Venezuela lead the region in methanol demand.  Mostof Brazil's demand comes from its national fuel alcohol program, whileMTBE production dominates Venezuelan demand.Region Offers Producers Several Advantages      Low feedstock costs are one of the advantages of methanolproduction in many South American countries, said project developers. However, it is not the only advantage the region holds.  For example,Trinidad & Tobago "not only offers competitive natural gas prices, butalso skilled labor, logistical advantages and duty-free access to bothEurope and U.S. markets and has the needed infrastructure available,"said Deo van Wijk, president of Saturn Methanol Co.  Saturn announcedplans for the construction of a 2,500-metric-tons-per-day (287-million-gallons-per-year) facility to be located in Point Lisas,Trinidad & Tobago.  The plant is expected to be on-line by late 1997  Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996SOUTH DAKOTA ETHANOL SUPPORTERS CONSIDER YEAR-ROUND OXYGEN      Ethanol proponents in South Dakota are considering their optionsto add a year-round oxygen requirement to the state's gasoline.  Whilean exact course of action has not yet been devised, a bill may beintroduced as early as this session.      "A year-round oxygen content has a lot of merit," said TrevorGuthmiller, executive director of the American Coalition for Ethanol(ACE).  "The question is, can we educate legislators on the issue intime to pass it this year?  The lawmakers we have discussed the ideawith so far do seem positive."      The South Dakota Corn Growers Association (SDCGA) have alsoshown support for such a move, said Jane Heenen, program coordinatorfor SDCGA.  The group passed a resolution to support legislation "thatwould require the sale of gasoline that contains at least 2.7%oxygenates such as ethanol" and "encourage South Dakota's governor andlegislators to take the lead in getting all PADD II states to havesimilar oxygenated fuel standards."      However, both ACE and SDCGA were quick to note that a year-roundoxygen requirement should not come at a cost of the state's otherincentives for ethanol.  "We don't want to lose the incentives wealready have in place," said Heenen, noting that almost 50% of thestate's gasoline already contains ethanol.  "This may not be the yearto proceed."      Minnesota begins its state-wide oxygen requirement in 1997, andNebraska is also considering such a move.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996API PETITIONS EPA TO REPEAL NOx REDUCTIONS IN PHASE II RFG      In the first attempt to amend Federal Phase II RFGspecifications, the American Petroleum Institute (API) has filed apetition with U.S. EPA seeking  a repeal of the agency's requirementto reduce summertime NOx emissions.  "This move is an attempt toformalize the complaint we have had with the NOx reduction regulationssince the rule was promulgated," said API spokesman Chris Kelley.       Oxygenate producers worry this move may be the first in a seriesof attempts to change Phase 2 specifications, including one to removethe oxygenate requirement.      In the petition, API argues that NOx reduction is not a cost-effective way to control summertime ozone and in some cases mayactually exacerbate the problem.  EPA estimates NOx reduction costs atabout $5,000/ton while API maintains that the cost is closer to$10,000/ton.        "API remains convinced that EPA's estimates of gasolinedesulfurization costs and the cost-effectiveness of NOx reductions arefar too low because of flawed refinery modeling assumptions," thepetition states.  "Because consumers would be faced with the highercosts of Phase II RFG, API's petition urges EPA to repeal the NOxreduction requirements, which would require refiners to makesignificant capital investments.      Phase I of the federal RFG program calls for no increase in NOxemissions from gasoline, while Phase II RFG, which takes effect in2000, calls for a 5% to 7% reduction in NOx emissions.      Since the 1994 promulgation of the RFG rule, EPA has grantedseveral state waivers from certain stationary source NOx reductionrequirements, API noted.  The foundation of these waivers stems fromthe "undisputed fact that NOx reductions in many areas do not help andmay even hinder some areas in their progress toward complying withfederal ozone pollution standards," the petition said.        Like VOCs, NOx emissions are widely believed to be a precursorto ozone.  However, some studies have shown that in a few cases, NOxmay actually serve to break down ozone and that NOx reductions couldwork to increase urban ozone concentrations, depending on the VOC- to-NOx ratio.  Across-the-board RFG NOx reductions are not warranted,"especially when other, more cost-effective and more targetablecontrols are available," API wrote.      API called for a prompt rulemaking on its request to repeal theNOx reduction requirement, asking EPA to suspend the requirement until"a more comprehensive assessment of the NOx control strategies and anevaluation of EPA's overall nitrogen oxides control strategy can beperformed."      With EPA closed temporarily, there has been no recent movementon the issue, noted a source at the National Petroleum RefinersAssociation (NPRA).  "There was a meeting but it was nothing more thana formality," said the source.  "We had discussions with EPA that thecost and the effectiveness of a NOx control strategy has not beenproperly analyzed."      While no studies on this issue have been performed recently,"work was done earlier in conjunction with the RFG regulations andother work on sulfur issues," said the NPRA source.Oxygenate Sources Call the Change A "Mistake"      "We are concerned about any of these changes to RFGspecifications," said Douglas Durante, executive director, Clean FuelsDevelopment Coalition.  "To suspend NOx reduction or any otherrequirement without indisputable data and a consensus of stakeholderswould be a mistake," he said.      While agreeing that fuel science is constantly evolving, Duranteshowed concern over proposed changes to RFG specifications every timenew data appears.  "There needs to be a better process for dealingwith changing data," he said.      "At this time API is not looking for any other changes in thePhase II RFG regulations," said Kelley. Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996GOVERNORS' ETHANOL COALITION SUPPORTS RFG IN ATTAINMENT AREAS      Even as the U.S. EPA is on the verge of finalizing its rule onRFG opt-outs, the Governors' Ethanol Coalition (GEC) is adding itssupport to the growing list of those urging the agency to allow ozoneattainment areas to join the federal program.      "Allowing ozone attainment areas to participate in the RFGprogram at the request of a state governor will provide states withanother strategy with which to combat air pollution and achieve CleanAir Act goals," wrote Govs. Ben Nelson (D-NE), Tommy Thompson (R-WI)and Mel Carnahan (D-MO) in a Dec. 15 letter to EPA Administrator CarolBrowner.      Allowing attainment areas to opt-in to the program isappropriate for several reasons, according the governors:* RFG has made a measurable contribution to air pollution control, is   highly cost-effective and safe;* Participation in the program may help areas in attainment avoid   slipping into nonattainment;* RFG would assist downwind areas to reach attainment through reducedpollution transport; and* Once in nonattainment, control measures required in an area wouldlimit industrial expansions and consumer freedom.      "While the Clean Air Act establishes a number of mandatorycontrol strategies, the Act still demonstrates a clear commitment toallowing states the flexibility to determine the appropriate mix ofmeasures needed to meet air quality goals," wrote the governors. "Voluntary participation by attainment areas in the reformulatedgasoline program is just such a measure."Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996THIRD QUARTER MTBE, METHANOL PRODUCTION OUTPACED 1994 RATES      Production of both methanol and MTBE in the third quarteroutpaced the same period in 1995, says the International TradeCommission's (ITC) Preliminary Report on U.S. Production of SelectedSynthetic Organic Chemicals.      MTBE far outpaced increases of other key octane boosters,growing 273,884 metric tons, or 9.46%, from third quarter 1994 ratesto 3.169 million metric tons.      During the same period, methanol production also inched up,rising 60,955 metric tons, or 1.69%, to 3.667 million metric tons.      Benzene, which is limited to 1.0 vol% in RFG, fell 95.066million liters, or 17.84% from the same time last year to 5.738billion liters in the third quarter.  However, production of the twoother major aromatics used in gasoline blending -- toluene andxylene -- made year-to-year gains on the strength of petrochemicaldemand.  Toluene production advanced 1.21%, or 21.014 million liters,while xylene production rose 9.23%, or 313.383 million liters.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996E-95 SHOWS "SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS" IN TAILPIPE EMISSIONS, SAYS STUDY      While E-95 surpasses premium gasoline in reducing carbonmonoxide, hydrocarbon and oxygen emissions, carbon dioxide emissionsare slightly increased, reveals a newly released study from MankatoState University (MSU) in Minnesota.        The study compared the fuel efficiency, tailpipe emissions, fueleconomy, horsepower and drivability of E-95 (a blend of 95% ethanoland 5% unleaded gasoline) to that of conventional premium unleadedgasoline in a 2.5-liter, four-cylinder General Motors engine.      Test results show significant reductions in tailpipe emissions,as well as increases in fuel efficiency and horsepower with E-95 fuel,researchers said.  However, the test vehicle's fuel economy decreasedwith E-95 due to the lower energy density of ethanol.      The study, which primarily involved laboratory testing forhorsepower and emissions, also included some road testing,particularly for fuel economy.  It ran from January 1994 through June1995, according to Fred Kuzel, director of the Great Lakes RegionalBiomass Energy Program, which supplied funding for the study.Additional funding was received from MSU and the Minnesota CornProcessors Association.       The vehicle used in the study was one of several test vehiclesdesigned and built by senior automotive engineering students at MSU. The fuel and ignition systems of a Recycled Automotive Design vehicle,developed by MSU students in 1991, were modified to run on thealternative fuels.      For information about the study, call Associate Professor BruceJones, MSU College of Science, Engineering and Technology, at (507)389-6700.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PITTSBURGH COMES CLEAN BY JOINING DOE PROGRAM      Pittsburgh has become the latest addition to the U.S. Departmentof Energy's Clean Cities program, marking the second designation forPennsylvania.  Philadelphia earned designation in 1993.  Pittsburgh'saddition brings the program's year-end total to 43 Clean Citiesnationwide.      Pittsburgh has more than 650 compressed natural gas (CNG)vehicles fueling at 23 public stations in the area.  The stakeholdersinvolved in planning Pittsburgh's Clean Cities program expect to addanother 1,650 alternative fuel vehicles -- mostly CNG, with someelectric -- by the year 2000.  They also plan to add 40 fuelingstations.      The program will get local support from the University ofPittsburgh, with its Natural Gas Vehicle Technology AssistanceProgram, to research the operation of NGVs.  The $1.13 million programis being funded through Congestion Mitigation and Air QualityImprovement grants, Pennsylvania's Alternative Fuels Incentive GrantProgram, and Equitable Gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996AGENCY EXPLORING WAYS TO CONTINUE FEDERAL FLEET PROGRAM      While Congress struggles to pass a 1996 fiscal year budget,others are looking for ways to ensure the federal government continuesadding alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) to its fleet despite budgetcutbacks.        Since the Energy Policy Act (EPACT) established federal fleetAFV requirements in 1992, much of the incremental costs have been paidfor by the U.S. Department of Energy.  This year Congress nixed DOE's$20 million request for 1996 after rescinding funds in 1995.      Without DOE funding, many doubt that federal agencies willpurchase AFVs in substantial numbers.  So DOE proposed an executiveorder requiring that agencies meet EPACT's AFV mandate by paying forit themselves.  The requirement stipulates that AFVs comprise 25% of1996 federal fleet purchases, an estimated 12,500 vehicles.  Theproposed executive order has been supported by the natural gas andelectric vehicle industries, which have expressed concerned that EPACTrule delays and Congressional funding rescissions are sending themessage that AFV program support is waning.      The proposed executive order, which is expected to be reviewedby the White House as early as next week, would also require that eachalternative fuel comprise at least 10% of the federal fleet's annualAFV purchases, depending on commercial availability of fuels andvehicles.      So agencies with aggressive AFV programs would not be penalized,the proposed executive order would direct the General ServicesAdministration to average the incremental costs across the entirefederal fleet.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ASSOCIATION CHARTS EV RECHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE      There are 888 non-residential electric vehicle charging outletsacross the United States, according to a survey released by theElectric Vehicle Association of the Americas (EVAA).  Of those, only43 of the 219 charging locations are at public stations.  Most (72%)are located in California, with Georgia having the second highestconcentration.      Conductive charging sites account for about 90% of thoseavailable.  Conductive charging utilizes a standard plug outlet withmetal-to-metal contact and will be used by Ford and Chrysler electricvehicles.  General Motors announced it will produce its vehicles to becharged inductively, which transfers power through a magneticconnection with no direct contact.      "This is an emerging transportation technology, and we are nowseeing only the very first commercial stages of vehicles andchargers," said EVAA's executive director Robert Hayden.  Theassociation plans to release a site directory and will continue toannually track infrastructure development.      The EV industry is working to make greater inroads in charginginfrastructure.  The Electric Transportation Coalition's "EV MarketLaunch" begins this year with workshops in 10 cities selected tobecome "EV-Ready":  Los Angeles; Sacramento; Atlanta; Washington,D.C.; Phoenix; New York City; Richmond; Boston; Detroit; and Ft.Lauderdale.  The program will focus efforts in those areas to addressissues such as local, state and federal building codes, safetytraining, fleet acquisition and charging availability.  Thecoalition's goal is to place 5,000 new EVs on the road by 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightOXY-FUEL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ENVIRONMENT CANADA TO EXPAND ECOLOGOtm PROGRAM FOR OXYGENATES      Environment Canada is reviewing the possible expansion of itsautomotive fuels category beyond just ethanol to consider granting avariety of oxygenates and alternative fuels EcoLogotm status, whichwould likely boost their sales.      The government is considering opening the status to more thanjust ethanol, for possible inclusion of MTBE, ETBE, TAME, propane,methane, natural gas and low-sulfur diesel.  The group will considerall types of automotive fuels, including those intended for use inmodified spark-ignition engines, such as compressed natural gas andpropane, as well as modified compression ignition engines.  Additionalcategories may be added later.      The EcoLogo status, part of Canada's Environmental ChoiceProgramtm, signifies the government's endorsement of the fuel asenvironmentally responsible.  The EcoLogo appears on wholesale andretail packages, and the government provides incentives to fleetowners who use the recognized fuel.  Ethanol is the first and onlyfuel granted EcoLogo status, but a routinely scheduled review is nowalso underway to determine if it will retain its status.  The programis revised every three years.      "It's pretty safe to assume that ethanol will remain in theprogram," said Kevin Gallagher, Marketing and Customer Relations forTerraChoice Environmental Services, Inc., administrators of theEnvironmental Choice Program.  "In fact, it's just beginning to takeoff in Canada."  One company he cited has enjoyed 20% sales increasesin the last year and a half, since it was granted the status.       Preliminary testing conducted on ethanol reveals it comes closeto meeting the tentative draft standards.  A final determination isexpected by June 1996.  Ethanol blends of 5% or higher qualify for theEcoLogo label at this time.  Canadians use 35 billion liters ofgasoline annually.      To earn the status, Environment Canada will review currentlyavailable life cycle information to determine if the fuel reducestoxic emissions, global-warming substances and tropospheric ozone orsmog.  The fuels will be compared with an established matrix, andscored for each of its stages against pollutant standards.  However,the fuels won't be compared with each other, Gallagher explained.SPOT MTBE -  cents/gal ($/metric ton)World Markets   1/4/95              12/21/95                ChangeNew York, NY    98.00 (347.90)   95.00 (337.25)      0.00 (0.00)Houston, TX     92.00 (336.60)   89.50 (317.73)      0.00 (0.00)Los Angeles, CA  98.00 (347.90)  95.50 (339.03)      0.00 (0.00)Rotterdam       86.76 (308.00)   85.92 (305.50)     +0.84 (+2.50)Singapore       74.37 (264.00)   73.94 (262.50)     +0.43 (+1.50)                                        Marketer Margin ImprovementFUEL ETHANOL        Terminal                W/ Ethanol per gal                    Mkt Price    Change    R.U.    M.U.         P.U. Key Ethanol Markets($ Gallon)                   ($ Gallon) Chicago, IL         1.20-1.25     0.00    0.0042  0.0380     0.0488 Decatur, IL         1.19         +0.01    0.0071  0.0346     0.0608 Pekin, IL           1.18         +0.01    0.0085  0.0451     0.0646 Indianapolis, IN    1.17         +0.01   -0.0062  0.0305     0.0518 Bettendorf, IA      1.20         +0.01    0.0024  0.0356     0.0514 Cedar Rapids, IA    1.20         +0.01    0.0028  0.0609     0.0498 Kansas City, KS     1.19          0.00   -0.0082  0.0280     0.0376 Wichita, KS         1.19          0.00   -0.0084  0.0399     0.0363    Minneapolis, MN     1.23         +0.01    0.0144  0.0409     0.0580 Cincinnati, OH      1.22         +0.01    0.0052  0.0356     0.0596 South Point, OH     N/A           0.00    N/A     N/A        N/A Houston, TX         1.18         +0.01   -0.0070  0.0308     0.0550Gulf Coast Export   1.18-1.22     0.00    N/A     N/A        N/ALos Angeles, CA     1.28         +0.03   -0.0134  0.0314     0.0622 San Francisco, CA   1.28         +0.03   -0.0122  0.0338     0.0606 Denver, CO          1.25          0.00   -0.0078  0.0205     0.0372 Seattle, WA         1.28          0.00    0.0208  0.0746     0.1083     * Note: The Chicago ethanol price is now being listed as a rangebecause transactions are being based both on MTBE and gasoline prices.  GASOLINE GULF COAST SPOT  - ( per gal.)            1/4/95    12/21/95    ChangeRegular:    50.80        46.95    +3.85Midgrade:   52.05        48.03    +4.02Premium:    53.90        49.65    +4.25METHANOL GULF COAST - ($/gallon)            1/4/95    12/21/95    Change      Spot:       0.32          0.32     0.00Contract:   0.42          0.42     0.00SPOT AROMATIC PRODUCTS - ($/gallon)             1/4/95                    12/21/95   ChangeBenzene:       0.88                       0.88      0.00       Toluene:       0.77                       0.77      0.00Xylene:        1.02                       1.02      0.00ADDITIONAL ETHANOL MARKETS                                                      Marketer Margin Improvement                                         W/ Ethanol per gal                Mkt Price    Change    R.U.     M.U.       P.U.                ($ Gallon)                    ($ Gallon) TerminalPensacola, FL    N/A          0.00     N/A      N/A        N/A Tampa ,FL        N/A          0.00     N/A     N/A          N/ARichmond, VA     1.22        +0.01    -0.0130   0.0210      0.0464 Louisville, KY   1.22        +0.01    -0.0054   0.0316      0.0506 Lexington, KY    1.20        +0.01    -0.0072   0.0309      0.0469 Detroit, MI      1.18         0.00    -0.0059   0.0314      0.0501 Niles, MI        1.18         0.00    -0.0057   0.0290      0.0497 Lincoln, NE      1.19        +0.02     0.0130   0.0440      0.0591 Omaha, NE        1.19        +0.02     0.0128   0.0438      0.0590 Upstate NY       1.25        +0.01    -0.0084   0.0613      0.0812 Fargo, ND        1.22        +0.01    -0.0078   0.0548      0.0444 Walhalla, ND     N/A          0.00     N/A       N/A        N/A Memphis, TN      1.18         0.00    -0.0089    0.0314     0.0551 Nashville, TN    1.20        +0.02    -0.0076   -0.0030     0.0256 Birmingham,AL    N/A          0.00     N/A      N/A        N/A New Orleans, LA  1.23        +0.01    -0.0154    0.0198     0.0404 Albuquerque, NM  1.29        +0.01    -0.0113    0.0302     0.0478 Phoenix, AZ      1.29        +0.01    -0.0056    0.0414     0.0688 Boise, ID        1.27         0.00    -0.0206    0.0145     0.0409   CASH GRAINS PRICES (USDA) - ($/bu)       Corn:          1/4/95       12/21/95            ChangeK.C.:          3.7700        3.5850              +0.1850Chicago:       3.7000        3.4600              +0.2400Wheat:Kansas City:   5.5000        5.4750              +0.0240Sorghum:Kansas City:   3.5748        3.5168              +0.0580CO-PRODUCTS  Illinois Points: ($/Ton)                                        1/4/95   12/21/95   ChangeDist. Dried Grains:                     141.00    134.50     +6.50Corn Gluten Feed:                       119.00    117.00     +2.00Corn Gluten Meal:                       340.00    330.00    +10.001  Indicates blending price (750-800 gallons).  All other ethanolprices are transport (7,500-8,000 gallons).  Estimated  by InformationResources, Inc. Source for gasoline prices: Computer Petroleum Corp.,St. Paul, MN.NOTE: During the oxy-fuel season, large differences sometimesdeveloped between contract and spot prices.  The price estimated byIRI reflects the average spot traded in the terminal region duringlast week.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-8IA086-000616-B013-308http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey20.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001207 text/html 38023HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:10:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:55 GMTContent-length: 37836Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey20.html Sample Issue Copyright PETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MAJORS TURN TO JOINT VENTURES, ALLIANCES TO FINANCE OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT (412 words) BROCK'S MERGER INTO KEY MAY BE FIRST OF MANY AMONG SMALL INDEPENDENTS (614 words) NEW FINANCINGS NORAM ENERGY COMPLETES TWO BANK CREDIT FACILITIES TOTALING $550 MILLION (252 words) TENNECO WILL OFFER DEBT FOLLOWING ACQUISITION OF MOBIL PLASTICS (105 words) FOREST OIL REGISTERS TO OFFER $6 MILLION OF COMMON STOCK (83 words) AMOCO, UNOCAL EMPHASIZE OVERSEAS PROJECTS IN 1996 E&P SPENDING PLANS (847 words) TENNECO, QUESTAR CANCEL KERN RIVER DEAL AFTER UNFAVORABLE FTC RULING (286 words) PARKER DRILLING WILL BECOME FIRST U.S. LAND DRILLER IN VIETNAM (134 words) LYONDELL PETROCHEMICAL ADOPTS POISON PILL THAT PARTIALLY EXCLUDES ARCO (115 words) INPUT/OUTPUT INC.'S COMMON STOCK SPLITS TWO-FOR-ONE (236 words) WHO'S WORRIED ABOUT DEREGULATED ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPETITION? NOT ATMOS (764 words) LYONDELL-CITGO REFINING APPOINTS TENNECO GAS EXEC AS ITS NEW PRESIDENT (115 words) VALERO ELEVATES ITS NATURAL GAS AND NGL CHIEF TO COMPANY PRESIDENCY (131 words) PHILLIPS E&P EXEC WILL BECOME CHAIRMAN OF UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM (92 words) DEBT RATINGS DUFF AND PHELPS, FITCH TAKE POSITIVE VIEWS TOWARD ENRON FOR DIFFERENT REASONS (641 words) CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MAJORS TURN TO JOINT VENTURES, ALLIANCES TO FINANCE OVERSEASDEVELOPMENT      Major oil companies are emphasizing joint ventures and alliancesas they move to develop overseas projects. Leading U.S. producers haveworked with foreign entities since oil first was discovered outsidethe United States. But the new agreements include financing by non-U.S. participants that effectively makes them fuller partners as theworld oil industry continues to evolve.   The most recent agreements include a $210 million investment byKorea Petroleum Development Corp. (PEDCO) in exchange for a 15% stakein Texaco Inc.'s Captain field in the British North Sea, and a multi-faceted alliance between Chevron Corp. and Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.subsidiary Maraven S.A. to develop the Boscan field in Venezuela andsupply heavy crude to Chevron in the United States.   Chevron's arrangement makes it the first publicly traded multi-national oil firm since 1975 to be responsible for such a high levelof Venezuelan production. It expects to spend $2 billion over a 20-to-30-year period in the heavy oil field. The San Francisco-based companywill be responsible for Boscan operations and production (which itplans to increase from 80,000 barrels per day to 150,000 b/d over thenext three years), while Maraven will handle marketing.   The alliance, which covers an initial 20-year term with a 10-yearextension option, will make Maraven Chevron's joint venture partner ina West Coast asphalt business, the Chevron Ven Asphalt Alliance."Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees, is an excellentasphalt feedstock," notes Dave O'Reilly, president of subsidiaryChevron USA Products Co. Maraven also will supply crude to Chevron'srefinery at Pascagoula, Miss., and its asphalt plants at Perth Amboy,N.J.; Portland, Ore., and Richmond Beach, Wash.   Texaco, which previously owned 100% of the Captain field, willcontinue to be its operator. It expects 60,000 b/d of initialproduction, beginning in 1996's fourth quarter. Since a portion of theproject's expenditures will be lease-financed, PEDCO will assume a 15%obligation for the financing. The companies expect to complete theirtransaction during 1996's first quarter.   "In addition to acquiring an investment partner with this alliance,Texaco gains an important business relationship with PEDCO -- one thatwill provide access to market opportunities in the Far East and inother potential project developments," maintains York LeCorgne,managing director of exploration and production at affiliate TexacoU.K. Ltd. "The formation of strategic alliances is an importantelement in Texaco's plan for growth and allows the company to expandits core oil and gas activities worldwide."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996BROCK'S MERGER INTO KEY MAY BE FIRST OF MANY AMONG SMALL INDEPENDENTS   By Wall Street's standards, Key Production Co. Inc.'s approximately$13 million all-stock acquisition of Brock Exploration Corp. isrelatively minor. But it could signal a consolidation among smallerpublicly traded independent producers every bit as intense as thesales of domestic production properties and formation of jointventures by major oil companies, a leading oil analyst contends.   "It could take place across the board. People who had good years in1992 and 1993 following 10 years of the natural gas `bubble' arebeginning to say, `Never again!' after several warm winters," saysJoseph Culp of A.G. Edwards and Sons Inc. in St. Louis. "Just as themajors are amalgamating their domestic assets, the smaller producersare doing the same thing, only with stock because they don't have asmuch financial leverage." Key Production and Brock will structuretheir merger as a tax-free exchange, with Brock shareholders receivingone Key common share for every 1.45 Brock share. Key also intends toopen a regional office in New Orleans that will be staffed by severalemployees who previously worked for Brock.   Brock Exploration's sale has been expected since the New Orleansindependent producer issued its 1994 annual report with a front coverfeaturing Lawrence E. Brock, the chairman and founder, posing with hiswife, Lorena, who was corporate secretary, standing on a Gulf ofMexico beach alongside the words, "We toiled for 28 years! We left ourtracks! It's time to go! Adios, Amigos!" Brock is in his early 80s.His wife is about 10 years younger.   What took some observers by surprise was Denver-based KeyProduction's role of purchaser. "It obviously brings it onto the GulfCoast. But it's a big move for Key beyond its Rocky Mountain andCalifornia bases that I frankly didn't expect because I haven'tfollowed the company that closely," says one analyst who asked not tobe named.   Culp, who does track Key, says that the deal makes perfect sense."It apparently is a combination of someone who probably said, `Mybetter days in the oil business are behind me,' with someone else whosaid, `I'll let you ride a little bit on my coattails, but I also wantto diversify my assets,'" he tells Petroleum Finance Week. "Key hasbeen a financially sound company all along that's been able to acquireproperties and then aggressively exploit them. Apparently, it was ableto strike an all-stock deal based on its record of being able to dosomething positive with its assets. It's going to be able to pay forthis because its recent acquisitions in California are beginning tobear fruit."   Key Chairman Francis H. "Mick" Merelli and Brock say that theybelieve the combined companies will be more efficient and strongerthan either one was by itself. The merger has to be approved by bothcompanies' shareholders, who will vote on the proposal at specialmeetings in February. Key intends to file the necessary registrationcovering the new shares it intends to issue with the Securities andExchange Commission as soon as possible. The companies expect thecombination to be complete this spring.   Culp considers Key a relative sleeper among small independents andMerelli "a well-respected guy who walks in the circles of the largeindependents. He can get an audience and do deals that surprise somepeople. But he has always been very good at being conservative and nottaking big drilling risks. He also has made some good strategicacquisitions. The company tends to hide its light under a bushel,preferring to let its actions speak louder than its words. If peopleunderstood the kind of value it offered, it would have a much highershare price."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NORAM ENERGY COMPLETES TWO BANK CREDIT FACILITIES TOTALING $550MILLION   NorAm Energy Corp. completed two bank credit facilities totaling$550 million with a group of 22 banks. The facilities are a $150million term loan and an amended $400 million revolving credit, whichwill allow NorAm to release two pipeline subsidiaries that itpreviously provided the banks as security and provide the integratednatural gas company financing at a lower price and with reducedborrowing fees. CitiBank was agent for both facilities. Bank ofMontreal and NationsBank of Texas were lead managers of the revolvingcredit, the terms of which were extended to December 1998.   The $150 million term loan is a five-year facility, which willgenerate proceeds for NorAm to redeem $150 million of 8% notes dueJanuary 1997, which it called at par on Nov. 22, 1995, and redeemed onDec. 22. This facility, as well as the revolving credit, includes apricing grid where the facility and borrowing codes are reduced oncedebt rating services Standard and Poor's Corp. and Moody's InvestorsService upgrade specific assessments.   "These two facilities were well received by the banking community,with both being well over-subscribed," notes NorAm Chief FinancialOfficer Michael B. Bracy. "The improved terms in the revolving creditreflect NorAm Energy's continuing improvement in credit quality,reflected by debt reduction and improved results from operations. Therelease of the security previously provided by [pipeline subsidiariesNorAm Gas Transmission Co. and Mississippi River Transportation Corp.]to the banks is another step toward management's goal of returningNorAm Energy to an investment grade."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TENNECO WILL OFFER DEBT FOLLOWING ACQUISITION OF MOBIL PLASTICS   Tenneco Inc. will offer $600 million of long-term debt to refinanceshort-term debt incurred with the Houston diversified company'sacquisition of Mobil Corp.'s plastics division by subsidiary TennecoPackaging Co. The offering will include $300 million of 6.5% 10-yearnotes due Dec. 15, 2005, and $300 million of non-callable 7.25% 30-year debentures due Dec. 15, 2025. Morgan Stanley and Co. is leadmanager for the notes and debentures. C.S. First Boston Corp., LehmanBrothers Corp. and Salomon Brothers Inc. are co-managers for theoffering of 10-year notes, while Merrill Lynch and Co. and J.P. MorganSecurities Inc. are co-managers in the 30-year debentures offering.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FOREST OIL REGISTERS TO OFFER $6 MILLION OF COMMON STOCK   Forest Oil Corp. registered with the Securities and ExchangeCommission to offer 60 million shares of common stock, priced at 10cents per share par value. The Denver independent producer will usesubstantially all of the proceeds to finance its acquisition ofCanadian producer Atcor Resources Ltd.. Salomon Brothers Inc., MorganStanley and Co. Inc. and Chase Securities Inc. are lead underwritersof the syndicate that will handle the offering, which is scheduled tobegin sometime after shareholders' meetings planned for Jan. 9.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AMOCO, UNOCAL EMPHASIZE OVERSEAS PROJECTS IN 1996 E&P SPENDING PLANS      -- Pennzoil's '96 Outlays Will Slightly Exceed 1995 Level --   Continuing a well-established trend among major U.S. oil companies,Amoco Corp. and Unocal Corp. each emphasized overseas exploration andproduction prospects as they announced capital spending plans for1996.   Chicago-based Amoco announced a capital spending and explorationbudget of $4.7 billion, a 12% increase from the $4.2 billion approvedfor 1995. The rise follows an increase last year of 31% from 1994's$3.2 billion, "a pattern of strong re-investment" that compares withaverage annual spending of $3.4 billion during the 1990-94 period.   "The continued growth in our spending is a clear indication of thesuccess of our 1994 restructuring," Amoco Chairman H. Laurance Fullersays. "That restructuring has allowed us to reduce costs, acceleratedecision-making and empower our business groups to more quickly bringforward projects that we believe will provide profitable growth. Infact, additional funds above the $4.7 billion level could be madeavailable to take advantage of other opportunities. For example, wecurrently are negotiating the purchase of Albemarle Corp.'s olefinsderivatives business, the cost of which is not included in thisbudget."   Of the $2.8 billion that Amoco has budgeted for 1996 explorationand production outlays (about 60% of the total), overseas projectsaccount for $1.4 billion, up from $1.15 billion of the nearly $2.68billion E&P total in 1995. Significant projects include constructionof a liquefied natural gas plant in Trinidad and a program of highlyfocused exploratory drilling. Startup of crude oil and natural gasproduction in China and gas production in China and continuation ofEgyptian and North Sea programs also are included. U.S. E&P spendingwill fall to an even $1 billion from nearly $1.08 billion in 1995,while outlays in Canada will decline by $50 million, year-to-year, to$400 million in 1996.   The company expects to spend $525 million for refining andmarketing improvements ($450 million in the United States and $75million overseas), principally to upgrade gasoline marketingoperations. In 1995, it spent $600 million downstream ($575 million inthe United States and $25 million overseas).   Amoco has budgeted $1.25 billion in chemical outlays for 1996, $875million of which is planned for the United States and $375 millionslated for overseas, where new facilities or expansions are under wayin Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Belgium. In 1995, its chemicalspending totaled $900 million, with $575 million spent in the UnitedStates and $325 million spent overseas.With Downstream Outlays Essentially Complete, Unocal Turns itsAttention Upstream...   Unocal budgeted $920 million, or 68% of its forecast $1.25 billioncapital spending total, for exploration and production, a 10.8%increase from the $830 million it spent on E&P in 1995. The 1996 totalis slightly below the estimated $1.4 billion that Unocal spent overalllast year. "We have significantly reduce the capital allocated to ourdownstream segment now that we've completed the refinery modificationsto manufacture California-mandated reformulated gasoline," UnocalChairman Roger C. Beach says. "This frees capital for new projects inSoutheast Asia, particularly Myanmar, Thailand and Indonesia, as wellas the oil project in Azerbaijan that will create significant valuefor the company."   Approximately $530 million of the $920 million budgeted for E&P isearmarked for overseas oil and gas activities, up 43% from anestimated $370 million in foreign upstream outlays during 1995.Domestic E&P spending is budgeted at $390 million this year, down from$460 million in 1995. Some 64% of the U.S. upstream budget is slatedfor development of key natural gas projects in Louisiana and the Gulfof Mexico.   Unocal earmarked another $240 million for worldwide exploration,$170 million, or 71%, of which will be spent for projects nearexisting operations that the company believes have a high potentialfor success.   Planned expenditures for Unocal's 76 Products Co. division, whichencompasses its West Coast refining and marketing holdings, are $230million for 1996, a 41% drop from 1995's $390 million. About $100million is designated for marketing, principally the addition of quickservice restaurants, convenience stores, car washes and other newprofit centers to existing retail sites. Another $90 million isplanned for Unocal's California refineries on projects to enhanceprofitability and meet environmental regulations.   Spending for geothermal and power projects are expected to nearlydouble to $110 million in 1996 and focus on projects in Indonesia.Diversified businesses (agricultural products, carbon and mineralsoperations, pipelines and real estate development) will receive $50million, a 29% drop from 1995's $70 million when Unocal started up anammonia and urea manufacturing plant in Finley, Wash.   Another integrated U.S. oil firm, Pennzoil Co., announced a 1996capital budget totaling $474 million, up from the approximately $472million that it expects to spend in 1995. The Houston company willspend $233 million on oil and gas exploration, $214 million on motoroil and refined products operations and $27 million on franchises andother operations. The company also announced that it has hedged asubstantial portion of its 1996 oil and gas production as part of arisk management program that it established in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TENNECO, QUESTAR CANCEL KERN RIVER DEAL AFTER UNFAVORABLE FTC RULING   Citing the potential concentration of market power for QuestarPipeline Co. in the Salt Lake City area, the Federal Trade Commissionvoted against allowing Tenneco Energy Co., a subsidiary of TennecoInc., to sell its 50% interest in the Kern River natural gastransmission system to the pipeline division of Salt Lake-basedQuestar Corp.. The companies agreed last week not to legally challengethe ruling and terminated the $225 million cash deal that wasannounced Sept. 8.   The transaction would have been the largest in Questar's history,dwarfing its $94.5 million purchase in April 1994 of exploration andproduction assets formerly held by Amax Oil and Gas Co. from UnionPacific Resources Co.. "We really wanted this deal. But the FTCapparently doesn't understand how the restructured natural gasindustry works and how difficult it has become for a pipeline todominate a market," a Questar spokesman tells Petroleum Finance Week."It has sent a signal that we intend to aggressively grow and willpursue other opportunities. But the growth won't be with Kern River."   The 904-mile pipeline runs from Opal, in southwestern Wyoming, toBakersfield, Calif. It delivers 700 million cubic feet of gas per dayto customers that include local distribution companies, direct end-users, electricity cogenerators and enhanced oil recovery systems.Tulsa-based Williams Companies Inc. owns the remaining half interestin Kern River.   "We are disappointed with the Federal Trade Commission's ruling anddon't agree with it," says Tenneco Energy Chairman Steve Chesebro'."However, during the bidding process, we received a high level ofinterest from several qualified bidders. We plan to reopen contactwith these parties in the next few days, with the goal of competingthe sale in a timely manner."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PARKER DRILLING WILL BECOME FIRST U.S. LAND DRILLER IN VIETNAM   A subsidiary of Parker Drilling Co. will become the first Westerndrilling contractor to work onshore in Vietnam, officials disclosed atthe Tulsa company's annual meeting. Parker Drilling International Ltd.will drill two wells south of Hanoi for Australian oil company AnzoilN.L. near the Gulf of Tonkin coast. Further contract terms were notdisclosed. "Parker has a long tradition in pioneering new drillingmarkets. Vietnam holds great potential and we plan to establish along-term presence in this energy-rich country," said Parker DrillingPresident Robert L. Parker Jr. In 1980, the company became the firstU.S. onshore drilling contractor to gain a contract in the People'sRepublic of China. It became the first Western drilling contractor towork in the former Soviet Union in 1991 and the first to enterKazakhstan in 1992.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LYONDELL PETROCHEMICAL ADOPTS POISON PILL THAT PARTIALLY EXCLUDES ARCO   Lyondell Petrochemical Co. adopted a 10-year shareholder rightsplan, effective Dec. 20, 1995, that its directors say is designed toprotect shareholders in the event of a proposed change of control atthe Houston petrochemical producer and petroleum refiner. Like otherso-called "poison pills," the plan would be implemented withdistribution of common stock purchase rights as a dividend if a personor group acquires 15% or more of Lyondell's outstanding common shares,or if a tender or exchange offer is commenced that would have thateffect. The plan provides an exception for Atlantic Richfield Co.,which currently holds 49.9% of Lyondell's stock. But it could beactivated if Arco decided to accumulate additional shares.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996INPUT/OUTPUT INC.'S COMMON STOCK SPLITS TWO-FOR-ONE   Input/Output Inc., a Stafford, Texas, seismic instrumentsmanufacturer and marketer, split its common stock for shareholders ofrecord on Dec. 26, 1995. The company expects to distribute theadditional shares on Jan. 9, 1996.     HOW KEY PRODUCTION CO. INC. AND BROCK EXPLORATION CORP. COMPARE                    September 1995 Nine-Month Results      (In Thousands, Except Per Share Figures and Production Data)FINANCIAL            Key ProductionBrock ExplorationRevenues$                                                  14,208$7,299Net Income$                                                   2,193$171  Earnings Per Common Share$                                  0.23$0.04Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding                   9,6233,904PRODUCTION DATANatural Gas (Millions of Cubic Feet)                         3,8861,969  Average Price (Per Thousand Cubic Feet)$                    1.67$1.33Crude Oil (Barrels)                                      477,600232,966Average Price (Per Barrel)$                                 15.67$17.33Source:  Companies' nine-month results.                     ATMOS ENERGY CORP. AT A GLANCE                    For the Year Ending September 30       (In Thousands, Except for Per Share and Operations Figures)                         FINANCIAL19951994ChangeRevenues$                                        435,820$499,808+ 12.8%Gross Profit$                                    167,010$168,237-  0.7%Operating Income (1)$                            134,633$141,771-  5.0%Net Income$                                        18,873$14,679+ 28.6%  Per Share$                                           1.22$0.97+ 25.8%Average Common Shares Outstanding                   15,41615,195+  1.5%                    YEAR-END BALANCE SHEET HIGHLIGHTSNet Property, Plant and Equipment$               363,252$327,407+ 10.9%Total Assets$                                    445,783$416,678+  7.0%Shareholders' Equity$                            158,278$149,556+  5.8%Return on Average Shareholder's Equity                12.3%10.2%+ 20.6%                               OPERATIONSHeating Degree Days                                   3,5793,953-  9.5%  Percent of Normal                                       90%99%-  9.1%Total Metered Volumes (in million cubic feet)     138,909151,395-  8.2%Average Number of Meters in Service               656,259646,165+  1.6%Source:  Atmos Energy Corp. full-year financial results.N.A. = Not Applicable.(1) After operating and maintenance expense, depreciation andamortization, income taxes and other taxes.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996WHO'S WORRIED ABOUT DEREGULATED ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPETITION? NOTATMOS   The prevailing sentiment is that natural gas demand will sufferinitially because the electric industry, once it is decontrolled, willbe so much more competitive. "For a low-cost, efficient provider likeAtmos Energy Corp., competition brings more opportunity than concern,"declared Robert F. Stephens, president and chief operating officer ofthe Dallas-based, multi-state natural gas utility holding company.   "We're old hands at competition in the industrial market,particularly in our Kentucky service area, where 59% of our throughputis to large-volume customers," he said during a recent Atmospresentation to the New York Society of Security Analysts. "We're alsoaccustomed to competition at the retail level from other energysources, and compete for customers against some very low-cost electricutilities."   The company has stayed ahead of other natural gas distributors inmaking sure its operations are streamlined and efficient. Stephenssaid that it has 400 customers per employee, compared to an industryaverage of 380. Its operating expenses are among the industry'slowest. And its plant investment per meter is below the industry'saverage.   Atmos also reduced its already low average cost of gas per thousandcubic feet during fiscal 1995 (ending Sept. 30) to $2.46 because itsmarket-sensitive contracts let customers benefit from lower wellheadprices while keeping the company competitive. "By operatingefficiently to keep its gas price low, looking for ways to trim gascosts and providing a valuable resource to its customers to reducetheir total energy bills, Atmos has achieved a record of success incompetitive markets," said Stephens.   James F. Purser, Atmos' executive vice president and chieffinancial officer, pointed out that the company achieved a 12.3%return on average shareholder equity during fiscal 1995 from earningsthat rose 28.6% (despite weather in its utilities' Texas, Colorado,Kansas, Missouri, Louisiana and Kentucky service areas that was 10.3%warmer than normal) to $18.9 million, or $1.22 per share from fiscal1994's $14.7 million, or 97 cents per share.   Cash flow per share increased 40% in fiscal 1995 to $3.02 fromfiscal 1994's $2.46, with the help of rate increases totaling $2.8million during fiscal 1995. Atmos has established an ambitiousbuilding program for fiscal 1996, including a second Colorado gasprocessing plant and gathering system upgrades in Colorado and Kansas.But the company is holding to a debt-to-equity ratio target between40% and 60%, Purser indicated. "Regulators, obviously, have an impacton that, although it has not been a bone of contention in any of ourrate cases where we have explained our capital structure," he said.   Atmos' wide-spread gas utility operations make it distinctive amonglocal distribution companies -- and frequently mentioned as apurchaser when it comes to acquisitions. "Looking at acquisitions is aregular ongoing activity for our company," Stephens confirmed. "Wehave enough experience that, generally, if someone is consideringselling a piece of property, we're generally invited to look at it."   Most government regulators are hesitant to allow recovery from autility's acquisitions that are above book rate. Atmos supports thisidea, but adds that there are occasional instances where anacquisition above book value should be allowed because it would be inthe public interest. "The kind of regulation that's present and thekind of economy that a prospective addition operates in determines howmuch we're willing to pay," said Stephens. "But our interest is piquedif something different is offered."   Atmos does not set a limit on the size of a deal because that wouldlimit its opportunities. "There are lenders who will finance $200million if a deal offers very favorable returns," said Stephens. Heconceded that earnings dilution is almost inevitable followingacquisitions. But he also emphasized that Atmos' purchases have notdiluted payouts to shareholders permanently, "and we plan to makecertain that it won't happen."   He said that Atmos is aware that several primarily electricutilities are thinking of divesting their gas holdings. "We're findingthat an equal number, if not more, tend to view their service role asenergy products and are quite happy to have gas as a part of theircompanies. I do expect several to shift more of their operations intoseparate components, and that could provide more opportunity for acompany like ours," said Stephens.   Asked if Atmos might consider acquiring electric assets, hepromptly replied, "We certainly would. We realize the reality of thesituation with electric companies' balance sheets and their higherinvestment per customer. That would make an acquisition very difficultfinancially for any gas company. But we would be interested if wefound a deal that makes financial sense."Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LYONDELL-CITGO REFINING APPOINTS TENNECO GAS EXEC AS ITS NEW PRESIDENT   Charles M. Rampacek, previously president of Tenneco EnergyTransportation Co., was named president of Lyondell-Citgo RefiningCo., the limited liability company jointly owned by LyondellPetrochemical Co. of Houston and Tulsa-based Citgo Refining Co. Hesucceeds William E. Haynes, who retired Dec. 31. Rampacek began hiscareer with Exxon Corp. as a refining engineer and held subsequentpositions of increasing responsibility. In 1982, he joined Tenneco OilCo. as senior vice president of operations, where he was responsiblefor the refining, natural gas liquids and crude and product supplydepartments. When Tenneco Inc. sold its downstream oil holdings in1989, he moved over to Tenneco's natural gas transmission division asexecutive vice president of operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996VALERO ELEVATES ITS NATURAL GAS AND NGL CHIEF TO COMPANY PRESIDENCY   Valero Energy Corp. elected Joe Becraft, previously an executivevice president and president of its natural gas and gas liquidsdivisions, as the San Antonio petroleum refining and natural gastransmission company's corporate president and chief operatingofficer. Bill Greehey will continue as chairman and chief executiveofficer. Becraft rejoined Valero in May 1995 after six years aspresident and chief executive officer of Transok Inc., the natural gaspipelines and liquids subsidiary of Central and South West Corp., aDallas utility holding company. He previously was with Valero from1984 to 1989 as senior vice president of its natural gas division.Before that, he spent 10 years at Northwest Pipeline Corp., a divisionof Williams Companies Inc., where he was vice president of gas supply,marketing and natural gas liquids.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PHILLIPS E&P EXEC WILL BECOME CHAIRMAN OF UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM   John L. Whitmire, executive vice president for exploration andproduction at Phillips Petroleum Co., will succeed A. Clark Johnson aschairman and chief executive officer of Union Texas Petroleum HoldingsInc. effective Jan. 9. Whitmire, 55, has more than 30 years ofinternational oil and gas experience, all of it with Phillips, whichhe joined in 1964 following his graduation from New Mexico StateUniversity with a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering. Whilewith Phillips, Whitmire worked in a number of operations, includingdrilling, reservoir engineering, production and liquefied natural gasprocessing.Back to Headline List CopyrightPETROLEUM FINANCE WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996DUFF AND PHELPS, FITCH TAKE POSITIVE VIEWS TOWARD ENRON FOR DIFFERENTREASONS   Duff and Phelps Credit Rating Co. and Fitch Investors Service tooka positive view toward Enron Corp. in separate ratings actions. Fitchsees an improving credit trend for the Houston integrated natural gascompany because it is structuring its businesses to compete on avertically-integrated basis worldwide in all of its operatingsegments. DCR applauds Enron's sale of more than 25% of Enron Oil andGas Co. because Enron will use the approximately $690 million ofproceeds to reduce its short-term debt. But the ratings service alsocites uncertainty regarding the final outcome of the Dabhol powerproject in India and resolution of a dispute over the J-block naturalgas contract. The Enron Oil and Gas stock sale involved two separatetransactions: the direct sale of more than 31 million shares and thesale of 10 million 6.5% interchangeable notes, which DCR and Fitchrate Triple B-Plus, with mandatory common share conversion provisions.DCR also affirmed its Triple B-Plus ratings of Enron's senior notes, aTriple B assessment its senior subordinated debt and a Triple B-Minusrating of its convertible preferred.   Moody's Investors Service and Standard and Poor's Corp. affirmedtheir assessments of Talisman Energy Inc.'s senior debt followingTalisman's announcement that it will acquire Goal Petroleum Plc. (LSE)for C$315 million in a debt-financed transaction. S&P, which assessesTalisman's debt Triple B-Plus, sees a stable outlook for the companybecause the purchase is consistent with Talisman's operating strategyand will reduce its dependence on North American natural gas markets.But Moody's, which rates the issue "Baa1", changed its outlook for theCalgary independent oil and gas producer's credit to negative fromstable. Goal is a British independent producer active in the BritishNorth Sea, and its acquisition is consistent with Talisman's goal toincrease its reserves outside Canada. Proved reserves, which totalapproximately 45 million barrels of oil equivalent, are primarilycrude oil and include a 32% interest in the Blenheim field. Moody's isconcerned over the deal's size, the fact that it is being financedwith debt and the continuing impact of low gas prices.   Moody's affirmed its "b1" rating of Tejas Gas Corp.'s preferredstock while Standard and Poor's Corp. raised its assessment of theHouston gas gathering, transmission and marketing company's issue toDouble B-Minus. Moody's also assigned a "Ba1" rating to the $455million revolving credit facility of the Tejas Acadian Holding unit,citing the parent company's relatively stable results, sensitivity ofearnings to gas prices and resulting pressures on margins from intensecompetition in Gulf Coast markets. Both ratings services favorablyview opportunities from Coral Energy Resources, a gas marketing jointventure in which Tejas has a one-third interest and Shell Oil Co.holds a two-thirds stake. Coral, which began to operate in November,is expected to assure higher volumes for Tejas' transmission systemand to expand its marketing capabilities.   S&P placed a Single B-Minus rating on KCS Energy's $150 million ofsenior unsecured notes, with a Single B corporate rating and apositive credit outlook. S&P considers KCS "a small independentexploration and production company with an aggressive financialprofile and above-average finding costs." Its positive outlook assumesa favorable outcome for a gas contract dispute and moderate RockyMountain drilling successes leading to improvements in finding anddevelopment costs that are higher than average.   In its first assessment of Public Service Co. of North Carolina,Moody's assigned a preliminary "A2" rating to the Gastonia, N.C.,natural gas utility's $125 million shelf registration for seniorunsecured debt. The assessment reflects PSNC's strong and relativelystable earnings and cash flow, management's commitment to maintain aconservative balance sheet and the absence of non-gas-relatedsubsidiaries. The rating also considers the company's small sizerelative to other publicly traded gas utilities, its relatively highaverage dividend payout ratio and the short-term nature of itscommitted bank facilities.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-9IA086-000616-B013-331http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey74.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001228 text/html 29379HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:10:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:48 GMTContent-length: 29192Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey74.html Sample Issue Copyright PLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNet January 2, 1996 Vol. 74, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IRAN STILL CONSIDERING ITS OPTIONS ON SHAKH DENIZ ROLE (369 words) UNOCAL SEEKS TO ADJUST THAI HOLDINGS Wants to shift some stake to its partners (395 words) AMOCO CANADA WILL SELL REMAINING CRESTAR STAKE (231 words) NEB BACKING TCPL DEAL (157 words) VIETNAM TO CUT ITS TARIFFS (108 words) MARCUS HOOK SHUTDOWN DELAYED, AS THREE-WAY LABOR TALKS CONTINUING (307 words) ELECTRICITY, TAXES TO BE STATES' '96 FOCUS Power restructuring will be felt in the field (1499 words) PETRODOLLARS (837 words) PRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONS (201 words) WHAT CRUDE AND NATURAL GAS MARKETS ARE DOING... (32 words) CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoIRAN STILL CONSIDERING ITS OPTIONS ON SHAKH DENIZ ROLE(London)Iran is still considering participating in Azerbaijan's Shakh Deniz oil andgas project in the Caspian Sea, a senior Iranian oil official said lastweek.Mehdi Hosseini, the National Iranian Oil Co's exploration director, said ina telephone interview from Tehran that Iran was still consideringAzerbaijan's invitation to join the project through an equity transfer fromstate oil company Socar.   Hosseini said the National Iranian Oil Co was "still looking at theviability" of the project and that further exchanges of information withSocar would be necessary. He said Socar had not imposed a deadline forIran's response to the long-standing invitation.   Azerbaijan is anxious to compensate Iran for having been rejected as amember of the consortium developing the offshore Azeri, Chirag and Guneshlifields. Cash-strapped Socar plans to sell off part of its 40% stake inShakh Deniz, assigned in a preliminary agreement last summer with BP,Statoil and Turkish TPAO which have a collective 60% equity. Negotiationson a production- sharing agreement got underway late this year and willresume in January 1996.   Current thinking among the companies involved in Shakh Deniz is thatIran could join the project, which currently has no US partners. But whileNIOC appears to be interested in Shakh Deniz, Iran's foreign ministry isunwilling to endorse Iranian participation in an Azerbaijani offshoreproject while the legal status of the Caspian remains unresolved, accordingto analysts.   Shakh Deniz's oil reserves are pegged at 1.2-1.4-bil bbl.   Meanwhile, Hosseini said, French oil major Total will shortly beginshooting seismic in the Sirri area offshore Iran. Hosseini said Totalalready has begun a seabed survey using a vessel leased from NIOC. "Totalhas started a seabed survey with this ship and will soon start seismic," hesaid. "Drilling will be the next step," he added.   Total in July signed a $600-mil contract to develop Iran's Sirri A and Efields after Conoco of the US, which originally was awarded the contract,was ordered by the US government to pull out of the deal.   Total will be paid for its work with production from the project.Hosseini said Total was working "in accordance with the time schedule."Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUNOCAL SEEKS TO ADJUST THAI HOLDINGSWants to shift some stake to its partnersBy:Maya Webber(Bangkok)Unocal Thailand has asked its partners in several Gulf of Thailand contractareas to increase their equity holdings, in a move to streamline gas pricenegotiations by standardizing equity distribution in Unocal gas salescontract areas I, II and III.   Mitsui Oil Exploration Co currently controls 20% in Unocal I, 30% inUnocal II, and 23.75% in Unocal III. If agreed to, the arrangement wouldgive Petroleum Authority of Thailand Exploration & Production Co afirst-time interest in Unocal I and II. PTTEP currently has a 5% interestin Unocal II, but no interest in the other two contract areas.   A Unocal spokesman in Thailand. said the negotiations do not reflect apullback by Unocal, which would remain the majority owner and operator ofthe contract areas.   "We were probing for a way to facilitate decision-making and costallocation among the three partners," said Konthi Kulachol, UnocalThailand's public relations manager, arguing that cost allocations can betime-consuming and tedious.   An increased interest by PTTEP could be attractive to Unocal in thefuture. PTT, the monopoly operator of Thailand's natural gas pipelines,retains a 70% interest in PTTEP.   It makes sense to have "a close working relationship" with PTTEP, theUnocal spokesman said.   PTTEP officials said they have made no decisions about whether to investin Unocal I and II.   Tevin Vongvanich, PTTEP vice-president for corporate planning and newventures, said that seeking to harmonize the equity holdings to reduce costallocation headaches is a good concept.   Because the production potential of the areas is well proven, theinvestment would involve little risk, he said. But that also means thereis limited added potential, he said. PTT's Natural Gas Business presidentPrajya Phinyawat added that price would be a big factor in the decision totake increased equity shares.   Some of the fields are "quite old" and might start to decline, he said.   Unocal Thailand's production from its offshore fields averaged 705,000Mcf/d for the first nine months of 1995. Production is expected rise to900,000-950,000 Mcf/d when a second pipeline to Rayong comes into servicenext year. The company's investment in natural gas development in the gulfrepresents the company's largest commitment for a single project. Inaddition to Unocal I,II, and III, the company is also developing blockB12/27, the Pailin field.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoAMOCO CANADA WILL SELL REMAINING CRESTAR STAKE(Calgary)Amoco Canada Petroleum Co. Ltd said it intends to sell its remaining 15%stake in Crestar Energy Inc to fulfill a pledge to the federal governmentfollowing its C$5.2-bil takeover of Dome Petroleum Ltd in 1988.   Calgary-based Amoco Canada said it has appointed RBC Dominion SecuritiesInc as its agent to oversee block trades in Crestar.   The planned transaction is valued at about C$134-mil ($98.4-mil) basedon Crestar's closing price Dec 28 of C$19.12 ($14.04) a share on theToronto Stock Exchange.   Amoco Canada had promised to make certain assets available to Canadianinvestors in the wake of its Dome acquisition. In 1993, the federalgovernment's screening agency for foreign investment allowed Amoco Canadato spin off those assets to create Crestar.   No date has been set to begin selling the 7-mil Crestar shares owned byAmoco Canada, but the sale could start as early as Jan 4 under TSEpolicies.   Industry analysts have speculated that any proceeds from the Crestarsale could be used by Amoco Canada to launch a significant takeover in1996. Three months ago, Calgary-based Anderson Exploration Ltd's shareswap valued at C$800-mil beat out Amoco Canada's C$757-mil cash bid forHome Oil Co Ltd   Crestar is considered a promising player in Canada's oil patch. Itacquired Ranchmen's Resources Ltd. in a C$177.5-mil (C$130.4- mil) hostiletakeover effective Oct. 1.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoNEB BACKING TCPL DEAL(Calgary)The National Energy Board has endorsed a historic four-year deal ondomestic and export natural gas transportation tolls negotiated byTransCanada PipeLines Ltd. and Canada's natural gas industry.   The new tolls are designed to save millions of dollars a year intransportation costs (ON 12/22).   The incentive regulation agreement between the gas line operator andshippers has been lauded as a watershed for new ways to cut the massivecosts of delivering most of Canada's gas to domestic and US markets.   Normally, tolls are decided by the NEB, rather than between suppliersand pipeline operators, said NEB secretary Scott Richardson. Finalendorsement of interim tolls that reflect the pipeline's terms of servicewill be considered at a January hearing, Richardson said.   Under the agreement--the first in North America signed with a pipelineoperator--when TransCanada saves C$1 in costs, the benefit will be split50-50 between the Calgary-based pipeline and shippers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoVIETNAM TO CUT ITS TARIFFS(Hanoi)The country will cut the import tariff for petrol from 70% to 55% beginningJan 1, following a request from the the Association of Southeast AsianNations that all tariffs be brought under 60%, an official at the taxdepartment at the Ministry of Trade said. Vietnam imports all its products.Tariffs on diesel will remain at 25% and for jet fuel at 10%, the officialsaid. The country is cutting tariffs on 857 goods or commodities from thesix members of ASEAN, the first step toward membership in the ASEAN FreeTrade Area, which Vietnam will join fully in 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMARCUS HOOK SHUTDOWN DELAYED, AS THREE-WAY LABOR TALKS CONTINUING(New York)BP has pushed back into January the possible shutdown of the Marcus Hook,Pennsylvania refinery, allowing more time for the union there to reach anew contract with Tosco, which is buying BP's US Northeast refining andmarketing assets.   BP had said it would begin to suspend operations at the 190,000 b/dMarcus Hook plant at the start of January if it was unable to close thedeal with Tosco by the end of 1995. And BP had wanted Tosco to have a newcontract in place with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union at therefinery before closing its deal with Tosco.   BP now has delayed the potential shutdown until the middle of January, acompany spokesman said Dec 29. However, a union official said BP hasindicated in talks with OCAW that it would push back the suspension untilthe end of the month. The BP spokeswoman had not comment on the unionofficial's statement. BP's current contract with the OCAW expires Jan 31.   BP has extended the shutdown deadline to allow more time for thecompany, as well as Tosco, to negotiate with the OCAW, the BP spokeswomansaid. BP still must settle severance issues with the union, while Toscomust negotiate a new contract. The spokeswoman said severe winter weatherin the Philadelphia area has delayed negotiations. She also said BP isencouraged by the meetings that began last week between Tosco and the OCAW.A bargaining session was held Dec 29 between OCAW and Tosco, which wants tocut refinery staff by 25% and runs by 20%. The BP spokeswoman said BPstill wants to close the Tosco sale as soon as possible. Should the companysuspend operations in January, it's likely that the sale to Tosco wouldclose in February, she said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoELECTRICITY, TAXES TO BE STATES' '96 FOCUSPower restructuring will be felt in the fieldBy:William Mullins(Houston)The continuing shift in electricity markets in the US looms as a majorissue that oil industry officials will be watching at the state level in1996, according to a survey of oil and gas officials in several keystates.   An overview of some of the leading state issues facing the industry thisyear indicates that on the state level, the oil industry as electricityconsumer, rather than as provider of a generating fuel, has risen to thetop of the list of concerns in several states.   Ironically, the second-biggest state in terms of oil production--Texas--will not have a legislative session this year, so no issues will bedecided there.   What follows is a state-by-state survey of some of the leading issuesthat will be taken up by legislatures this year.CALIFORNIA: The ongoing restructuring of electricity markets in the stateis an important issue to oil producers because they have a constant baseload demand and use a lot of electricity, said California IndependentPetroleum Assn president Dan Kramer.   "So, as a group we'll be fighting potentially having to pay excessivestranded costs, basically paying for utilities' bad investments in nuclearpower and some other more expensive forms of power that would be embeddedin our electricity rates," Kramer said. "We'll be fighting that issue alongwith trying to lower electricity rates for our producers in general."   Electricity bills in California, depending on where a company islocated, are 25% to 50% higher than in any other state, he said.   Oil companies have formed a group called Oil Producers Electric Project,and are working on a legislative solution to the problem.   As for other issues in the nation's largest state, California doesn'thave a severance tax on oil production, and some of the more liberallegislators probably will introduce a severance tax bill on the groundsthat other large producing states have such a tax, Kramer said. But oilproducers will be opposing it, Kramer said, basing its opposition in parton the argument that California already has the highest property taxes onoil production of any state that imposes such levies.   The industry also will try again to reform the California endangeredspecies act, which is more stringent than the federal law, he said. A billalmost was passed at the end of the last session but it failed because ofdisagreements on a few issues, Kramer said.   Still another industry goal is to repeal a portion of state fish andgame laws that allow the California Dept of Fish & Game, in conjunctionwith local district attorneys, city attorneys and environmental groups, tolevy bounty hunter fines on producers with accidental spills, he said.These are small accidental spills that can be less than one barrel, butcarry fines of up to $25,000 per day. Kramer said they have been levied ona producer, even if it cleans up the spill.   "We'll also attempt to coordinate oil spill response," he said. "InCalifornia, when you have an oil spill, depending on where you're at, youcan have up to 15 or 16 different agencies involved in the spill andthey're all trying to assert their jurisdictional authority."LOUISIANA: The legislature will be holding a session on fiscal mattersonly, but the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil & Gas Assn thinks one issue thatcould come up is the idea of an oil and gas processing tax designed toraise revenue on the foreign oil imported into Louisiana, as well as theoffshore oil and gas coming into the state. Such a proposal has beendefeated previously and probably would be again, an association spokesmannoted.OKLAHOMA: Oklahoma oil producers, like those in California, are hoping tosee the legislature enact some kind of electricity rate reform, said MickeyThompson, executive vice president of the Oklahoma Independent PetroleumAssn.   Oklahoma producers also will be fighting against two proposals thatwould modify forced pooling arrangements, and allow higher damages to beassessed in pollution cases, Thompson said.   The forced pooling issue arises from a law allowing the state to step inwhere there are multiple land owners on a tract, and an operator can'treach negotiated settlements with all of them. The state can "force pool"the properties in such circumstances.   Royalty owners and producers are on opposite sides, with royalty ownersmaintaining some operators are abusing the process by using it as a quickway of putting together a tract without bothering to negotiate, accordingto Jim Stafford, executive director of the National Assn of Royalty Owners."The poolings in Oklahoma in the last few years have gotten ridiculous interms of being vastly unfair in regards to fair market value, on leasebonuses particularly," he said.   Another factor is that royalty owners are concerned about a produceracquiring multiple zones on a lease tract, but not drilling, testing andproducing all of them, Thompson said. This can occur when the producercan't or doesn't want to produce from more than one zone and may laterproduce the others, but some royalty owners would like to see a time framewithin which a producer had to produce the zones or lose his rights.   Producers and royalty owners are having difficulty coming to anagreement over the issue, Thompson said. So the situation may develop as itdid last year, when the royalty owners found a sponsor for their bill, butcouldn't prevail in voting on the measure.   Another proposal supported by royalty owners and farm and ranchorganizations would change the Oklahoma law on how much damages courts canaward in pollution cases, Thompson said. The proposal follows a stateSupreme Court decision in 1994 that held a land owner could recover no morethan the total value of the land in a pollution case, although the OklahomaCorporation Commission still would be able to compel an operator to cleanup the pollution.   The initial bill to negate the effect of the Supreme Court rulingfailed, but the oil industry expects a similar bill will be introduced innext year's session, he said.   Another issue which probably can't be handled in one session but whichthe industry wants to pursue is the creation of a state oil and gasdepartment that would take over regulation from the Oklahoma CorporationCommission, Thompson said.KANSAS: A major tax shift bill that passed the House last year is in theSenate tax committee now, said Donald Schnacke, executive vice president ofthe Kansas Independent Oil & Gas Assn. The bill would shift about $600-milin annual school levies from overall property taxes to the sales andindividual income tax base.   "We pay a significant property tax on oil leases, about $100-mil ayear," Schnacke said. "This bill, if it passed, would reduce our ad valoremtax by about 50%. That would be a very significant improvement on our taxsituation. The governor is resisting this bill, but it's a very popularbill and he may wind up having to veto it."   There also is likely to be action on the issue of abandoned wells,Schnacke said. The Kansas Corporation Commission has estimated there may beas many as 91,000 such wells throughout the state, but they date from 1880and regulation only started in 1935. "We're probably talking about usingdedicated severance tax money or something like that to help on the expenseof this well plugging," Schnake said.COLORADO: The state's severance tax is likely to come up in the 1996session of the Colorado legislature, according to the Rocky Mountain Oil &Gas Assn. At present, 50% of the tax is allocated for local governments touse in addressing impacts from mineral development, and the other 50% goesinto a state trust account.   But an amendment is expected to be offered that would allow half thestate trust funds to be used for state agency projects directly related tomineral development.   Another proposal that the Colorado legislature is expected to consideris a bill on retail wheeling, which would allow retail customers to freelychoose among different suppliers of electricity. The oil industry'sinterest is both as a user of electricity and as a supplier of natural gasto fire power plants.NEW MEXICO: In a budget-only session, there might be a revival of aproposal to impose a pipeline tax that would raise $10- or $15-mil for thestate, said D. Van De Graaff, executive vice president of the New MexicoOil & Gas Assn. The proposal previously passed the Senate, but was defeatedin the lower chamber.OTHER STATES: The Idaho legislature will consider raising the state's motorfuels tax 2-5 cts/gal to pay for road maintenance and construction, whileSouth Dakota will be looking at an increase of 3cts/gal dedicated to countyroads and bridges.   Utah's legislature also is being urged by government agencies toincrease the state motor fuel tax to fund road work.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPETRODOLLARSBy:Peter ZipfWho would have thought that old war horses like Exxon, Mobil, Texaco andthe like could still put on such a strong finishing kick? The group of thelargest publicly traded oil majors ended 1995 with an impressiveperformance in equity markets. In the last two months of 1995, a group of14 large oil companies posted a stock- price gain of 11%, bettering the 5%increase in the Standard & Poor's 500. Most of the majors clearly neededthis late run to the wire, since for much of the year they badly lagged thestellar 34% gain posted by the S&P 500 for the full year. Even with thelate jump, the 14-member oil group's full-year gain was 24%.   The oil group did have its stars for the full year, with Exxon (up 37%),Mobil (+35%) and the smaller Kerr-McGee (+35%) managing to beat by a nosethe gain of the S&P 500. Also in this top-tier group, though trailing thebroader market by a length, were Royal Dutch/Shell (+30%), Texaco (+30%)and BP (+29%). Further back in the pack in 1995 were Shell Transport &Trading (+24%), Amoco (+22%), Chevron (+18%), Amerada Hess (+18%) andMarathon (+17%). Trailing badly were Arco (+9%), Unocal (+7%) and Phillips(+4%).   To some industry analysts, the story of 1995 was this divergence in thestock-price performance of the largest oil companies. Their conclusion: itpaid to be big and well-balanced internationally. As an example, DeanWitter's Eugene Nowak cites Mobil, whose diversity allowed it to usestronger margins in Singapore to offset weak refining margins for parts ofthe year in the US and Europe. The more US-concentrated majors, such asArco, Unocal and Phillips, also suffered because of their higher leverageto domestic natural gas prices, which had a disappointing year.   The largest companies also attracted more market attention, SchroderWertheim's Michael Mayer says, because they tend to raise their dividendsyear after year, providing a haven for yield-starved investors.   The diversity of the biggest oil companies also provided some insulationas oil prices languished for much of the year, a development that set backthe domestic majors.   If geographic and sector balance was a key to equity performance in1995, why was Kerr-McGee among the leaders? Nowak says the company's exitfrom the US downstream in 1995 exceeded expectations, with Kerr-McGeeplanning to use the $400-mil in proceeds to reduce debt and repurchasestock. Nowak calls Kerr- McGee his favorite gas play, and sees the stockgaining more than 10% in the next 12 months.   The oil group's late kick allowed it to make up some ground on theoverall market. Mayer says many major portfolios were underweighted on oilstocks during much of 1995, in large part due to OPEC-induced uncertaintyon the direction of oil prices. Once OPEC's mid-November meeting removedmuch of the haze--the organization decided to roll over its output ceilingfor another six months--the fund managers began to pour money into the bigoils. The money that rotated into oil was drawn from previously hot stockgroups such as technology and the financials.   Adding to the impact of firmer oil prices was the surge in US naturalgas prices, which Mayer calls "the icing on the cake."Bear Stearns Fred Leuffer said the end-year trading rally proves thatinvestors' "thirst for yield is insatiable," with fund money being drawn bythe relatively strong dividends paid by many large oil companies.   How will the race in 1996 infold? Many observers do not expect it to beas enticing as this year's run. "The easy money has been made," says Nowak.The international majors traditionally have been good values, he says, butthat margin has been narrowed by this year's late run.   Leuffer is advising investors to trim positions in the major oils nowthat a rally has taken place. He says his neutral outlook for the group for1996 would likely slide to "sell" if not for the yield protection the oilcompanies provide.   Leuffer believes the majors' earnings momentum has peaked. After rising35% in 1995, the analyst expects operating earnings for the group toincrease only 6% in 1996. Some of this is tied to the fact thatrestructurings, and their associated cost cuts, having largely run theircourse at most companies.   Many analysts continue to like Mobil despite its 35% gain in 1995. Mayerranks the company as a premier E&P player, saying Mobil invests abouttwo-thirds of its cash flow on the upstream-- as opposed to the industrynorm of some 85%--yet more than replaces output each year. Mobil is alsoseen deriving further savings from its broad restructuring, and is among agroup of 5-7 majors likely to boost dividends in 1996. This yieldprotection is shaping up as a key factor in the group's projectedperformance for 1996. For an investor in a defensive posture, "the oils area decent place to have holdings," Leuffer says.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONSPRINCIPAL DATA OF API'S WEEKLY STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF U.S. OPERATIONSProcessing      Dist 1  Dist 2  Dist 3  Dist 4  Dist 5  Ttl U.S.12/22/95Refin Input     1,594   3,252   7,246   458     2,587   15,137Mogas Total     913     1,888   3,506   264     1,064   7,635Jet Kero        78      196     815     19      392     1,500Distillate      451     820     1,584   112     447     3,414Residual        178     89      343     12      275     89712/15/95Refin Input     1,556   3,231   7,485   488     2,626   15,386Mogas Total     809     1,867   3,630   279     1,229   7,814Jet Kero        79      184     781     26      449     1,519Distillate      446     809     1,562   123     413     3,353Residual        138     74      363     9       268     852Stocks12/22/95Crude           14,283  63,404  145,130 10,727  81,203  314,747Mogas Total     51,158  50,387  61,094  6,741   27,017  196,397Jet Kero        11,016  6,429   14,930  595     6,896   39,866Distillate      53,509  30,139  29,104  2,968   12,294  128,014Residual        15,247  2,695   12,439  568     6,485   37,434Unfin Oils      11,158  12,947  41,805  2,066   21,432  89,40812/15/95Crude           15,555  64,068  147,799 10,433  81,252  319,107Mogas Total     52,975  50,054  60,436  6,877   27,105  197,447Jet Kero        11,511  6,663   14,074  592     7,516   40,356Distillate      56,549  30,235  29,692  3,031   11,710  131,217Residual        16,326  2,348   12,595  564     6,082   37,915Unfin Oils      11,388  12,833  44,049  1,935   21,542  91,747Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWHAT CRUDE AND NATURAL GAS MARKETS ARE DOING...Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: NYMEX CRUDE SETTLE, FIRST MONTHDecember 29 $19.55; Up $0.19Illustration: Graph: NYMEX NATURAL GAS, FIRST MONTHDecember 29 $2.619; Up $0.110Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B36-10IA086-000616-B013-366http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey75.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001311 text/html 81184HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:11:02 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:47 GMTContent-length: 80997Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey75.html Sample Issue Copyright PLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNet January 2, 1996 Vol. 74, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WEATHER CUTS FORTIES CRUDE OUTPUT TO 550-600,000B/D (258 words) LIBYA RAISES JANUARY CRUDE PRICES BY 5-20 CTS/BBL (136 words) MORE TIME ALLOWED FOR BP REFINERY SALE TO TOSCO (319 words) ACTIVE VLCC TANKER MARKETS (165 words) JAPAN TO HIKE CRUDE OIL RESERVE TO 305-MIL BBL IN FISCAL YEAR 1996 (125 words) MARKET BY MARKET ASIA: 1995 GOES OUT QUIETLY (537 words) EUROPE: QUIET CLOSE (422 words) MTBE: QUIET AND STABLE (69 words) GAS LIQUIDS: PROPANE STILL CLIMBING (69 words) ATLANTIC COAST: READY FOR HOLIDAYS (391 words) US GULF COAST: A MODEST YEAR-END UPTURN (248 words) CHICAGO: PRICE DIFFERENTIALS UNCHANGED (64 words) GROUP THREE: DEMAND CONTINUES (69 words) FUTURES: THIN AND VOLATILE (352 words) US WEST COAST: PRICES SLIP INTO '96 (289 words) US CRUDE: TALK OF SUPPLY PROBLEMS (362 words) INTERNATIONAL CRUDE: UNEVENTFUL (356 words) FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28 FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28 (681 words) SPOT PRICE ASSESSMENTS ARAB GULF, FOB (22 words) Caribbean Cargoes, FOB $/MT c/Gal (29 words) Singapore/Japan Cargoes C&F Japan Singapore (128 words) GROUP THREE (27 words) New York/Boston Cargo Barge (161 words) U.S. Gulf Coast Waterborne Pipeline (128 words) European Bulk Cargoes Cargoes CIF Cargoes (174 words) Gas Liquids Mont Belvieu Conway (37 words) WEST COAST PIPELINE (94 words) WEST COAST WATERBORNE (37 words) CHICAGO PIPELINE (34 words) LATIN AMERICA, FOB (24 words) SOUTH CHINA, C&F (24 words) LATIN AMERICA CRUDE $/BBL (25 words) SPOT CRUDE PRICE ASSESSMENTS INTERNATIONAL (62 words) U.S. (47 words) Canada CD$/CM US$/BBL (24 words) Pacific Rim $/Bbl Spread vs ICP (76 words) CONTRACT CARGO PRICES CONTRACT CARGO PRICES (103 words) ATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESID ATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESID (26 words) U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT (396 words) U.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT, REFORMULATED GASOLINE (28 words) PLATT'S INDEX PLATT'S INDEX (55 words) FIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES FIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES (406 words) CLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS CLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS (142 words) SPOT TANKER RATES SPOT TANKER RATES (133 words) JET FUEL PRICES JET FUEL PRICES (45 words) API WEEKLY SUMMARY API WEEKLY SUMMARY (370 words) CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEATHER CUTS FORTIES CRUDE OUTPUT TO 550-600,000B/D(London)Production of UK Forties Blend crude plummeted to 550-600,000 b/d December29 as freezing weather conditions caused problems at onshore processingfacilities in Scotland, a source with an equity producer said.   The source said output was likely to remain at that level for the nextcouple of days. Operator BP admitted that production from the fields whichmake up the Forties system had now fallen below 800,000 b/d because of theproblems at onshore processing facilities at Kinneil.   "It's down, it's quite low. We're working on it right now," a BPspokesman said. "It was 800,000 b/d a while ago (today) and has gone below800,000 b/d," he said.   The spokesman was unable to predict when Forties output would return tonormal levels of 1-1.2-mil b/d. "We don't know with the weather being as itis," he said.   The equity producer source said Forties production was around 1-mil b/din early December and fell to 800,000 b/d "a few days ago" before fallingfurther December 29.   Trading sources close to operator BP said a total of 2-mil bbl or theequivalent of four Forties cargoes had so far been cancelled from theJanuary loading schedule. "A string of old problems" is expected to pushthe current loading schedule back for at least one to two days, one sourcesaid.   Recent Forties spot trades achieved directionally stronger pricedifferentials to dated Brent. Mid-January transactions of the grade werereported late December 28 at around dated Brent plus 20-23 cts or around$19.01-19.04/bbl.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLIBYA RAISES JANUARY CRUDE PRICES BY 5-20 CTS/BBLBy:Gerald Bueshel, London.(London)   Libya has raised its official selling price for crude liftings inJanuary by 5-20 cts/bbl, equity sources said Friday.   The price for Es Sider, the main Libyan export grade, was set at datedBrent plus 15 cts/bbl, compared to dated Brent minus 5 cts/bbl inDecember.   January OSPs for other grades were announced as follows: Sirtica atdated Brent plus 18 cts/bbl (up 18 cts from December); Brega and Zueitinaat dated Brent plus 30 cts (up 5 cts); Sarir at dated Brent minus 55 cts(up 5 cts); Amna at dated Brent minus 60 cts (up 5 cts); Bu Attifel atdated Brent minus 40 cts (up 5 cts); and Bouri at Iranian Heavy FOB SidiKerir minus 25 cts/bbl (up 5 cts).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMORE TIME ALLOWED FOR BP REFINERY SALE TO TOSCO(New York)   BP has pushed back into January the possible shutdown of the MarcusHook, Pennsylvania refinery, allowing more time for the union there toreach a new contract with Tosco, which is buying BP's US Northeast refiningand marketing assets.   BP had said it would begin to suspend operations at the 190,000 b/dMarcus Hook plant at the start of January if it was unable to close thedeal with Tosco by the end of 1995. And BP had wanted Tosco to have a newcontract in place with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union at therefinery before closing its deal with Tosco.   BP now has delayed the potential shutdown until the middle of January, acompany spokesman said December 29. However, a union official said BP hasindicated in talks with OCAW that it would push back the suspension untilthe end of the month. The BP spokeswoman had no comment on the unionofficial's statement.   BP's current contract with the OCAW expires January 31.   BP has extended the shutdown deadline to allow more time for thecompany, as well as Tosco, to negotiate with the OCAW, the BP spokeswomansaid. BP still must settle severance issues with the union, while Toscomust negotiate a new contract.   The spokeswoman said severe winter weather in the Philadelphia area hasdelayed its negotiations with the union. She also said BP is encouraged bythe meetings that began last week between Tosco and the OCAW. A bargainingsession between the two was held December 29. Tosco had indicated a desireto cut refinery staff by 25% and reduce refinery runs by 20%.   The BP spokeswoman said the company still wants to close the Tosco saleas soon as possible. Should the company suspend operations at Marcus Hookin January, it's likely that the sale to Tosco would close in February, shesaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoACTIVE VLCC TANKER MARKETS(London)   South Korean charterers were busy in the VLCC market, with a rash offixtures reported Arab Gulf-South Korea, mainly around Worldscale 57-59 for250-260,000mt lots.   Despite the Christmas holiday, European charterers were relativelyactive, with Mediterranean refiners in particular keen to fix stems out ofthe Egyptian port of Sidi Kerir through the first half of the month.Brokers suggested that owners were for now willing to settle for aroundWorldscale 90 on Suezmax ships, but that charterers feared an increase inrates once the rest of the market returned to work after the New Yearholiday.   West African business was similarly fairly brisk, with rates creepingslightly higher, even after factoring in the increase in flat rates for1996. Late in the week, several fixtures were seen for WestAfrica-UKContinent and the Med, while a steady stream of vessels continuedto head West Africa-US Gulf Coast and US Atlantic Coast at rates aroundWorldscale 89-90 for 130,000mt.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoJAPAN TO HIKE CRUDE OIL RESERVE TO 305-MIL BBL IN FISCAL YEAR 1996(Tokyo)   Japan will raise its national strategic crude stockpile by 1.2- billiter (7.5-mil bbl) to 48.71-bil liter (304.6-mil bbl) in the next fiscalyear starting April, a source at Agency of Natural Resources and Energysaid Wednesday.   Ministry of Finance halved the agency's original request for 2.5-billiter (15.6-mil bbl) in order to allocate financial resources forconstruction of a national strategic LPG stockpile, industry sources said.   The country's first government-operated LPG reserve complex, with acapacity of 250,000mt, will be built in Nanao in central Japan's Ishikawaprefecture next year.   The national strategic crude stockpile is expected to reach thegovernment's self-imposed goal of 50-bil liters (312.7-mil bbl) in thefiscal year 1997-1998, the agency source added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoASIA: 1995 GOES OUT QUIETLY   Gasoline cargo prices in Singapore were steady in very quiet trade aheadof the New Year holiday. The 97 RON unleaded market was supported at $21.50while 95 RON was flat at $20.95. In the 92 RON market, prices were flat at$19.75-19.85. Swaps were also unchanged for January and February at$20.70-21.20.   The open-spec naphtha market was softer due to the downturn on crudeprices and news that the CDU at the SRC refinery would re-starting onSunday. Trade was thin as the market slowed for the holiday break. Secondhalf February was bid at $175.00 while first half March quoted at$174.00-175.00. The front half to back half February spread was inbackwardation at $1.75. Singapore paper was weaker with January talked at$17.50-17.60, February at $17.40-17.50.   The kerosene market dropped slightly with some selling interest nowapparent in Singapore. A major offered 100,000 bbl, FOB Singapore, forloading January 23-28 at $32.25. A trader bought the parcel at even withthe market mean, pricing on current day quotes. Another major and a traderbid for 200,000-250,000 bbl parcels for loading January 14-24 at $32.50.Reports surfaced that a major was shipping kerosene to Asia from WesternEurope and some talked of shipments from the Caribbean. A major bid for DPKon a C+F basis into Japan at $34.40-35.20 for delivery January 25-29.However, there was only interest if the product was shipped directly from arefinery and not from storage.   The gasoil paper market tumbled in early Singapore trade with Januarydone at $26.30, markedly lower that the previous day's close at $25.90. Thedrop was attributed to weaker IPE and NYMEX settlements on Thursday and theclosing of positions ahead of the New Year. January paper dropped to aslow as $24.95 before it recovered to around $25.15, a reflection of IPEstrength at the opening. Physical bids were also lower in Singapore asbuyers stepped down almost in line with the weaker paper. A trader bid for180,000 bbl for loading January 13-17 at $25.75, then at $25.85. A selleroffered 150,000 bbl at $26.00 for loading January 20-24 but no deal wasdone. Earlier in the day, a 100,000 bbl parcel traded at 50 cts over themarket mean.   Despite bearish sentiment in the swaps market, cargo residual fuel oilprices were stable due to the rebound in crude values. A trader offered20,000mt of 180 CST at $116.50, then at $117.50, for January 13-17.   A major bid for that date range at $116.25, then at $117.25. The samecompany was also willing to pay $117.00 for January 18-22. A bid forJanuary 24-28 was seen at $115.75. Later, a 20,000mt trade went on thebooks for January 18-22 at $117.00. The 180/380 CST spread was pegged at$6.50/mt due to tight cutter stock avails. January swaps were done at$115.00, $114.75, $114.00, $113.00 and $113.50 and February at $108.50 and$107.40.   Indonesia is expected to allocate an additional 400,000 bbl of LSWR forJanuary to its affiliates. Indonesia had allocated 4.15-mil bbl. AIndonesian affiliate fixed 200,000 bbl of mixed/cracked for second halfJanuary lifting at the Pertamina formula, plus around $1.20, FOBIndonesia.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoEUROPE: QUIET CLOSE   A couple of first half January premium unleaded barges changed hands atslightly lower prices, $167.00 and $167.50 for storage material, FOBAmsterdam/Rotterdam, and $166 for very prompt loading. A regular unleadedbarge sale was reported at $157 for 1,000mt, FOB Rotterdam. Cargo activity,however, was dead, and the only other business reported was some Januaryswap action at $169.50-170.00, FOB Rotterdam.   A flurry of naphtha cargoes was placed ahead of the New Year break asmost dealers headed off early for the weekend. An Egyptian cargo for earlyJanuary loading was reported sold into Brazil and another sale was heardinto Canada. A January 10-20 arrival for the Mediterranean was confirmed at$165.50, CIF Spain, for 70 min paraffins. Swaps values were more difficultto establish. January and February swap levels were notional at $166-168,CIF NWE.   A firm tone was maintained though activity was quiet on the jet fuelmarket. Sources expected the firm numbers currently obtainable to attractavails into the market next week. Buying interest into the UK was stillapparent, but much of traders' attention still focused on moving productinto eastern arbitrage opportunities.   A Russian gasoil cargo was reported sold into Cyprus at $9 over the highCIF market quotes. Trade was said very quiet over the day with bargesasking a slightly firmer $1 over the gasoil futures screen. GOM wasreported sold FOB at even with the high CIF market quotes. There was alsotalk in the market of an Algerian offered in the Mediterranean at $1.25over formula with bids at 50 cts over. The North may be moving more intoline with the firm numbers in the Mediterranean, traders said. Delaysreported in the Black Sea may be resolved before the New Year, saidsources, and vessels awaiting loading berths were due to dock at theweekend.   High sulfur cracked fuel oil in the Mediterranean was again strongerwith a deal heard into Romania at $114, CIF Constanza. FOB bbl were alsowell bid, according to brokers. Low sulfur material was harder to gauge. InNWE, netback values to the US suggested a much firmer market, but trade wasreported into Italy at $123.25, CIF. Refiner, as well as utility, demandwas reported into Italy. High sulfur barge activity was very thin withprompt trade heard at $105.50, FOB ARA. Low sulfur barges continued tobenefit from the very cold weather in Europe. An E-4 cargo was said to havebeen done at $118, basis Rotterdam.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoMTBE: QUIET AND STABLE   Prices were stable in very quiet trade. Material for very early Januarywere perceived as tight. A refiner reportedly offered 50,000 bbl forJanuary 10-15 at 92.75 cts, FOB US Gulf. A producer indicated sellinginterest for second half January at 93 cts, FOB US Gulf.   In the Northeast, buying interest was again reported at close to 100 ctsin New York Harbor.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGAS LIQUIDS: PROPANE STILL CLIMBING   December non-TET propane was done at 38.50 cts at Mt Belvieu in themorning. But trade thinned with many players leaving early for the New Yearholiday.   A trader bought normal butane at 38.50 cts for December. January normalbutane sold at 39.50 cts.   Activity at Conway was extremely quiet. December Warren bbl of naturalgasoline sold at 41.75 cts and 42.00 cts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoATLANTIC COAST: READY FOR HOLIDAYS   Unleaded gasoline markets were thinly traded. Sources said that manytraders were "out of the saddle" getting ready to "pop the corks" andcelebrate the New Year.   Prompt RFG regular unleaded 87 barge offers held at 150 points under theJanuary screen while bids languished at 200 points under. Softer front halfJanuary RFG Boston unleaded cargo talk was heard at 125-160 points underthe January print.   Oxygenated RFG regular unleaded 87 barge talk weakened to even to 50points over the January screen. Softer RFG premium unleaded 93 values wereseen at 3.50-3.75 cts over the January print. Oxygenated RFG premiumunleaded 93 talked at 6.25-6.50 cts over January futures.   Talk for conventional regular unleaded 87 barges slipped to 5.75-6.25cts under the January print. Conventional premium unleaded 93 barge valueswere seen at 1.75-2.00 cts under the January screen.   Differentials to the futures screen for No.2 heating oil slipped on theback of sharply lower NYMEX prices. Prompt No.2 oil barge offers were seenat 25 points under the January screen, bids were 50 points under. Fronthalf January Boston No.2 cargo values were pegged at 20-40 points over theJanuary screen.   Low sulfur No.2 oil talked at parity with regular No.2 oil. Slightlysofter 54 grade jet fuel talk was heard at 1.20-1.40 cts over the No.2print. Low sulfur jet/kero, 55 grade, values held at 4.50-4.75 cts over theNo.2 screen.   Residual fuel oil traders ended 1995 on a quiet note. Most weren'tespecially eager to buy or sell and potential selling interest was mostlylimited to a few looking to move foreign low sulfur cargoes.   Little discussion was heard for 0.3%S H/P and L/P as traders waited fora New York utility to award its H/P tender for January 10-20 on January 4.Sellers of 0.3%S L/P barges could still be found at $23.00-23.25.   Nothing new was seen on the physical 1.0%S market. The "best bid" seenwas at $21.50. Values for January 1.0%S paper were little changed withsales reported at $20.20, $20.25 and possibly at $20.35.   Late Thursday, a trader sold its South American 1.7%S cargo at amarket-related high plus 50 cts, delivered to a New England utility. Valuesfor high sulfur material held near $18.00. New York 380 CST bunker saleswere last heard at $130.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS GULF COAST: A MODEST YEAR-END UPTURN   Unleaded gasoline prices firmed on the pipeline as a major stepped in topick up a few bbl. At one point the market was pushed to 710 points belowthe February gasoline futures print. By the end of the day, most called thefirst cycle 730 points off.   Premium unleaded looked a bit stronger at 3.0 cts over regular unleadedand 93 octane material was another 1.0 cts over that.   No.2 heating oil was still tight on the water. A 90,000mt ship was takento export for the Far East and most put the waterborne market about a 50-75points over the pipeline. On the pipeline, high sulfur No.2 oil traded aslow as 420 points under the February futures print, slightly less thanThursday's levels.   Low sulfur diesel was 15-25 points lower than high sulfur. Jet fuel onthe prompt cycle was 225 points below the February print, while low sulfurjet fuel sat at 150 points over. Both of those differentials were unchangedfrom Thursday.   Residual fuel oil values were up on the bunker market with $105 reportedfor 380 CST at Houston. Most attributed the strength to "distress buying"for the holiday.   There was little bulk market activity, but the consensus was that whilemore product was available, good export demand remained. Talk on 1.0%S washigher as well due to the possibility of Florida buying above its contractrequirements.   Naphtha was quiet around 1.0 cts under unleaded prices.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCHICAGO: PRICE DIFFERENTIALS UNCHANGED   Differentials to the futures screen were about unchanged with No.2 oilat 5.25 cts under the print and low sulfur diesel was 3.5 cts below.   Unleaded gasoline was stable at 4.5 cts under the February futuresprint. Premium unleaded was quoted at a 3.5 cts regrade. RBOB was reporteddone at a 1.5 cts premium to conventional unleaded.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGROUP THREE: DEMAND CONTINUES   Differentials to the futures screen for gasoline were unchanged at about4.50 cts under the February print. Premium unleaded held on to its3.25-3.50 spread over regular unleaded.   No.2 heating oil was quiet at 6.0 cts below the February futures printand low sulfur No.2 oil was 3.0 cts under.   Al prices were quoted in relation to the February futures for Januarydelivery.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFUTURES: THIN AND VOLATILE   The session on NYMEX was dominated by expiration-related activity on theproducts, traders said, and resulted in a sharp sell-off in January heatingoil and a milder decline in January unleaded.   February crude rallied to a new contract high near the close. Sometraders left early, or failed to appear to trade, before the long holidayweekend and that left trading thin and volatile. Additionally, the IPEclosed at 1300 GMT and that tended to erase some direction from themarket.   January heating oil, which from early December until Thursday had ledthe NYMEX energy complex higher, dropped for the second consecutivesession. Traders tied the decline to expiration-related long liquidation,profit taking and hedge unwinding. "It's the last day of the last month forthat contract and hedgers and speculators who were long during the recentprice run-up got out," a trader said. The contract also came under pressureover the past two days due to expectations of moderating temperatures.   January heating oil began its recent rise at the beginning of Decemberaround 52.00 cts and peaked at the contract high of 62.45 cts on Thursday.However, profit-taking prior to expiration caused it to drop more than 4cts in two days. January heating oil closed down 169 points at 58.63 cts.   January unleaded, which also expired, was under pressure much of thesession on expiration-related activity. Thought the contract recovered fromits lows, the market was too illiquid to really discern much aboutdirection. January unleaded closed off 42 points at 58.86 cts.   February crude was range-bound after gaining early on an unexpectedlylow US crude stock figure as reported by API. While crude received somesupport from its stock draw, the draws in heating oil and unleaded failedto support those contracts. "The market tends to ignore the figuresfollowing the initial reaction," a trader said.   However, in the final minutes of trading the February crude contractfound renewed strength as the market stabilized and it broke aboveresistance at the previous contract high of $19.55 to set a new high at$19.57.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS WEST COAST: PRICES SLIP INTO '96   The end of 1995 approached quietly in Los Angeles with little talk heardfor most products. Los Angeles unleaded languished at the previous day'slevel of 57.00-58.00 cts with few buyers seen. Talk was mostly notionalwith some narrower ranges heard.   Traders said it appeared the Portland unleaded market was starting toslide a little faster. The range dipped to 54.25-55.25 cts as the marketcontinued to "figure things out" following the reopening of the pipelinefrom Seattle.   Bay unleaded was said to be losing ground to Los Angeles and talked atleast 1.50 cts lower than Los Angeles. Oxy was reported done at 2.50 ctsover Bay unleaded. Reformulated talk was no higher than 2.00 cts over LosAngeles conventional unleaded.   Jet fuel prices in Los Angeles appeared closer to the 66.25 cts level atwhich the last reported deal was done. Apparently little was getting done,but there continued to be enough outside pressure in the form of refineryproblems and Asian prices to keep jet supported.   A CARB seller in Los Angeles was reportedly looking for 67.00 cts earlywhile the Bay was pegged around 62.50 cts. Low sulfur No. 2 oil held steadythrough the day at 60.00-61.25 cts with 60.00 cts reported done in LosAngeles for the back half of the month. Portland L/S No.2 oil talked lowerat 57.75-58.75 cts.   Demand into the fuel oil market screeched to a halt on the last tradingday of the year. Traders scrambled to supply what was left of the demand inthe bunker market.   In Los Angeles, sources reported that bunker-C sold at $111.50,resulting in a slight increase in the price of 380 CST and 180 CST.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoUS CRUDE: TALK OF SUPPLY PROBLEMS   The steady march to stronger prices in Gulf Coast grades continued onFriday. The tight avails of crude in the US Gulf has been pushing priceshigher as refiners seek out alternate, cheaper crudes.   According to one trader, the Brent replacement cost on Thursday wasFebruary WTI plus 42 cts and that contributed to the gains seen in LLS.That sweet grade climbed several cents above Thursday's levels which werestronger than Wednesday's levels. February LLS was heard traded at 68, 69and 70 cts over Cushing WTI, with 70 cts over Cushing WTI said to have beendone 10 to 12 times. That topped Thursday's high of 65 cts.   February Midland WTI was done at 8-10 cts under Cushing WTI, actuallypriced into the Gulf and not into Cushing. The February WTS talk levelfirmed. One trader suggested, that with the climb in LLS prices, refinersmight turn to WTS because of the wide differential, as much as $1.00-1.65."They would run as much as possible until they 'max out' and theirdesulfurization units halt," he said.   Production problems which cut four January Forties cargoes, cold weathereffects on refineries overseas and production problems in certain fieldscreated a supply problem in crude worldwide, traders noted. The bottomline, another said, is "crude is tight, crude is strong."   There were numerous and persistent reports of activity in South Americancrude, but, due to an absence of traders prior to the long weekend, thereports remained unconfirmed. In addition, a trader said that informationappeared to be flowing less freely than it had in the past.   A second half February Cano Limon said on offer at WTI minus $1.20 and,while buyer and seller were confirmed, the selling price could not beverified. There was talk that an end-January or February Vasconia hadtraded, but details weren't available. Several traders doubted reports thatup to four cargoes of Oriente had traded around the ANS minus 40 cts level.The doubt was due to uncertainty about whether Petroecuador will change itspricing formula in February.   No West Coast ANS sales were reported by the main spot seller.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoINTERNATIONAL CRUDE: UNEVENTFUL   The 15-day Brent market was uneventful with two February Brent cargoesdone at $18.53 and a partial done at $18.51. February Brent/Dubai talked at$1.20-1.25 while February/March Dubai talked at plus 24-30 cts andMarch/April Dubai talked at plus 21-25 cts. January 2-5 Brent CFDs werepegged at February plus 35-40 cts. January 8-12 Brent CFDs were valuedaround February plus 15 cts.   Prompt physical Brent values moved lower versus February when a January4-6 cargo changed hands early at February plus 30 cts. But two late-daytrades tightened the market. A January 15-17 was done at 5 cts underJanuary, equivalent to February plus 67 cts. It was later re-sold atFebruary plus 60 cts. Talk was tighter during the day so the late dealcoincided somewhat with the market. However, next week's CFDs were rumoreddone at plus 37 cts. Based on the three trades, the market was valued atFebruary plus 52 cts.   In other dated Brent talk, most were waiting for fresh second decadeJanuary offers while seven sets of Brent dates were kept from the chains.Six of the dates were kept by a UK major said to hold up to 13 physicalBrent cargoes. Little action took place in other North Sea markets withOseberg price differentials to dated widening. An end-January cargo of thegrade was heard done at dated plus 37 cts.   West African markets were fairly quiet with many still absent due to theholiday season. The general tone for BQ and Forcados price differentials todated was said "reasonably strong." Recent trades were seen breaking thedated plus 50 ct mark. Offers for light Nigerian grades, loading towardsend-January, were said at the mid 50s over dated Friday.   Mediterranean Urals trade was thin though prices firmed on back of tightavails with one deal done at dated plus 15 cts, C+F Augusta, for 80,000mt.Although the port of Novorossiisk re-opened late Thursday, 19 vessels were reportedly waiting to load. Sources said Mediterranean refiners wereseeking alternative crude supplies and were replacing their sour cruderequirements with sweet North Sea barrels.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28       FEEDER CRUDE PRICES EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 22 - DECEMBER 28                                    FEEDER CRUDES                                (DESCENDING GRAVITIES)                ----------YIELDS---------    ---------NETBACKS--------SPOTOPEC            at     at    at    at  OSP-a  from  from  from  from F.O.B.CRUDES         USGlf R'dam S'pore Italy       USGlf R'dam S'poreItalySourceArun Cond      19.33 18.72 20.13 19.05 16.83  16.70 16.95 19.92 17.0619.00Saharan Blend  20.45 20.68 21.38 18.52 18.87  18.97 20.13 19.66 18.2219.27Brass River    20.35 20.15 21.87 19.08 19.19  18.75 19.22 20.77 18.2819.05Es Sider       19.53 19.63 20.71 18.26 18.76  18.01 18.99 19.14 18.0218.65Zueitina       20.21 20.32 20.87 18.44 19.06  18.65 19.70 19.48 18.1718.95Zar'taine      19.83 19.77 21.05 18.61 18.87  18.34 19.21 20.66 18.3019.17L. Zakum       20.12 20.15 21.65 18.77 16.95  17.82 18.78 21.17 16.9518.32Brega          19.64 19.63 20.78 18.43 19.06  18.09 19.02 19.39 18.1818.95Qatar Dukhan   19.53 19.63 21.11 18.40 16.38  16.91 18.03 20.69 16.5617.72Murban         19.87 19.94 21.34 18.48 16.95  17.41 18.31 20.68 16.6218.32Arab Berri     19.21 19.32 20.65 18.12 18.23  16.88 17.93 20.16 17.0418.23Sirtica        20.03 20.19 20.78 18.35 18.81  18.44 19.55 20.78 18.0818.83Bonny Light    20.66 20.57 21.47 18.88 19.13  18.80 19.40 20.19 17.8719.15Umm Shaif      19.10 19.22 20.65 18.07 16.55  16.76 19.22 20.16 16.2117.92Sarir          19.62 19.97 20.14 17.88 18.21  18.03 19.33 18.51 17.6018.10Qatar Marine   20.25 20.45 21.25 18.49 16.26  17.89 19.03 20.75 16.6117.60Amna           19.00 19.24 19.77 17.74 18.16  17.35 18.56 18.34 17.4318.05Kirkuk         19.39 19.75 20.65 17.94 17.60  17.67 19.01 19.24 17.5714.00Minas          19.55 19.75 19.88 17.91 16.96  16.40 19.24 19.64 15.9519.85Basrah Light   19.18 19.70 20.51  0.00  0.00  16.93 17.67 19.72  0.0016.00Iran Light     19.35 19.73 20.40 17.84 17.18  16.91 18.23 19.83 16.6817.23Arab Light     19.31 19.87 20.67 17.74 17.78  16.92 18.43 20.17 16.6317.78Hout           18.38 18.48 19.98 17.76 17.12  14.99 16.18 19.18 15.5617.18Cinta          18.69 19.03 18.59 17.21 16.41  15.85 18.90 18.29 15.2719.10Kuwait         18.30 18.79 19.63 17.26 16.98  15.87 16.03 19.10 16.1116.98T-J-Light      18.38 18.60 19.71 17.56 17.17  17.32 17.76 18.20 16.37 n.a.Iran Heavy     18.82 19.38 19.90 17.41 17.21  16.35 17.86 19.32 16.2317.22Dubai          19.38 19.79 20.55 17.86  0.00  17.14 18.36 20.08 16.5317.05Arab Medium    18.82 19.47 20.30 17.44 17.08  16.41 18.02 19.79 16.3117.08Forcados       20.71 21.00 21.86 18.67 19.10  19.03 20.01 20.68 17.8319.15Mandji         18.46 18.88 19.82 17.33 17.32  16.66 17.76 17.72 16.2317.25Oriente        18.95 19.40 19.56 17.44 16.50  17.51 18.12 18.16 16.1617.45Khafji         16.99 17.90 19.55 16.16 16.27   5.58 16.40 19.01 14.9917.78Arab Heavy     17.57 18.46 19.29 16.62 16.78  15.12 16.98 18.77 15.4716.78Bonny Medium   19.93 20.13 21.29 18.32 18.97  18.11 18.89 19.91 17.2418.82T-J-Medium     18.28 18.51 19.70 17.52  0.00  17.20 17.64 18.13 16.28 n.a.Duri           18.42 19.19 18.90 16.73 15.25  15.33 18.64 18.64 15.5018.35NON-OPEC CRUDES                      FOREIGNGippsland      20.40 20.16 21.91 19.15  n.a.  17.81 17.81 20.87 17.1519.05Oman Blend     19.55 19.63 20.90 18.31 15.96  17.72 18.41 20.48 17.4317.30Ekofisk        20.49 20.59 21.28 18.64  n.a.  18.94 20.16 18.98 17.9618.85Brent          20.34 20.51 21.23 18.51  n.a.  18.82 19.93 18.85 17.8018.65Isthmus        19.35 19.48 20.21 18.00 17.85  18.50 18.59 17.59 17.0917.85Forties        20.20 20.38 20.95 18.41  n.a.  18.64 19.93 18.56 17.6918.85Flotta Blend   18.77 18.90 20.18 17.87  n.a.  17.23 18.42 20.18 17.1518.25Daqing         18.93 19.38 19.05 17.32  n.a.  16.08 18.84 18.24 15.4719.60Suez Blend     18.00 18.93 19.52 16.77 17.38  15.86 17.77 18.25 16.1417.10Urals          19.45 19.80 20.63 17.95  n.a.  17.33 18.66 18.71 17.1918.70Kole           19.16 19.39 20.25 17.88  n.a.  17.38 18.29 19.01 16.9318.12Cano Limon     20.14 20.76 21.21 18.10  n.a.  18.85 19.90 19.81 17.1018.51Maya           16.73 17.72 18.39 16.05 15.49  15.87 16.78 16.63 15.0815.49                                     UNITED STATES:WTI            20.53  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 18.00  20.33  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.19.30WTS            19.27  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 15.75  18.67  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.18.25ANS            19.08  n.a.  n.a.  n.a. 17.70  19.08  n.a.  n.a.  n.a.17.85(a) ANS del USG; Urals del Med; Basrah ex Yanbu; Kirkuk ex Ceyhan.Oriente del USG.  Cano Limon del USG.  Brent prices for dated Cargoes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoARAB GULF, FOB                        Arab Gulf, FOB$/MT   Naphtha                                 -146.00-148.00-       HSFO 180 cst                            +108.65-109.65+$Bbl   Kerosene                                -30.65-30.70-       Gasoil                                  -24.05-24.15-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCaribbean Cargoes, FOB        $/MT                c/GalCaribbean Cargoes, FOB        $/MT                c/Gal        Naphtha             159.75-162.00       44.00-44.50        Jet Kerosene        191.00-195.00       59.00-60.00        Gasoil              176.50-178.25       57.00-57.50$/Bbl   No.6 2.0%S         +15.75-16.25+        No.6 2.8%S         +15.00-15.25+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSingapore/Japan Cargoes      C&F Japan           SingaporeSingapore/Japan Cargoes      C&F Japan           Singapore$/Bbl  Mogas Unl            21.70-21.80       Mogas 92 Unl                             19.75-19.85       Mogas 95 Unl                             20.90-21.00       Mogas 95 Unl Pap.(JAN )                   20.70-21.20       Mogas 95 Unl Pap.(FEB )                   20.70-21.20       Mogas 97 Unl                             21.30-21.70$/MT   MTBE                                     265.00-275.00       Naphtha             -174.00-176.00-     -17.70-17.80-       Naphtha 30-45       -176.75-177.75-       Naphtha 45-60       -175.00-176.00-       Naphtha 60-75       -174.00-175.00-$/Bbl  Kerosene            +34.70-35.90+       -32.25-32.50-       Gasoil Cracked      -26.50-26.65-       Gasoil Pure         -27.40-27.55-       Gasoil 0.5%S                            -25.80-26.00-       Gasoil 1.0%S                            -25.65-25.85-       Gasoil LoPr                             -25.85-26.05-       LSWR S.R. 0.3%S                          18.70-18.90       LSWR Mixed/Cracked                       18.70-18.90       Naphtha Pap.(JAN )                      -17.50-17.60-       Naphtha Pap.(FEB )                      -17.40-17.50-       Kerosene Pap.(JAN )                     -29.70-29.85-       Kerosene Pap.(FEB )                     -27.20-27.35-       Gasoil Pap.(JAN )                       -25.10-25.25-       Gasoil Pap.(FEB )                       -24.45-24.60-$/MT   FO 180 cst 2%                           -122.00-123.00-       HSFO 180cst         -124.70-125.70-     -116.50-117.50-       HSFO 380cst                             -110.00-111.00-       HSFO 180cst Pap.(JAN )                   -113.00-114.00-       HSFO 180cst Pap.(FEB  )                  -107.00-108.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGROUP THREE              Group Three15.0 RVPc/Gal   Unleaded            53.50-54.00        Prem. Unleaded     +56.75-57.00+        No. 2               52.50-52.75-        LS No. 2           -55.50-55.75-        Jet Fuel           -59.75-60.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoNew York/Boston               Cargo               BargeNew York/Boston               Cargo               Barge15.0 RVPUnl 87             -52.00-52.50-       -52.50-53.00-        Unl 87 RFG         -56.25-56.75-       -56.75-57.25-        Unl 87 RFG Ox      -58.75-59.25-       -58.75-59.25-        Unl 87 (Boston)    -52.75-53.25-        Unl 87 (Boston RFG)                    -57.25-57.50-        Unl 89             -55.25-56.00-       -55.75-56.25-        Unl 89 RFG         -58.50-58.75-       -59.00-59.25-        Unl 89 RFG Ox      -60.75-61.25-       -61.25-61.75-        Super Unl 93       -60.00-60.25-        60.50-60.75        Super Unl 93 RFG   -61.75-62.00-       -62.25-62.50-        Super Unl 93 RFG Ox 64.50-64.75-       -65.00-65.25-        Jet Fuel           -59.75-60.25-       -60.00-60.50-        LS Jet/Kero        -63.00-63.25-       -63.25-63.50-        LS Jet/Kero(Boston)                    -63.25-63.50-        No. 2              -58.25-58.50-       -58.25-58.50-        LS No. 2           -58.25-58.50-       -58.25-58.50-        No. 2 (Boston)     -58.75-59.00-        LS No. 2 (Boston)  -58.75-59.00-$/Bbl   No. 6 0.3%S HiPr    22.50-22.75         22.75-23.00        No. 6 0.3%S LoPr    22.75-23.00         22.75-23.00        No. 6 0.7%S Max     21.85-22.10         21.85-22.10        No. 6 1%S Max       21.35-21.60         21.35-21.60        No. 6 2.2%S Max     18.50-18.75         18.50-18.75        No. 6 2.2%S Max (Bstn)                  18.60-18.85        No. 6 3.0%S Max     17.50-17.75         17.50-17.75        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. 1st M                 -20.20-20.45-        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. 2nd M                 -18.25-18.50-        No. 6 1.0%S Pap. Qtrly                 -18.25-18.50-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. Gulf Coast              Waterborne          PipelineU.S. Gulf Coast              Waterborne          Pipeline13.5 RVPc/Gal  Unl 87              +50.50-50.75+       +50.50-50.75+       Unl 87 RFG          +54.25-54.50+       +54.25-54.50+       Unl 89              +51.75-52.00+       +51.75-52.00+       Unl 89 RFG          +55.50-55.75+       +55.50-55.75+       Prem Unl 92         +53.50-53.75+       +53.50-53.75+       Prem Unl 92 RFG     +57.50-57.75+       +57.50-57.75+       Prem Unl 93         +54.50-54.75+       +54.50-54.75+       Prem Unl 93 RFG     +58.50-58.75+       +58.50-58.75+       MTBE                 92.00-93.00       Naphtha             +48.75-49.25+       Jet/Kero 54         -56.50-57.00-       -56.25-56.50-       Jet/Kero 55         -60.00-60.50-       -60.00-60.50-       No. 2               -55.00-55.75-       -54.50-54.75-       LS No. 2            -54.25-54.50-       -54.25-54.50-$/Bbl  No. 6 0.7%S          17.95-18.20       No. 6 1.0%S 8 API    17.00-17.25       No. 6 1.0%S 10.5 API                     17.00-17.25       No. 6 3.0%S          15.00-15.25       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. 1st M                   14.75-15.00       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. 2nd M                   14.75-15.00       No. 6 3.0%S Pap. Qtrly                   14.50-14.7515.0 RVP                   SupplementalNorthern Grade Gasolinec/Gal  Unl 87 RFG          +55.75-56.25+       +55.75-56.25+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoEuropean Bulk                     Cargoes         Cargoes CIF     CargoesEuropean Bulk                     Cargoes         Cargoes CIF     Cargoes                                  FOB Med         Med Basis       CIF NWE                                 Basis Italy     Genoa/Lavera    Basis ARA$/MT          Prem 0.15 G/L     165.00-167.00   175.00-177.00  173.00-175.00              98 RON Unl                                       187.00-189.00              Prem Unl          162.00-164.00   172.00-174.00  169.00-171.00              Reg Unl                                          164.00-166.00              MTBE              Naphtha Physical +145.00-149.00+ +162.00-166.00++165.00-169.00+              Naphtha Swaps                                   +166.00-168.00+              Jet Kerosene     -193.00-196.00                 -209.00-212.00              Gasoil EN590     -185.00-185.50- -194.00-195.00--187.50-189.00-              Gasoil 0.2       -180.50-181.50- -189.00-190.00--185.00-186.00-              1% Fuel Oil       118.00-119.00   125.00-126.00  125.00-127.00+              3% Fuel Oil                                      110.00-111.00              3.5% Fuel Oil    +103.00-105.00+ +110.00-112.00+ 110.00-111.00              E4 Feedstock                                    -10.00-11.00-              M-40 Feedstock                    8.00-10.00              0.5%-0.7% Straight Run0.2 PCT Gasoil does not include -5 -15 spec.IPE Average (JAN) 179.75-. IPE Average (FEB) 173.75-.                                  Barges           Cargoes                                   FOB               FOB                                 Rotterdam           NWE$/MT          Prem 0.15 G/L    -172.00-174.00-  165.00-167.00              98 RON Unl       -189.00-191.00-  179.00-181.00              Prem Unl         -167.00-169.00-  161.00-163.00              Reg Unl          -156.00-157.00-  156.00-158.00              MTBE              315.00-320.00              Naphtha Physical +159.00-162.00+              Naphtha Swaps              Jet Kerosene     -201.50-202.00- -202.00-205.00              Gasoil EN590                     -179.00-180.50-              Gasoil 0.2       -180.00-180.50- -176.50-177.50-              1% Fuel Oil      +120.00-121.00+  118.00-120.00+              3% Fuel Oil                       104.00-105.00              3.5% Fuel Oil    +105.00-106.00   104.00-105.00              E4 Feedstock              M-40 Feedstock              0.5%-0.7% Straight Run            121.00-124.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoGas Liquids                 Mont Belvieu          ConwayGas Liquids                 Mont Belvieu          Conwayc/Gal   Ethane             +18.50-20.50+       +16.50-17.00+        Propane            +38.25-38.75+       +39.50-40.50+        Propane (TET)       38.25-38.75        Normal Butane       38.50-38.75         39.00-39.25        Normal Butane (TET)                     38.50-38.75        Isobutane           42.00-42.25         43.25-43.50        Natural Gasoline    41.25-42.00+        41.25-41.50Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEST COAST PIPELINE                      West Coast PipelineCalifornia                 Los Angeles(a)      San Francisco(b)c/Gal   Unl 87              57.00-58.00        -55.75-56.75-        Unl 87 Ox                              +58.25-59.25+        Unl 87 RFG*        -58.75-59.75-        Prem Unl 92        +63.75-64.75+        63.00-64.00        Prem Unl 92 Ox                          64.25-65.25        Prem Unl 92 RFG*   -61.00-62.00        Jet Fuel           +66.00-66.75+       +65.75-66.75+        LS No. 2            60.00-61.25+        60.00-61.00        CARB Diesel        -66.25-67.25-       -62.00-63.00-$/MT    180 cst             112.00-115.00+        380 cst            +109.00-112.00+Northwest                  Portland(c)         Seattle(d)c/Gal   Unl 87             -54.25-55.25-       -52.50-53.50-        Prem Unl 92        -60.25-61.25-       -58.50-59.50-        Jet Fuel                                64.75-65.75        LS No. 2           -57.75-58.75-        55.50-56.50$/MT    180 cst            -127.00-132.00-      119.00-122.00        380 cst            -126.00-131.00-      115.00-119.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoWEST COAST WATERBORNE                    West Coast Waterbornec/Gal   Unleaded 87                             55.25-56.25        Jet Fuel                               +64.75-65.50+$/Bbl   Gasoil                                 -23.50-23.90-        No. 6 0.5%S                             16.50-17.00        No. 6 1.0%S                             15.50-16.00        No. 6 1.6%S                             13.25-14.25$/MT    180cst                                  86.00-96.00        380cst                                  82.00-92.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCHICAGO PIPELINE            Chicago Pipeline15.0 RVPc/Gal Unleaded 87            53.25-53.50      Unleaded 89            54.50-54.75      Prem. Unl 92           56.50-56.75      RBOB                  -54.75-55.00-      Jet Fuel              -60.00-60.50-      No. 2                 -53.25-53.50-      LS No. 2              -54.75-55.00-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLATIN AMERICA, FOBIllustration(s):Table: Latin America, FOB (This table is not available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSOUTH CHINA, C&FIllustration(s):Table: South China, C&F (This table is not available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoLATIN AMERICA CRUDE $/BBLIllustration(s):Table: Latin America Crude $/Bbl (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoINTERNATIONAL                            International$/Bbl  Brent(JAN)     +19.19-19.27+     Dubai(FEB)        +17.27-17.34+       Brent(FEB)     +18.52-18.54+     Dubai(MAR)        +16.99-17.08+       Brent(MAR)     +17.96-17.99+     Dubai(APR)        +16.75-16.86+       Brent(DTD)     +19.03-19.07+     Oman(FEB)         +17.47-17.61+       Forties        +19.24-19.30+     Oman "MPM"          0.20-0.25       Ekofisk        +19.25-19.31+     Ural (Med)        +19.17-19.23+       Statfjord      +19.29-19.35+     Ural (Rdam)       +19.19-19.27+       Oseberg        +19.38-19.44+     Es Sider          +19.00-19.09+       Flotta         +18.67-18.73+     Iran Lt(Sidi)     +18.63-18.69+       Forcados       +19.51-19.58+     Iran Hvy(Sidi)    +18.26-18.32+       BQ             +19.51-19.60+     Suez Blend        +17.45-17.55+       Cabinda        +18.40-18.46+Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S.                                U.S.$/Bbl  WTI(FEB)       +19.54-19.56+     ANS(JAN)          +18.10-18.14+       WTI(MAR)       +19.06-19.10+     Eugene Island     +18.41-18.46+       WTI Midland    +19.44-19.48+     Line 63           +16.85-16.91+       WTS            +18.57-18.62+     THUMS              14.63-14.67       LLS            +20.21-20.27+     Kern River         13.23-13.27       HLS            +19.77-19.83+     ANS(Cal)          +17.70-17.76+       Wyo. Sweet     +19.52-19.58+     P-Plus Line 63     1.00-1.05       P-Plus WTI     +2.12-2.13-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCanada CD$/CM                                                US$/BBLCanada CD$/CM                                                US$/BBLPar Crude             -158.75-160.75-                     -18.49-18.72-Mixed Lt. Sr           134.35-136.35                      -15.65-15.88-Bow River/            +127.00-129.00+                     +14.79-15.02+HardistyCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPacific Rim $/Bbl                                        Spread vs ICPPacific Rim $/Bbl                                        Spread vs ICPTapis                 -20.40-20.50-     Minas     -19.95-20.05-  0.85-1.00Pap. Tapis(JAN )      -19.85-19.95-     Attaka    -20.05-20.15-  0.70-0.80Pap. Tapis(FEB )      -19.22-19.30-     Arun      -19.25-19.35-  0.50-0.60Labuan                -20.45-20.55-     Ardjuna   -19.50-19.60-  0.60-0.70Miri                  -20.30-20.40-     Handil    -19.10-19.20-  0.40-0.60Gippsland             -19.20-19.30-     Cinta     -19.25-19.35-  0.80-0.95Jabiru                -20.55-20.65-     Duri      -18.45-18.55- +1.00-1.20Thevenard             -20.75-20.80-     Widuri    -19.20-19.30-  0.80-0.95Kutubu                -19.45-19.50-     Belida    -20.25-20.35-  0.90-1.20Daqing                -19.85-19.95-     Lalang    -19.50-19.60- +0.60-0.70Shengli               -18.45-18.55-     Nanhai    -19.75-19.85-NW Shelf              -19.65-19.75-     Griffin   -19.15-19.20-Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCONTRACT CARGO PRICESNo. 2 Fuel Bargec/Gal                     +66.00-66.75(a)No. 6 Fuel Cargoes$/Bbl Company   Eff Date  0.3pct    0.5pct    1.0pct    2.2pct    2.8pct      Coastal   12/21     27.00     26.80     26.50     21.00     19.50      Global    12/29     +29.75    +29.50    +27.00    +21.00    +20.55      Hess      05/10     25.00     23.50     23.00      Rio Energy          12/28               22.50     21.00     18.50      Apex      05/18                                   18.50     17.50      Sprague   12/22               27.25     26.25      Northeast 12/27     28.00     27.25     26.75     22.25      Ranges(b)      0.3pct              27.00-28.00      0.5pct              23.50-27.25      1.0pct              23.00-26.75+      2.2pct              18.50-21.00      2.8pct              19.50-19.50All prices delivered, N.Y. Harbor. Residual fuels are low pour.(a)Barge prices, FOB Terminal. Some suppliers grant TVAs.(b)Ranges excluded low and high for each grade.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoATLANTIC & GULF COAST RESIDIllustration(s):Table: Atlantic & Gulf Coast Resid (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT                      U.S. Tank Car Truck TransportPAD1                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedMetroNY*N.New Jersey*Albany                            -58.00-60.15-  -61.25-64.00--65.80-70.50Atlanta                           +52.25-53.70+  +55.05-56.50++59.25-61.45Baltimore                         -54.50-54.50-  -60.05-60.05-+64.15-64.15+Boston*                                                                                    (x)-64.25-72.25Charleston                         54.40-55.20+   57.03-58.00+ 61.90-62.90+Greensboro,NC(a)                  -52.25-53.70+  -55.25-59.00+-59.25-61.40+Miami                              53.55-54.05+  +56.70-57.05+ 61.05-62.55+New Haven*Norfolk                            52.45-54.15    55.46-58.30  60.45-64.15Philadelphia*Pittsburgh                         55.13-58.30-   59.03-62.60- 64.88-70.75-Portland,ME*Savannah                          +54.70-55.45+  +57.65-58.15++62.85-64.15+Spartanburg                       +53.00-53.70+  +56.00-56.50++60.05-60.70+Tampa                              53.40-55.80+   56.40-58.80+ 61.40-63.80+Wilmington,NC                     -55.40-55.40-  -58.60-58.60--62.40-62.40-                    Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional        No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselMetroNY*           -81.70-81.70-  -64.85-66.65-  -65.30-68.40-N.New Jersey*      -68.00-70.00-  -61.75-63.65-  -61.75-64.10-Albany             -70.15-72.05-  -63.35-65.20-  -64.10-66.60-Atlanta                           -57.70-59.55-  -56.75-59.60-Baltimore          -68.95-68.95-  -59.85-62.10-  -58.80-62.95-Boston*            -68.70-76.75 (x)              -64.05-71.00Charleston         -65.00-65.00-                 -59.00-60.65-Greensboro,NC(a)   -64.15-67.00-  -58.15-59.80-  -57.15-60.00-Miami                             -59.20-59.70-  -57.90-59.35-New Haven*         -71.15-76.15-  +63.75-70.00   -64.95-65.10-Norfolk                           -58.30-60.95-  -58.15-61.60-Philadelphia*      -66.75-68.30-  -62.50-62.75-  -62.50-62.90-Pittsburgh         -69.65-69.65-  +59.04-59.50-   61.93-62.65-Portland,ME*       -68.95-74.00-  -64.15-71.10   -64.40-71.75Savannah                          -60.95-60.95-  -59.50-60.45-Spartanburg                       -57.75-59.80-  -57.30-59.80-Tampa                             -58.00-58.65-  -57.55-59.45-Wilmington,NC                     -60.50-60.50-  -60.50-60.50-PAD2                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedChicago                           +55.50-55.60-  +58.50-58.50++62.50-62.60-Columbus                          -56.45-57.70+   59.85-60.70+-64.45-66.70+Des Moines                        -56.45-57.15+               -62.95-63.65+Detroit                           +55.65-57.20+  +58.90-60.20++63.40-65.70+Mpls/St.Paul(a)                   +56.20-62.00+               +67.00-67.00+Oklahoma                          +53.35-54.40-  +56.35-57.55++59.90-62.65St.Louis                          -53.50-54.77-               -61.00-62.35-                    Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional        No.6Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselChicago             35.00-42.00   -54.10-54.95-  -55.45-57.10-Columbus                          -56.00-58.90-  -56.05-59.80-Des Moines                        -57.00-57.60-  -60.10-61.45-Detroit                           -56.25-56.45-  -55.55-59.65-Mpls/St.Paul        38.00-40.00    56.45-58.15-   60.20-61.75-Oklahoma                          -53.65-54.03-  -57.82-58.90-St.Louis                          -54.00-54.85-  -55.85-60.65-PAD3                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedAlbuquerque(a)                     64.75-64.75                 73.25-73.25Amarillo                           55.85-55.85    59.85-59.85  63.85-63.85Arkansas                          +52.80-54.05   +55.50-57.05 +60.05-61.90Birmingham                        +51.95-52.70    55.65-55.65 +58.95-60.15Corpus Christi                     50.00-50.80-  -54.10-54.10- 58.00-58.80-Dallas/Ft.Worth                   +54.00-54.00+               +62.00-62.00+Houston*N.Orleans Area                     51.80-52.35-   54.80-55.07--59.60-60.30                   Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselAlbuquerque(a)                                    64.50-64.50Amarillo                                         -60.55-60.55-Arkansas                          -56.05-59.60-  -57.55-62.70-Birmingham                        -57.70-59.70-  -56.65-59.65-Corpus Christi                    -56.50-57.90-  -55.00-57.95-Dallas/Ft.Worth                   -58.75-58.75-  -57.00-60.00-Houston*                          -56.80-59.50-  -56.50-60.00-N.Orleans Area                    -57.00-58.30-  -56.50-58.25-PAD4                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedBillings(d)                        61.50-61.50                 70.50-70.50Casper(d)                          60.00-60.00                 68.50-68.50Denver(d)                          53.25-55.00+                61.50-63.50+Salt Lake   (d)                   +56.50-56.50+               +65.50-65.50+                Kerosene           Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselBillings(d)                                       65.00-65.42Casper(d)                                         63.75-63.77Denver(d)                         +57.90-57.90+  +58.00-60.37+Salt Lake                         -62.50-62.50-  -62.02-62.75-PAD5                    Regular        Unleaded       Midgrade      PremiumConventional                                                    UnleadedLos Angeles*Phoenix(a)                         65.50-70.25+                73.00-80.25+Portland,OR                       -57.75-66.25                -67.75-76.25SanFran-EBay                      +60.75-63.25+  +64.75-67.25++69.75-72.25+Seattle/Tacoma                     56.50-56.50                 66.50-66.50Spokane(a)                         65.50-65.50                 76.50-76.50                   Kerosene       Diesel         Low SulfurConventional       No.1Fuel       No.2 Fuel      No. 2 DieselLos Angeles*                                      69.75-71.00+Phoenix(a)                                        65.75-66.25Portland,OR                       -57.75-59.50-  -61.00-62.00SanFran-EBay                                     -67.00-67.00-Seattle/Tacoma                     55.85-55.85    56.00-57.20Spokane(a)                         64.00-65.00    64.00-65.00Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoU.S. TANK CAR TRUCK TRANSPORT, REFORMULATED GASOLINEIllustration(s):Table: U.S. Tank Car Truck Transport, Reformulated Gasoline (This table isnot available electronically. Please see the January 2, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoPLATT'S INDEX             PLATT'S INDEXJet Kerosene   Gasoline       Gasoil135.52 + 0.74  104.54 - 0.35  127.24 - 1.61Naphtha        Resid          Atlantic Sweet Crude113.32 + 0.60  186.56 + 0.72  119.69 + 1.52Med Sour Crude  PG/Asia Crude  U.S. Pipeline Crude125.16 + 1.73   128.19 + 0.10  115.27 + 1.08Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoFIVE-DAY ROLLING AVERAGES                 Five-Day Rolling AveragesGasoil/Heating Oil          $/Bbl               c/GalSingapore                   25.4625.59          60.62**60.93Arab Gulf                   23.6723.78          56.36**56.62W.C. Cargo                  22.9823.38          54.71**55.67L.A. LS.2                   25.10**25.49        59.7560.70S.F. LS.2                   24.99**25.39        59.5060.45$/MT                c/Gal0.2 CIF ARA                 180.90182.10        57.80**57.44EN590 CIF ARA               182.80184.10        58.40**58.820.2 Rotterdam Barge         175.40175.90        56.04**56.200.2 FOB NWE                 172.40173.60        55.08**55.460.2 CIF MED                 184.70185.70        59.01**58.58EN590 CIF MED               189.20190.40        60.45**60.83NY Cargo                    190.26**191.21      60.4060.70NY Barge                    190.26**191.21      60.4060.70US Gulf Water               170.32**171.56      55.3055.70US Gulf Pipe                169.55**170.48      55.0555.35Group 3                     160.47**161.85      52.1052.55Carib Cargo                 175.90177.50        56.56**57.07NYMEX NO. 2                 191.05              60.65Naphtha$/Bbl               c/GalSingapore                   17.1617.26          40.86**41.10$/MT                c/GalJapan C/F                   170.15171.35        45.01**45.33Arab Gulf                   142.15143.35        37.61**37.92CIF NWE Physical            161.60164.00        42.75**44.32Rotterdam  Barge            156.00 158.40       41.27**42.81FOB Med                     141.60144.00        37.46**38.92CIF Genoa                   158.60161.00        41.96**43.51US Gulf W                   174.64**177.97      47.2048.10Carib Cargo                 158.70161.70        43.72**44.55Jet Kerosene                $/MT                c/GalCIF NWE Cargo               203.80  205.80      61.76**61.99Rotterdam Barge             196.70197.30        59.61**59.43FOB Med                     187.80189.80        56.91**57.17US Gulf Water               190.73**192.06      57.4557.85US Gulf Pipe                190.73**192.06      57.4557.85Carib Cargo                 182.50185.11        56.50**57.31NY Cargo                    204.11**204.93      61.8562.10LA Pipeline                 206.23**209.10      64.6565.55Group 3                     201.36**202.52      60.6561.00Chicago                     199.37**200.53      60.0560.40Gasoline,Intl. Market       c/Gal               Prem $/MtCIF ARA 0.15                48.66**49.23        170.80172.80Rotterdam Barge 0.15        48.15**48.92        169.00171.70FOB NWE 0.15                46.38**46.95        162.80164.80FOB Med 0.15                46.15**46.72        162.00164.00Gasoline, U.S. Market         Unleaded            PremiumSF Pipeline                 55.3056.25          60.4561.40Chicago                     51.7552.05          55.0055.40NYMEX Unl                   58.55Low Sulfur Resid Fuel Oil   $/Bbl               $/MtSingapore LSWR              18.0418.24          120.87**122.21CIF ARA 1%                  19.41**19.59        124.20125.40Rot Bar 1%                  18.34**18.34        117.40119.20NWE FOB 1%                  18.31**18.22        117.20118.40Med FOB 1%                  18.44**18.40        118.00119.60NY Cargo .3% HP             22.3922.64          150.01**151.69NY Cargo .3% LP             22.7022.95          152.09**153.77NY Cargo .7% Max            21.3421.59          138.71**140.34NY Cargo 1% Max             20.8421.09          135.46**137.09US Gulf .7%                 18.0018.25          115.02**116.62US Gulf 1%                  17.0717.32          109.08**110.67Hi Sulfur Resid Fuel Oil    $/Bbl               $/MtSingapore 180               17.70**17.93        115.05116.55Singapore 380               16.96**17.18        108.55109.95Arab Gulf 180               16.86**17.09        107.90109.40CIF ARA 3.5%                17.02**17.17        107.20109.00NWE FOB 3.5%                16.06**16.22        101.20103.00Med FOB 3.5%                15.59**15.81        98.20100.40CIF Med 3.5%                16.70**16.91        105.20107.40NY Cargo 2.2%               17.8218.07          114.05**115.65NY Cargo 3.0%               16.9917.24          108.74**110.34US Gulf 3%                  15.0515.30          96.32**97.92Carib 2.0%                  15.0015.25          96.00**97.60Carib 2.8%                  14.7515.00          94.40**96.00Crude Oil, FOB Source       $/BblWest Texas Int              19.1919.23NYMEX Crude                 19.25Brent (DTD)                 18.5418.58Brent (First Month)         18.8418.89Dubai                       16.9917.05Iran (Sidi)                 17.6917.75ANS (First Month)           17.7517.81ANS (California)            17.3317.40WTI Posting Plus            1.911.94*Five Days ending December 28Conversions either side of asterisksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoCLOSING COMMODITY LEVELS                      Closing Commodity Levels                                        Change                  Change$/Bbl   NYMEX Crude     Feb     19.36   -0.14   Mar     18.92   -0.12        NYMEX Sr. Crude Feb     n.a.    n.a.    Mar     n.a.    n.a.        IPE Crude       Feb     18.26   -0.09   Mar     17.75   -0.04c/Gal   NYMEX No. 2     Jan     60.32   -2.01   Feb     59.15   -1.46        NYMEX NY Unl    Jan     59.28   -0.98   Feb     58.07   +0.08        NYMEX GC Unl    Jan     n.a.    n.a.    Feb     n.a     n.a.$/MT    IPE Unl         Jan     n.a     n.a.    Feb     n.a     n.a        IPE Gasoil      Jan     178.25  -1.75   Feb     172.75  -2.75                                        Change  Total Volume$/Bbl   NYMEX Crude     Apr     18.56   -0.09   55,845        NYMEX Sr. Crude Apr     n.a.    n.a.    0        IPE Crude       Apr     17.35   -0.06   29,233c/Gal   NYMEX No. 2     Mar     55.99   -1.12   67,085        NYMEX NY Unl    Mar     56.64   +0.15   33,582        NYMEX GC Unl    Mar     n.a.    n.a.    0$/MT    IPE Unl         Mar     n.a.    n.a.    0        IPE Gasoil      Mar     165.75  -3.25   21,102Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoSPOT TANKER RATES                            DIRTY                         Route           WS=100 WS Assess. Rate/$MT65,000 MT                FE/FE             6.20      117   7.254                         CARIB/USAC        4.89      152   7.44080,000 MT                MED/MED           4.96       98   4.861                         AG/FE             5.95      125   7.438                         MED/USG           9.49       89   8.446                         UKC/UKC           3.72       96   3.571130,000 MT               MED/USG          10.41       80   8.332                         WAF/USG           9.63       90   8.671                         UKC/USG           8.96       88   7.880                         AG/MED            8.26       75   6.195250,000 MT               AG/USG           14.47       58   8.396                         AG/FE             5.95       59   3.510                            CLEAN                         Route           WS=100 WS Assess. Rate/$MT30,000 MT                MED/UKC           5.18      165   8.547                         MED/USAC          7.72      225  17.381                         MED/MED           3.52      160   5.632                         UKC/USAC          7.18      230  16.526                         UKC/UKC           4.00      160   6.400                         BSEA/MED          4.26      160   6.816                         AG/INDIA          5.59      270  15.093                         AG/JAP           10.45      260  27.170                         SING/JAP          5.71      249  14.218                         CARIB/USAC        3.92      360  14.130                         CARIB/USG         4.25      370  15.743                         CARIB/UKC         6.94      300  20.82055,000 MT                AG/JAPAN         10.45      215  22.468Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoJET FUEL PRICES                  Jet Fuel Prices                       Contract             Spotc/GalHouston         +63.00-64.00        -56.50-57.00-     E. Chicago      +61.50-68.00+       +60.00-60.50+     Linden           59.75-66.75+       -60.00-60.50-     Los Angeles     +70.50-75.00        +66.00-66.75+     Denver          +65.25-65.50+     Tulsa           +66.00-67.50        -59.75-60.00-     Pt. Everglades  +62.50-67.00+       +59.00-60.00+     San Antonio      61.50-66.00     Boston          +68.00-69.00+     Alaska           74.75-75.25+Effective December 29Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S OILGRAM PRICE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996   Vol. 74, NoAPI WEEKLY SUMMARY                         API Weekly SummaryDistrict 1                           12/22/95  12/15/95  12/23/94 12/24/93Crude                                14,283    15,555    14,111    14,970Oxygenated Mogas                     209       186       2,087     naReformulated Mogas                   18,319    17,698    24,617    naTotal Mogas                          51,158    52,975    56,549    64,654Kero Jet                             11,016    11,511    11,918     9,020Distillate greater than 0.05         36,263    38,794    45,923    naDistillate less than 0.05            17,246    17,755    20,177    naTotal Distillate                     53,509    56,549    66,100    65,144Resid                                15,247    16,326    17,997    17,617District 2Crude                                63,404    64,068    72,523    77,102Oxygenated Mogas                     608       659       523       naReformulated Mogas                   1,544     1,625     2,867     naTotal Mogas                          50,387    50,054    55,495    56,563Kero Jet                             6,429     6,663     7,790     7,293Distillate greater than 0.05         10,524    10,744    9,707     naDistillate less than 0.05            19,615    19,491    21,747    naTotal Distillate                     30,139    30,235    31,454    34,164Resid                                2,695     2,348     2,410     3,181District 3Crude                                145,130   147,799   165,815   170,766Oxygenated Mogas                     375       492       1,028     naReformulated Mogas                   8,850     9,074     10,276    naTotal Mogas                          61,094    60,436    61,006    64,794Kero Jet                             14,930    14,074    16,763    12,722Distillate greater than 0.05         13,329    13,792    13,162    naDistillate less than 0.05            15,775    15,900    14,567    naTotal Distillate                     29,104    29,692    27,729    28,696Resid                                12,439    12,595    15,031    15,893District 4Crude                                10,727    10,433    11,736    10,633Oxygenated Mogas                     114       198       370       naReformulated Mogas                   na        na        na        naTotal Mogas                          6,741     6,877     6,882         6,809Kero Jet                             595       592       499       432Distillate greater than 0.05         662       649       570       naDistillate less than 0.05            2,306     2,382     2,486     naTotal Distillate                     2,968     3,031     3,056     3,199Resid                                568       564       474       421District 5Crude                                81,203    81,252    73,741    74,973Oxygenated Mogas                     3,010     2,889     4,078     naReformulated Mogas                   6,128     6,105     5,146     naTotal Mogas                          27,017    27,105    29,958    31,635Kero Jet                             6,896     7,516     7,793     8,230Distillate greater than 0.05         4,332     3,811     4,025     naDistillate less than 0.05            7,962     7,899     8,018     naTotal Distillate                     12,294    11,710    12,043    11,546Resid                                6,485     6,082     6,715     7,396Total                                12/22/95  12/15/95  12/23/94 12/24/93Crude                                314,747   319,107   337,926   348,444Oxygenated Mogas                     4,316     4,424     8,086     naReformulated Mogas                   34,841    34,502    42,906    naTotal Mogas                          196,397   197,447   209,890   224,455Kero Jet                             39,866    40,356    44,763    37,697Distillate greater than 0.05         65,110    67,790    73,387    naDistillate less than 0.05            62,904    63,427    66,995    naTotal Distillate                     128,014   131,217   140,382   142,749Resid                                37,434    37,915    42,627    44,508Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B36-11IA086-000616-B014-85http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey84.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001421 text/html 295144HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:11:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:45 GMTContent-length: 294956Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey84.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER via NewsNet January, 1992 Vol. 136, No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ABB REORGANIZED TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICE (868 words) WASHINGTON UPDATE IN AN UNDERTAKING AS COMPLEX AND COSTLY AS POWERPLANT DEVELOPMENT--WHERE STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS CAN SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THE DESIGN AND OPERATION OF A PLANT--PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS MUST BE AMPLY PREPARED FOR REGULATORY AND PUBLIC OVERSIGHT. (390 words) RECENT COURT RULINGS AND LAWSUITS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE WASTE-TO-ENERGY (WTE) PLANTS, AS WELL AS COAL-FIRED FACILITIES, HAVE UNDERSCORED THE NEED FOR DEFINITIVE REGULATION ON ASH FROM POWERPLANTS. (530 words) DRAFT LEGISLATION AIMED AT SUBSIDIZING THE RENEWABLE-ENERGY INDUSTRY IS DRAWING FIRE FROM INDUSTRY GROUPS. (185 words) NEW POWERPLANT PROJECTS TECHNICAL PROFILES OF CURRENT PROJECTS AS REPORTED IN MCGRAW-HILL ENERGY GROUP'S ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK, INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT, AND NUCLEONICS WEEK NEWSLETTERS (1272 words) SPECIAL REPORT COAL HANDLING AND PREPARATION Although the basics remain the same, the many elements comprising coal handling and preparation in the powerplant have taken on a new luster--put there by the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (6164 words) COMING: EXPERT SYSTEMS TO PREDICT IMPACT OF COAL QUALITY ON PLANT OPERATION (230 words) MICRONIZED-COAL MILLS YIELD PRODUCT 10 TIMES FINER THAN PULVERIZED COAL (314 words) SPECIAL REPORT: PROJECT PROFILES SUPPRESSANTS CONTROL DUST IN ALASKAN MINE (176 words) ON-LINE COAL ANALYZER INSURES SO SUBSCRIPT 2 COMPLIANCE (127 words) BARGE UNLOADER MOVES COAL INLAND IN A HURRY (177 words) VALVE ISOLATES BURNER/PULVERIZER LINE (131 words) FEEDERS PROVIDE CONTINUOUS, DEPENDABLE TRANSFER OF COAL (104 words) FAMILY OF DUST SUPPRESSANTS BASED ON RESEARCH, TESTING (143 words) RING HAMMERMILL OFFERS DIVERSE SERVICE (164 words) PAIR CRUSHER/DRYER WITH FLUIDIZED-BED COMBUSTORS FOR EFFICIENT FUEL PREPARATION (179 words) SAMPLING WITHIN BIAS-TEST ACCURACY LIMITS (162 words) PULVERIZER UPGRADES BOOST PERFORMANCE (125 words) MILL EFFICIENTLY GRINDS WET OR DRY COAL FINES (194 words) WATER TREATMENT TWO-PASS RO EASES DEMINERALIZER REGENERATION BURDEN Membrane applications to makeup-water treatment continue to expand. Redesign of a utility pretreatment system, described here, introduced many improvements, not least among which was a major reduction in chemical costs (969 words) UTILITIES CONTEND WITH COPPER TO ENHANCE CYCLE RELIABILITY Remedies for corrosion and fouling include replacement of copper-bearing components, improvement of condensate polishing procedures, intensive chemistry monitoring (1948 words) PEOPLE Energy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director of (18 words) STONE & WEBSTER ENGINEERING CORP (22 words) Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president... (16 words) Foster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of international (16 words) Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology... (15 words) Hadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and Scott (25 words) Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president... (14 words) UNITED ENGINEERS 7 CONSTRUCTORS INC (19 words) ABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gas (28 words) CRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director of (20 words) Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president... (11 words) Research Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names Dr (24 words) The Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for its (20 words) CONTRACTS Newport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valve (49 words) Power Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize and (26 words) ABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply the (165 words) ABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies three (31 words) ABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturing (22 words) Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit of (27 words) Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW, (28 words) Chas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-based (28 words) General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md, (33 words) Chem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration and (23 words) PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul, (40 words) Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts by (116 words) Research-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies (47 words) Primesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-fired (33 words) Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW, (30 words) Papco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion joints (36 words) Resorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, supplies (40 words) Conversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGD (26 words) Foxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclear (27 words) Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop a (45 words) Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div, (32 words) Custom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of Duquesne (48 words) Foster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript x (26 words) Black & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuous (34 words) FMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaim (26 words) GEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generator (23 words) Leeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, will (59 words) Vortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop an (32 words) Environmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostatic (29 words) Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11 (26 words) Research-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supply (28 words) United Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provide (31 words) General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md, (29 words) BW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance and (30 words) MERGERS/ACQUISITIONS Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires Resources (34 words) Aquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering and (24 words) Ronan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, Industrial (42 words) B&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts service (20 words) Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc, (29 words) BURNS & MCDONNEL ENGINEERING CO (28 words) Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, form (31 words) Coppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreement (31 words) Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh, (19 words) PRECISION SAMPLERS INC (23 words) PUMPS, COMPRESSORS, VALVES, AND PIPING CIRC-WATER PIPING REPLACEMENT: GIVE IT THE ATTENTION IT DEMANDS When a vital piping system runs out of life, there is a chance to rethink possibilities, reconsider principles, and even to come up with unique solutions (2117 words) LOOK AT SUCTION SPECIFIC SPEED FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE Rework of experience-based limits for impeller performance makes the concept more helpful in practical pump selection (2002 words) STEAM GENERATION KNOW CAUSES OF, SOLUTIONS TO CFB-BOILER REFRACTORY PROBLEMS Refractories are used extensively in CFB boilers. Because early systems were prone to failures, advanced refractory systems have been developed and applied successfully (3170 words) STOKERS KEEP PACE WITH MODERN COMBUSTION Often-subtle design and operating details ensure maximum performance from spreader stokers firing most types of coal and solid waste fuels (1271 words) INSTRUMENTATION, CONTROLS, COMPUTERS, AND SOFTWARE DIAGNOSTIC MONITORING--AN OVERVIEW Diagnostic engineering is a recognized plant-maintenance function. This article outlines the use of diagnostic monitoring for detection of incipient failure, to facilitate predictive maintenance (1283 words) GAS TURBINES, STEAM TURBINES, ENGINES GAS TURBINES PACE NEW CAPACITY ADDITIONS The relentless march of gas turbines into the powerplant arena results from continued advances in efficiency, ultra-low NO subscript x emissions, coal compatibility, and unit output. The latest target: base-load power supply (1207 words) ADVANCED BURNERS REDUCE NO SUBSCRIPT X EMISSIONS (689 words) AERODERIVATIVE UNITS FEATURE HIGH EFFICIENCY, AIRCRAFT-ENGINE PARTS COMPATABILITY (348 words) INDUSTRY NOTES: UTILITIES ICE MAKER ADDS LOW-COST KILOWATTS TO PEAKING UNIT (1213 words) INDUSTRY NOTES: PROCESS/MANUFACTURING/UTILITIES DEVELOPMENTS TO WATCH (1917 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE COMPANY FEATURES RANGE OF PRODUCTS AT ISA SHOW (198 words) MONITOR, CONTROL ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION FROM CENTRAL LOCATION (254 words) UPGRADE INDUSTRIAL GAS TURBINES WITH ELECTRONIC TRANSMITTERS (334 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: STEAM GENERATION Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime, (40 words) Condensate discharge system combines the best features of float and (58 words) Steam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everything (47 words) Valve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored with (51 words) Scada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increased (44 words) Data-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--links (47 words) Ceramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. The (48 words) Utility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOx (36 words) Report-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspection (42 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: FUELS AND FUEL HANDLING Bulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurized (51 words) Drum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use product (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: GAS TURBINES, STEAM TURBINES, ENGINES PC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steam (51 words) Low-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines are (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PLANT ELECTRIC SYSTEMS Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity, (39 words) Communicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) to (49 words) Circuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruption (48 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PUMPS, COMPRESSORS, VALVES, AND PIPING Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland, (39 words) Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft, (42 words) Rotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service plus (45 words) Expansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation to (35 words) Check valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slam (35 words) Air compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load at (55 words) Ball valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operating (48 words) Valve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuator (49 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE: PUMPS, COMPRESSORS,VALVES, AND PIPING Expansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasive (40 words) NEW EQUIPMENT/LITERATURE:INSTRUMENTATION, CONTROLS, COMPUTERS, AND SOFTWARE Flue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streams (49 words) Emissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that uses (46 words) Pressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convert (60 words) Distributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precision (38 words) Company products include microprocessor-based control systems, (40 words) Data-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up to (43 words) Thermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described in (38 words) O subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling any (57 words) Pressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those made (47 words) Characterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning of (36 words) Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing, (40 words) Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant, (37 words) Transmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing area (53 words) Software package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- to (50 words) HART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available from (44 words) Applications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up to (46 words) Stator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements of (53 words) Software programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, and (38 words) XL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integrated (51 words) DESIGN/OPERATING IDEAS DETECT HOT SPOTS IN AIR HEATERS BEFORE FIRE OCCURS (514 words) CUT SCRUBBER O&M COSTS BY ACID-CLEANING FILTER SCREENS (145 words) USE MODEL PLANE TO RECORD STACK CONDITIONS (202 words) CALCULATE LOSSES CAUSED BY STEAM LEAKS (154 words) COOK ZEBRA MUSSELS BY RECIRCULATING COOLING WATER (70 words) FLOW MODIFIER UPS EFFICIENCY OF GAS-FIRED BOILERS (243 words) THIS MONTH'S PROBLEM HOW SHOULD WE PLAN FOR REPAIRS AFTER FIRE OR STORM? (1595 words) CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB REORGANIZED TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICEDr Richard J Slember, president, ABB Power Plant Operations (US),headquartered in Stamford, Conn, announces several changes in the areas ofsales/marketing, nuclear systems, fossil systems, services, controls, andR&D. These changes, made public over the last few weeks, are a major partof Slember's plan to build a more closely knit organization--one that can"get the synergy out of ABB" and better serve the customer.   Slember, who joined ABB Asea Brown Boveri in November 1990, told Powerthat he expects to make a few more announcements in the coming months as hefine-tunes his organization; however, these will be primarily personnelassignments and not involve structural changes to the organization.   Unified sales force. Perhaps the most significant of Slember's recentannouncements is the appointment of Michael Bray to head a newly formed,unified US sales force to serve all units of ABB Power Plant Operationsexcept the nuclear and services groups. The new organization is now ABB'sprimary interface with electric utilities for boilers, steam and gasturbines, environmental control equipment, and powerplant controls.   It was created in response to feedback from utilities, which hadrequested a more focused customer-service organization. Says Slember, "Thisaction brings together an unparalleled offering in meeting customerrequirements. ABB, with a single organization, can now meet the customer'sneeds for the entire powerplant, from fuel feed to stack."   The Power Plant Operations sales force will operate from five regionaloffices, coordinated by Bray from ABB's Windsor (Conn) facility. Regionalvice presidents are Andrew Cook, East, based in Windsor; Michael Salerno,Southwest, Atlanta; Steven Deabler, Southwest, Dallas; Vincent Pacello,Central, Chicago. The western regional vice president, to be located inCalifornia, is still unnamed.   Nuclear. Dr Shelby Brewer is appointed chairman, ABB CombustionEngineering Nuclear Power, with responsibility for strategic customers,government relations, and long-term positioning of the company's nuclearbusinesses. Brewer joined Combustion Engineering Inc in 1984 as vicepresident of operations for the Nuclear Power Systems Div.   In a related appointment, Peter S Van Nort is named president, ABBCombustion Engineering Nuclear Power, responsible for the operations of ABBImpell and the company's nuclear-power business units: systems, fuelservices, and associated staff. Van Nort has been with ABB for about ayear, serving in upper-management positions.   Boilers. Frank Fagan is appointed senior manager of ABB's boilerbusiness. Fagan, with over 30 years of experience in fossil-fueledsteam-generation technology and most recently president of ABB CombustionEngineering Services Inc, will concentrate on developing ABB's globalboiler strategies and on optimizing the implementation of those strategiesin the US marketplace.   Services. David M Gray becomes president, ABB Combustion EngineeringServices, replacing Fagan (see above). Gray, with extensive executive andoperations experience in the boiler business--most recently as vicepresident of fossil services--is responsible for all service-related workon operating boilers, world-wide. These services include all of the partsand components used to maintain, rehabilitate, and upgrade boilers; theengineering and design work to support that effort; field engineeringservices; and training, testing, and analysis services. Gray's group alsois involved in the construction of new boilers, precipitators, scrubbers,and related powerplant equipment, and provides commissioning services fornew boilers.   Gray told Power that he sees a large amount of clean-air-related servicework down the road, but that this activity has not yet started in earnestbecause federal and state regulations governing powerplant emissions arenot "final." Today, the boiler-service business essentially is in ano-growth period, with activity dominated by normal rehabilitationandpressure-part work. Considerable effort also is going into planning withcustomers to ensure a prompt response to regulatory requirements whenspecific clean-air guidelines are announced. One change in the servicesbusiness as it was envisioned only a few years ago, according to Gray, isthat many utilities are now looking to shut down old boilers rather than toextend their life--this to facilitate complying with expected clean-airstatutes.   Controls. Edward H Verdery is appointed president of ABB's new PowerPlant Controls business unit, incorporating the following preexistingcompany operations: fossil instrumentation and control operations fromABB's old Power Automation, Fossil Systems, and Fossil Services units andthe powerplant training simulator and computer businesses of the PowerAutomation and Nuclear groups.   In making this organizational change, Slember notes "In the past, thepowerplant operator had to use a piecemeal approach for plant control,using equipment from various vendors for each part of the plant--forexample, boilers, turbines, or environmental control. We now have greaterbreadth of offering in plant control and can match the control system tothe equipment, to optimize plant performance." The objective of integratedcontrols is to lower costs to the operator, increase plant availability,and minimize pollutant emissions.   R&D. Finally, in an effort to weave a technology network from Europe tothe US, Slember names Dr Gernot Gessinger vice president of research andtechnology. In his newly created position, Gessinger, a 20-yr ABB veteran,is responsible for the establishment of R&D programs for all ABB PowerPlant operation in the US.Photograph: SlemberPhotograph: GrayPhotograph: BrayPhotograph: FaganCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.IN AN UNDERTAKING AS COMPLEX AND COSTLY AS POWERPLANT DEVELOPMENT--WHERESTATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS CAN SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THE DESIGN ANDOPERATION OF A PLANT--PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS MUST BE AMPLY PREPARED FORREGULATORY AND PUBLIC OVERSIGHT.By:Marie LeoneAt least one industry expert, Peter Mason, Bechtel Corp, San Francisco,Calif, suggests the simple old-fashioned matrix system. He says thisevaluation tool has been successfully tested with nuclear powerplants, andcan easily be adapted to other types of facilities. In a talk to the recentASME Joint Power Generation Conference, Mason pointed out that manytechnical issues relating to power-project work originate as safety orenvironmental licensing concerns, often tied to legislation. He cites as agood example the nuclear industry's design review process which takes placebefore and after project completion. Often sparked by internal or externalaudits, inspections, reviews, and/or employee concerns, intervenorallegations, or hearing contentions, such issues can potentially delay, orin some extreme cases, terminate projects--as was the case with theShoreham nuclear plant in New York which was prohibited from operatingcommercially after construction and testing were complete.   Mason's proactive approach includes a review, resolution, and analysisof the issues and their root cause. By identifying and listing issues andsetting up cause matrices, project planners and plant-design experts canidentify problems before they become unmanageable, says Mason, who citesthe following example: The matrix evaluation method is used to design andbuild a new waste-to-energy plant. After the plant begins operation, apublic citizen's group raises safety concerns about the type of waste fuelbeing used and the toxicity of the ash. Local environmental regulatorsquestion the plant owners, who in turn, are able to use the matrix to roundup information and redirect the questions back to relevant technicaldocumentation. Asa result, a convenient record of consistent information issupplied to support the plant owner's decisions and safety-designstrategies.   The matrix approach is designed to prevent those involved in projectdevelopment from overreacting or being scarred off by problems that can besolved, notes Mason, adding that the issue-resolution step must remain atechnical, not a legal or quality-assurance matter, and thus must startwith a strong technical basis. More importantly, the process provides ahistory of potential problems and technical resolutions so there is areference file for new powerplants. Often, problems that management assumesare new have actually occurred before and have been solved, but the"corporate memory" fails, says Mason.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.RECENT COURT RULINGS AND LAWSUITS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE WASTE-TO-ENERGY(WTE) PLANTS, AS WELL AS COAL-FIRED FACILITIES, HAVE UNDERSCORED THE NEEDFOR DEFINITIVE REGULATION ON ASH FROM POWERPLANTS.By:Marie LeoneIn a decision that may go before the US Supreme Court, a federal appealscourt has ruled that ash generated by municipal-solid-waste (MSW) burningplants is subject to regulation as a hazardous waste (Subtitle C) under theResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The decision by the US Courtof Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reverses a lower court decision based ona 1988 lawsuit filed by the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), Washington,DC, against the city of Chicago. The latest decision raises the possibilityof higher disposal costs for MSW facilities located in Wisconsin, Indiana,and Illinois--the court's jurisdiction. However, industry observers saythat the decision will not have a significant impact because most ashtested under the existing EPA procedures does not exceed the regulatorythreshold for hazardous wastes, reports Independent Power Report, aMcGraw-Hill Inc newsletter. But although this particular ruling may nothurt the industry, the fact that no clear-cut rule exists leaves the dooropen for future complications that could aggravate project development,warn industry sources.   For example, based on a 1980 EPA rule, Congress voted to exempt"household waste" from RCRA's definition of hazardous waste. In an effortto further clarify the exemption, Congress added a section to the law in1984 stating that a waste-to-energy plant "shall not be deemed to betreating, storing, disposing of, or otherwise managing hazardous wastes, solong as the plant receives and burns only household waste or solid wastefrom commercial or industrial sources that does not contain hazardouswastes." Since then, industry experts have interpreted this to mean that ifthe fuel-waste delivered to the plant is not hazardous, then it followsthat the ash coming out is non-hazardous as well, and should be categorizedunder RCRA's Subtitle D. However, the recent Chicago ruling disallowed thatinterpretation. Chief Judge William Bauer wrote in the majority opinionthat the "ash is fundamentally different in its chemical and physicalcomposition from the plastic, paper, and other rubbish that goes in."   Regarding coal, the Oregon-based Citizens Interested in Bull Run Inc issuing EPA to force a decision about whether to regulate coal-combustionwaste by electric-utility plants as hazardous or non-hazardous. Under the1980 RCRA amendments, EPA was ordered to complete a report oncoal-combustion wastes and finalize a rule no later than six months afterthe completion of the report. Although the report was completed in 1988,EPA has yet to make a decision on the classification of coal ash. Theprimary concern over disposal of the waste is the potential for leachate tocontaminate groundwater. Small quantities of arsenic, barium, cadmium,lead, mercury, selenium, and other contaminants are known to be present incoal ash.   A decision to characterize coal-combustion wastes as hazardous willsignificantly raise ash-disposal costs for coal-fired plants, say industryobservers. That becomes important when considering new generating capacityand comparing the cost of coal-fired plants with other options. Note thatkey members of Congress are pushing to amend RCRA sometime this year(Power, December 1991, p 9).Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DRAFT LEGISLATION AIMED AT SUBSIDIZING THE RENEWABLE-ENERGY INDUSTRY ISDRAWING FIRE FROM INDUSTRY GROUPS.By:Marie LeoneThe House proposal would establish a 2.5 cents/kWh incentive payment for atotal of 10 years for electricity produced from solar, wind, biomass, andcertain forms of geothermal energy. To pay for the incentive, Congresswould impose a user fee averaging one-third of a mill (one-thirtieth of acent) per kWh on electric generation. The fee would be capped at one-halfmill per kWh.   The Edison Electric Institute, Washington DC, opposes the draft, sayingit is an energy tax that would skew the energy market. In addition, aspokesman for the National Assn of Regulatory Utility Commissions (Naruc)says Naruc will oppose the proposal, noting that although "we supportrenewable energy, our traditional policy is to oppose energy fees or taxesimposed by the federal government because in the end they are passed on tothe ratepayers."   Conversely, representatives from the renewable energy industry maintainthat the proposal would firmly establish the US as a leader in renewableenergy technology and help renewables find a permanent place in the USenergy supply mix.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.TECHNICAL PROFILES OF CURRENT PROJECTS AS REPORTED IN MCGRAW-HILL ENERGYGROUP'S ELECTRIC UTILITY WEEK, INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT, AND NUCLEONICSWEEK NEWSLETTERSUtilities in the Western Systems Coordinating Council (WSCC) say peakdemand will increase by an average of 1.9%/yr through 1999. To meet thisgrowth, utilities plan to add 6631 MW of net operable capacity during thedecade. Figure includes new construction and reactivation of units now incold shutdown. The only utilities in the region planning more than 500 MWof new construction are Arizona Public Service Co (535 MW), Los AngelesDept of Water & Power (506 MW), Nevada Power Co (710 MW), SacramentoMunicipal Utility District (550 MW), and San Diego Gas & Electric Co (698MW). All of the new capacity would be gas-fired peaking or combined-cycleunits. The only base-load units in the forecast are the expected return toservice of Public Service Co of Colorado's Ft St. Vrain nuclear plant as agas-fired steam/electric unit in 1995 and Southern California Edison Co'sreactivation of the oil-fired, 320-MW Alamitos Unit 3 in 1996, oil-fired,126-MW San Bernardino Units 1 and 2 in 1997, oil-fired, 132-MW EtiwandaUnit 1 in 1998, gas-fired, 215-MW Huntington Beach Unit 3 in 1999, and thegas-fired, 180-MW Highgrove Unit 3 in 1999. Non-utility generation (NUG)additions in the region are expected to total 2655 in the 1991-1999period. Utilities planning more than 200 MW of NUGs are Nevada Power (377MW), Pacific Gas & Electric Co (498 MW), Public Service Colorado (628 MW),Puget Sound Power & Light Co (296 MW), and Southern California Edison (514MW). Major new-capacity additions by utilities in the WSCC region includethe following: Portland General Electric Co, a 210-MW combined-cycle plantfor operation in July 1998; Arizona Public Service, three 70-MW combustionturbines in 1998, two more in 1999, and another in year 2000; LADWP, a240-MW combined-cycle in 1994, plus unspecified additions of 100 MW in1997, 1999, and 2000 and 200 MW in 1998; Nevada Power, combined-cycleconversions of Clark Units 5 and 6 in 1993 and Units 7 and 8 in 1994, plus70-MW combustion-turbine additions in 1994, 1995, and 1996; San Diego Gas& Electric, 230-MW combined-cycles in 1995 and 1996 and 224-MW combinedcycles in 1998 and 2000; SMUD plans to add its 550 MW in 1996, but nodetails are available. Houston Lighting & Power Co plans a 160-MW,gas-fired cogeneration project at a DuPont Corp facility in LaPorte, Tex,that would be owned by the utility as a traditional rate-based plant.Commercial operation of the $120-million (not including land, switchyard,and transmission expenses) facility is expected in mid 1995 . . . BlackHills Power & Light Co asks the Wyoming Industrial Siting Council to waivea permit application for its proposed 80-MW, coal-fired Simpson Unit 2 sothe utility can begin construction by August 1993 . . . Thermo ElectronCorp, Energy Systems Div, Waltham, Mass, selects United Engineers &Constructors Inc to design a 21-MW, biomass-fired powerplant in Delano,Calif. A fluidized-bed boiler will be installed. Construction start isexpected in the spring of 1992; project completion by the end of 1993 . . .US Windpower Inc, Livermore, Calif, and InterCoast Energy Co, a unit ofIowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co, form a joint venture--WindRiverDevelopment Co, Davenport, Iowa--to develop at least 250 MW ofwind-generated capacity in the Midwest . . . Wheelabrator EnvironmentalSystems, Hampton, NH, joins Decker Energy International Inc, Winter Haven,Fla, as a partner in a 40-MW woodwaste- and waste-tire-fired project inPolk County, Fla, near Lakeland. Schedule calls for a January 1994startup, but state and federal air permits have not yet been obtained . . .Southern Electric International Inc, Atlanta, Ga, considersco-developing a $20-million office-paper recycling plant with DeNovo Corp,Washington, DC, that would use 60,000 lb/hr of steam from SEI's planned220-MW, pulverized-coal-fired cogeneration project near Fredricksburg, Va.The powerplant project was selected by Virginia Power in its 1989solicitation under the assumption that a steam host could be developed . . .General Electric Co, Schenectady, NY, estimates that about 69,000 MW ofNUG capacity will be ordered in the US between 1991 and year 2000, withthe Southeast the most significant market region in the 1990s. Estimate ishigher than those of others because the GE number is for plant ordersrather than completed facilities . . . East Kentucky Power Cooperative Incselects its own bid for 300 MW of gas-fired peaking capacity, needed bymid-1995, over those from 11 private developers. The utility based 60% ofthe bid scoring on price, remainder on non-price criteria such asreliability and environmental issues. . . Texas Utilities Electric Co's"information request" soliciting cogenerators and independent powerproducers for expressions of interest for long-term, firm generatingcapacity--the utility plans to add nearly 2200 MW by the end of thedecade--brings replies from 48 developers. The 102 projects proposedincluded 83 gas- and 12 coal-fired facilities . . . The village of GreenIsland, NY, selects American Ref-Fuel, Houston, Tex, to build a$250-million, 1500-ton/day waste-to-energy plant . . . Pinellas County,Fla, which operates a 3150-ton/day waste-to-energy plant shelves plans toexpand facility throughput by as much as 50% because actual volumes havefallen far below projections for several reasons, among them: drought andrelated water restrictions, the economic downturn (less new construction,fewer tourists, etc), little or no population growth, recycling of waste . . . Wisconsin Electric Power Co plans to build a 160-MW cogen plant at thelargest paper mill in the state--Repap Wisconsin Inc's Kimberly facility . . . KVA Resources Inc, Bellevue, Wash, agrees to joint-venture withColumbia Aluminum to build a 210-MW, gas-fired combined-cycle plant nearthe John Day dam on the Columbia River that would intertie at a substationat the smelter. If permitting proceeds according to plan, the plant couldbe in operation as early as September 1993 . . . Towner Electric LP,Minneapolis, Minn, and an unnamed utility plan to develop a 440-MW,coal-gasification project in New Jersey that would also produce 25-milliongal/yr of methanol for use as a gasoline additive or as an alternative tomotor fuel for areas--like New Jersey--where ozone levels must be loweredto comply with the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Power would be soldto Public Service Electric & Gas Co under an agreement specifying that an80% capacity factor be maintained by the new project or it would beresponsible for the cost of replacement power . . . Tennessee ValleyAuthority expects to add up to 220 MW of hydroelectric capacity over thenext 10 years by investing an estimated $100-million in a retrofit programto upgrade turbine runners. First contract in the program, for replacementrunners at Wilson and Chicamauga dams, was awarded last October to VoithHydro Inc, York, Pa . . . Montana Power Co's 150-MW solicitation fordeliveries beginning in 1996 attracts notices of intent to bid for 170projects totaling about 13,500 MW . . . Plans to develop two cogenerationand two geothermal projects totaling more than 110 MW are announced inOregon, including: James River Corp's (Westport) 50-MW, woodwaste-firedpowerplant that would power the expansion of the company's paper mill,Eugene Water & Electric Bd/California Energy's 30-MW geothermal plant inNewberry Crater, Vulcan Power Co's 30-MW geothermal plant in NewberryCrater, and PG&E Bechtel Generating Co's natural-gas-fired project inHermisten.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COAL HANDLING AND PREPARATIONAlthough the basics remain the same, the many elements comprising coalhandling and preparation in the powerplant have taken on a new luster--putthere by the 1990 Clean Air Act AmendmentsBy:Thomas C Elliott, Senior EditorCoal cleaning at the mine, transportation to the powerplant, siteunloading, stockout and storage, reclaiming, feeders and conveyors,preparation, blending and switching, overall instrumentation andcontrol--these are the key topics reviewed in this report. The underlyingtheme is the pervasive impact of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990(CAA), which has so altered the thinking about powerplant operation in theyears ahead (see Power Special Report, "Clean Air Act Amendments: TheEngineering Response," June 1991). Until these amendments became law,precombustion technologies were merely a part of the landscape, advancingmostly as the occasion demanded. Now they are at center stage, key playersin the struggle to slash powerplant emissions at the stack before theybecome problems.   Evidence of a renewed emphasis on precombustion technologies iscompelling (also see box, p 18). For example, the idea of constructing acommon coal-preparation plant serving several large power stations is beingdiscussed today as a business venture similar to independent powerproduction. In addition, at least one midwestern utility reportedly isinvestigating the construction of a centrally located coal-blending stationserving many of the utilities affected by CAA.COAL CLEANING   About one-third of US steam coal (over 200-million tons) is cleaned toremove ash and sulfur impurities and to increase the coal's heating value.Most of the costs of coal cleaning are borne by mining companies, who buildand operate the cleaning facilities and dispose of the refuse removed fromthe coal in the cleaning process (Figure 1). The mining companies pass someof these expenses along to powerplants in higher coal prices.Clean-coal benefitsUtilities are burning more cleaned coal each year because they find thatthe savings it offers in fuel handling, plant efficiency, availability, andenvironmental controls compensate for the added cost. More specifically,improved coal quality can result in:   --A reduction of up to 20% in transportation costs.   --Reduced pulverizer operation and maintenance (O&M) costs because therewill be less hard mineral matter to pulverize.   --Increased boiler availability, efficiency, and life expectancy becauseof reduced slagging, fouling, corrosion, and erosion.   --Reduced electrostatic-precipitator or fabric-filter O&M costs becausethere will be less particulate matter to capture.   With the tighter controls on SO subscript 2 emissions mandated by theCAA, it will be interesting to see in which direction utilities lean withregard to the precombustion alternatives of coal cleaning, blending, andpurchasing of low-sulfur coals. Since the latter two are generally lessexpensive, the scales may tip toward them. Even now, low-sulfur westerncoals are becoming increasingly attractive compared to flue-gasdesulfurization.Commercial techniques   Basic coal-cleaning techniques are covered in detail in McGraw-HillInc's Standard Handbook of Powerplant Engineering, "Coal Cleaning," Sec 4,Pt 1, Ch 2, and in Power's Special Report, Coal cleaning, September 1981;also, March 1987, p 76, and August 1990, p 77. However, two leading-edgecommercial techniques worth mentioning are these:   --Improved hydraulic jig effectively cleans fine coal--a growingchallenge as new mining methods produce finer coal particles for greatersulfur liberation. This fine-coal jig uses hydraulic separation to stratifya bed of different-density particles through the application of a pulsatingwater stream. Microprocessor-controlled air valves regulate the length ofpulsation strokes, allowing raw-coal cleaning down to 100 microns.   --Conventional heavy-media coal-cleaning process has been refined inthis fashion: (1) A new type of magnetite is used with optimized physicaland mechanical properties, (2) the cyclone separation step is enhanced, and(3) the recovery of magnetite has been significantly improved. Theseprocess refinements pertain to the fines cleaning circuit only; thecoarse-material circuit is the same as a conventional prep plant.   Processes nearing commercial status are the thermal drying of low-rankcoals, principally low-sulfur western coals, and the production of pelletsfrom these dried coals, which typically crumble and become very dusty. Inboth cases, the objective is to reduce transportation costs and make thecoal more attractive to eastern markets.Advanced techniques   Some advanced techniques are these, which are at the bench-scale, pilot,or demonstration stages:   --Agglomeration. Here, a light hydrocarbon--such as heptane--isintroduced to agglomerate spherical coal particles. Wet, raw coal is groundto 20 mesh, is mixed vigorously with heptane in a high-shear contactor,then enters a low-shear mixer where asphalt is added as a binder. Afteragitation, the agglomerates are drained of water and refuse particles. Atthis point, steam sparging captures the heptane for reuse. Finally, theresulting coal pellets are water-washed to remove any trace of impurities.   --Froth flotation. This is a physical/chemical process that depends onthe attachment of air bubbles to high-carbon-content hydrophobic solids.Separation of coal occurs as dispersed air bubbles pass through asuspension of fine raw-coal concentrate. Additives are usually required toenhance the hydrophobic character of the coal particles relative to thehydrophilic nature of the mineral matter.   --Column flotation. This process takes advantage of the differences insurface chemistries of coal and mineral matter, which affect the way theseparticles interact with water and air bubbles. The fine-refuse slurry isintroduced into an 8-ft-diameter, 22-ft-high column. Air bubbles risingfrom the column's bottom help to separate coal particles from wastematerial and carry them to the top of the column, where they are skimmedoff.   --Chemical process. Here, mine-cleaned coal is treated with sodiumhydroxide and potassium hydroxide to transfer organic and pyritic sulfurand mineral matter into the molten alkali. Because of the high density ofthe caustic melt, the clean coal floats to the surface of the reactor andis separated out. Molten caustic is recycled; the cleaned coal is furtherwashed with water and dilute acid.   --Biological process. Still in the embryonic state, bioprocessinginvolves the use of micro-organisms, such as bacteria and fungi, tocatalyze sulfur-removal reactions. Studies show that 99% of pyritic sulfurcan be removed by the micro-organism thiobacillus ferroxidans. Especiallyattractive is the use of bioprocessing for the removal of organically boundsulfur, which is resistant to conventional coal cleaning; in the US,research centers around removal using model compounds (dibenzothiophene,polysulfides, and humic acids) to determine the mechanism of directcleavage of sulfur from coal. High cost may be an obstacle to selectingthis process.TRANSPORTATIONTransportation from mine to powerplant is via unit train, barge, truck,overland conveyor belt, or any combination of these modes. The systemselected depends on such factors as distance from mine to plant, daily"burn rate," location of plant site, and relative economics of competingtransportation modes.Unit trains   More than half of the nation's coal-fired steam generators are fed byunit-train coal delivery (Figure 2). A typical coal train is comprised ofabout 110 cars, with each car carrying about 100 tons of coal--an11,000-ton-capacity train continuously operating back and forth betweencoal source and plant like a shuttle. Many utilities own their unit trainsoutright, with these benefits: reduced freight rates, better railcaravailability, greater degree of control over scheduling and maintenance.   Of interest today are shipments of low-sulfur coal from the Powder RiverBasin in Wyoming to eastern destinations. Because of CAA, this coal (atroughly $4/ton) is becoming increasingly attractive. Fears that shortagesand bottlenecks in moving this coal eastward in the years ahead, spurred byburgeoning demand, appear to be groundless.   These questions most often arise: Will shipment costs rise precipitouslyin a demand economy? Will there be enough railcars to handle the risingload? Will there be enough trackage? Will scheduling be a problem? Theanswers are encouraging.   Railroad management is not about to take advantage of its goodcustomers, especially since coal suppliers/users form a solid base for itsoverall business (annual tonnages are more than three times greater thanthe second largest commodity, farm products). Although costs may rise, theywill reflect competitive conditions and not those of a captive marketplace.While it is true that railcar manufacture annually is considerably lessthan 15 years ago (100,000 cars plus vs 40,000 or so today), most cars canaccommodate more coal and weigh less (being aluminum-bodied), thus cancarry an extra five to 10 tons of coal without exceeding track weightlimitations. New routes shouldn't be necessary, although reinforcements inselected areas, upgrading of some trackage, extended siding lengths, anddouble trackage may be required. Most important, railroads generally arerun better--they operate faster, more efficiently, with better scheduling.   With regard to freeze control, thaw sheds at the plant site are stillthe most common solution to arriving shipments of frozen coal, although thehigh operating costs associated with these systems restrict their use tothe largest utilities. Friable western coals are more prone to hardfreezeups because of their high fines concentrations.   Freeze-conditioning agents (FCAs) are receiving increased attentionbecause of their effectiveness in many applications. Some act as ananti-freeze while others weaken the crystalline structure of ice. Arecently introduced FCA consists of50% glycol with special wetting agentsfor freeze conditioning during rail transport. A recent field studysuggests that treating the sides of a coal car with FCAs could be moreeffective than treating the coal itself.Barges   Where feasible, barge delivery usually offers the lowest cost perton-mile, whether for coal or other bulk materials. As a result, US inlandwaterways have been extensively developed, with most coal traffic on theOhio, Monogahela, Mississippi, and Tennessee rivers. A typical barge forcoal transportation is an open hopper vessel measuring 195 ft long, 35 ftwide, 12 ft deep, and loaded to about 1500 tons at an 8- to 10-ft draft.Typically, 15 barges are ganged together, pushed by a tugboat, in anarrangement called a "unit tow," which carries 22,500 tons of coal.   While inexpensive, barge transportation is slow-moving, which cancomplicate scheduling. Waterway freezeups during winter months can be aproblem, as can drought conditions when they become severe enough tothreaten water levels. The crippling drought in the Midwest in 1990 is agood example.   With the anticipated surge in coal traffic--expected to reach more than180-million tons by the mid-1990s--a need exists now for larger fleets,bigger-capacity barges, and continued maintenance and constructionimprovements on the inland waterway system.Trucks, overland conveyors   These modes of transportation are used primarily for coal deliveries toplants near coal mines, although coal for small industrial boilers areoften supplied by trucks covering greater distances. Overland conveyorscommonly move coal up to 15 miles from mine to plant, or from mine tostorage or transportation facilities. Longer distances are feasible but maynot be economical compared to truck hauls or short-haul rail transport.Aerial tramways are sometimes used instead of conveyors to cover relativelyshort distances.   Deliveries by truck account for about 13% of the total amount of coalshipped annually. Three-axle dump trucks hold about 20 tons of coal,tractor/trailers up to 35 tons. The maximum load a truck can carry onhighways is limited by state regulations. Trucks sometimes see service forhauling coal on the spot market; that is, when plants are able to buyrelatively small amounts of desirable coal from distant suppliers.Normally, however, they cannot compete against rail or bargetransportation.SITE UNLOADINGOnce the coal shipment reaches the unloading area at the plant, equipmenttailored for this function comes into play.Railcar unloading   Here, the unloading system is designed to accommodate the specific typeof hopper car that delivers the coal: (1) conventional bottom-dump hoppercar with multiple doors, (2) rapid-discharge bottom-dump type wherevirtually the entire car bottom is opened for quick unloading, and (3) atop-dump gondola car that is unloaded by a rotary-car dumper (Figure 3).   The first design is intended for small users. Designs two and three areintended for larger coal-fired powerplants that require unit-traindelivery. Unloading with the rapid-discharge bottom-dump type is usuallyperformed while the train is in motion. When cars pass over the unloadingarea (a long underground hopper or an elevated trestle), car doors areautomatically opened and closed. Speed is the advantage here; a 110-carunit train can be dumped in 40 minutes--an unloading rate of 16,500tons/hr. This can be attractive for short hauls (less than roughly 500miles).   At most utilities, rotary dumping is the preferred unloading method,mainly because it offers better control of fugitive-dust emissions--alwaysa problem with low-sulfur coals. Major components of a rotary-car dumperinclude the large circular end rings that support the rails on which thedumper turns, and the platen, which carries the track rail. Each end ringrotates on a set of trunions consisting of four or eight crane wheels. Thedumper is rotated by a gear reduction drive through a rack-and-pinionarrangement or a chain. The unloading rate is typically 3500 tons/hr.   Ironically, when hauling low-sulfur western coals, unloading equipmentis subject to little, if any, redesign. This is because train speeds andsizes remain essentially the same. A rotary-car dumper, for example,unloads whatever kind of coal arrives at the unloading area. A largershipment of western coal may take a little longer, but dumper retrofitisn't necessary.Barge unloading   Primary types of barge unloaders are: (1) clamshell-bucket type, inwhich a bucket is suspended from a set of hoisting cables and opened/closedby a set of control cables; and (2) the bucket-ladder type, in which aseries of buckets are supported between two strands of roller chain runningin a loop. In the latter, the buckets are filled by being dragged throughthe coal in the barge and emptied as they pass over a discharge sprocket(Figure 4).   Since significant barging of low-sulfur western coals is notanticipated, unloading is not affected. Bucket redesign might be necessaryif western coals were to be barged, however, to accommodate the dustier,subbituminous material. Low-sulfur eastern coals pose no specialchallenge.   Another type of unloader, called the Siwertell screw-type unloader, isattractive at sites where noise and dust levels can be a problem. Rated at1000 tons/hr, it consists of three totally enclosed screw conveyors, whichtransfer the coal from collier to belt conveyor quietly and dust-free. Ifbarging of dusty low-sulfur coal increased, this unloader should beconsidered.STOCKOUT, STORAGEThe unloading and stockpiling of coal--both active and reserve--are closelyrelated, since the continuous unloading operations require the simultaneouswithdrawal and conveying of coal from the unloading point to the plantstorage areas. Conveying rates of coal to storage must correspond with themaximum unloading rates, so that both operations can be carried out as asingle, continuous process.Stockout equipment   Stockout equipment includes a fixed-boom conveyor, radial stacker, orstacker/reclaimer for, in most cases, stockpiling coal outdoors on theground. A fixed-boom conveyor is a stationary inclined conveyor with theend cantilevered to allow the formation of a conical pile beneath theconveyor discharge. Similar to this is a radial stacker, except theconveyor can rotate horizontally in a semicircle to form a kidney-shapedpile. Linear stackers and stacker/reclaimers (Figure 5) are rail-mountedmachines served by a conveyor that feeds coal to the machine (stockout) ortraveling tripper that delivers coal to the machine (reclaim).Storage piles   Active coal storage is the reclaiming of coal for combustion that hasbeen stored for a relatively short period of time, usually one week or less(Figure 6). Coal from an active pile is normally reclaimed withoutresorting to mobile equipment. The amount of coal stored in an activecoal-storage pile is usually a three-day supply at maximum burn rate.   Reserve storage is a long-term storage pile for supplying coal to thepowerplant on an emergency basis in the event of an interruption of coalshipments. Capacity of the reserve pile is a minimum 60-day supply at 75%of the maximum burn rate. Coal in the reserve pile is compacted. Because ofits dusty qualities, low-sulfur coal requires special treatment in bothactive and reserve storage. It must be wetted down or sprayed withchemicals to prevent undue losses from fugitive-dust emissions. Also, FCAshave been formulated for stockpiled coal applications.Enclosed storage   Enclosed storage of the active pile includes silos and storage barns.The storage silo encloses a vertical concrete-cylinder coal-pileconfiguration usually 70 ft in diameter (Figure 6). The pile is formedwithin the silo by means of an overhead conveyor discharging at the centerof the silo. Reclaiming is via a belt conveyor--normally loaded byvibrating feeders--at the silo's bottom.   An inverted-V-shaped storage barn encloses a long, straight coal pile.The pile is formed within the barn by means of an overhead conveyor with atraveling tripper or a reversible shuttle conveyor. A belt conveyor in aconcrete tunnel below the coal pile does the reclaiming. It emerges frombelow-ground outside of the storage barn and conveys the reclaimed coal tothe desired location.   In the foregoing stackout/storage activities, handling of low-sulfurcoal will require some equipment redesign. Equipment must be larger tohandle the larger quantities of low-sulfur coal, and must also be speededup.COAL RECLAIMINGIn general, coal reclaiming systems may be classified as either below- orabove- grade, depending on whether the coal is removed from the bottom ortop of the storage pile. The tunnel conveyor is the principal form ofbelow-grade reclaiming and is paired with a variety of feedsystems--vibrating feeders, pile discharges, rotary-plow feeders, andmobile equipment.   Above-grade reclaiming systems include the bucket-wheelstacker/reclaimer and bridge-mounted bucket-wheel reclaimers--the latterused almost exclusively for bed-blending operations. As shown in Figure 5,the main components of a stacker/reclaimer are the stacking/reclaiming boomon which is a reversible-belt conveyor, boom counterweight, bucket wheel,traveling rail-gantry mechanism with track wheels, and the travelingtripper. The bucket wheel removes coal off an active storage pile anddischarges it onto the boom conveyor belt. It has a series of bucketsarranged around the circumference of the wheel. The buckets arescoop-shaped with two open faces--one at the leading edge, for digging; theother where the bucket is attached to the wheel, for discharge to the boomconveyor.COAL CRUSHING, STORAGEIn general, the average size of coal received at large powerplants is3-in. x 0. The size required by pulverizers feeding large pulverized-coal(p-c) boilers is 1 1/4-in. x 0. Thus, reclaimed coal must be reduced insize by crushing before it is transported to the unit silos (Figure 7).   The crusher most commonly selected to reduce 3-in. x 0 coal to 1 1/4-in.x 0 coal is the ring granulator.It consists of two end plates mounted onopposite ends of a drive shaft. Smaller shafts are mounted between theseplates around their periphery. On these shafts are small round cuttingrings that perform the crushing or grinding action. This assembly ismounted in a steel housing, the bottom of which is a curved grate. As theyrotate, the rings force coal through the grates in the bottom. Gratespacing is adjustable to compensate for wear.Bunkers, silos   After crushing, the coal is conveyed directly to the unit to fill thebunkers or silos. The bunkers are large-capacity, rectangular-shaped binswith multiple hopper-type outlets. Because coal tends to hang up on theslopes and hopper valleys of bunkers, cylindrical concrete or steel siloswith conical outlets are an alternative. The capacity of in-plant silos isusually 8-10 hours at maximum burn rate (all silos in the plant).   Although bunkers have a greater capacity, a steady gravitation towardsilos at larger powerplants has occurred in recent years. Key reason: Lesspotential for fires and explosions, especially for the low-rank coalsfrequently selected today. Steeper bottom-discharge angles in the silochutes are being specified to make up for the increased use of poor-flowinglow-rank coals.   Methods to feed coal bunkers or silos include fixed trippers, travelingtrippers, shuttle conveyors, reversible conveyors, and en-mass chainconveyors. A primary concern for carbon steel silos and bunkers is metalloss caused by corrosion and wear. Fortunately, carbon steel can beprotected with a gunite lining.FEEDERS, CONVEYORSFeeders deliver coal from a storage area to a point where a conveyor canhandle it conveniently for transport. Of the several different types(apron, bar-flight, vibrating, etc), the gravimetric feeder is the mostsophisticated. It weighs material on a length of belt defined by two fixedrollers (span) precisely located in the feeder body (Figure 8). A thirdroller supports half the weight on the span. As material passes over thespan, the load cell generates a signal proportional to the weight supportedby the center roller. A microprocessor takes samples of the amplifiedoutputs of each cell. The samples are converted into binary numbers, whichare compared to parameters stored in memory. If the outputs are withinexpected range, each is converted into a signal equivalent to weight perunit of belt length, then added to obtain total weight per unit of beltlength.   Friable western coals require special consideration in conveyor-systemdesign (Figure 9). Field experience has shown that the equipment sized tohandle a given quantity of eastern coal will not handle equivalentquantities of western coal, even though speed adjustments are made tocompensate for the lower density of these fuels. The reason is that thehigher speeds necessary to provide an equivalent heat-rate input to theboiler may create a significant fugitive-dust problem when conveyingwestern coals. Speeds in excess of 550 ft/min are not recommended becauseof the high shear velocity along the coal's boundary layer, which has awind-blown effect on fines. Athough expensive, enclosed conveyors are asolution.COAL PREPARATIONIn p-c firing, coal preparation consists of reducing the incoming stream ofcoal to powder in a pulverizer (Figure 10), so that it will burn moreefficiently. Key pulverizing methods are these, which differ on the basisof their drying, feeding, and transport characteristics (also see box, p28):   --Storage or bin-and-feeder. Coal is pulverized and conveyed by air orgas to a collector, where the carrying medium is separated and coal istransferred to a storage bin and then fed to the furnace, as required.   --Direct-fired. The most common arrangement for new units, coal ispulverized and transported with air (or air-diluted gas) directly to thefurnace. The hot air used is called primary air (PA), which is a portion ofthe combustion air.   --Semi-direct. Coal is pulverized and transported to a cycloneseparator, then the separated coal is supplied directly to the furnace bythe independent PA system.Pulverizer types   Basic principals of particle-size reduction with pulverizers (or mills)are impact, attrition, and/or crushing; speed classifications are low,medium, and high. Most commonly used pulverizers are the ball-tube,ring-roll or ball-race, impact or hammer mill, and attrition types. Thefirst two types are most often selected for coal preparation inpowerplants, although ball-tube mills are not suitable for intermittentoperation and tend to be noisy, requiring noise attenuation.   With ring-roll or ball-race mills, two general classes are these: (1)the roller assembly is driven and the ring is stationary, or (2) the rollerassembly is fixed and the ring rotates. Generally, mills are equipped withself-contained or integral classifiers to regulate the fineness. Exhaustersor PA fans are used for flow of hot air through the mills.Recent advances   A new series of coal mills reportedly reduces maintenance cost anddowntime. Features are an independent removable planetary gearbox,vane-wheel primary classifier, heavy-duty grinding-roller assembly,grinding-roller tilt-out mechanism, long-wear-life grinding elements,spring cartridge assembly, and tall top classifier.   A promising device for fine grinding of coal is a ball mill that grindscoal from a nominally 3/16-in. topsize to a 10- to 20-micron size range ina single stage using coarse grinding media. Key features: verticallyoriented, batch operated, intermediate-energy density, stirred bed. Themill can lead to more efficient operation; also anticipated: reduced costof $29/ton vs $51/ton for conventional grinding under comparableconditions.   Coal-mill retrofits based on the principles of two-phase flow instead ofthe usual air-only approximation are now possible. A computer model, usingfluid-mechanical calculations and physical interpretations of theinteractions between solid particles and a gas, help to identify a regionin the classifier with unstable flow characteristics and recommend hardwarechanges that stabilize it. End result: Improved performance of thep-c-fired boiler.   A new, low-cost dry-cleaning process for removing pyrites from coal canbe integrated directly into a p-c powerplant, interfacing with existingcoal bunkers, mills, and burners. It uses a room-temperature, fluidized-bedparticle separator to perform the coal purification process.What about FBC?   Several large bubbling and circulating fluidized-bed boilers areoperating at utility powerplants. The need for carefully characterizing andpreparing coal for FBC application has only been recognized in the last fewyears. It is not unusual to see sizing specifications of 1/16 in. or lessfor low-volatile high-ash coals and coal wastes. High moisture contentaggravates existing prep problems. Top size for highly volatile coals maystill be rather liberal, however. To handle moisture-laden coal, extensivecoal blending is one solution. Fuel dryers can also be considered toalleviate pluggage and combustor instability problems that result whenwetter-than-anticipated coal is fired.BLENDING, SWITCHINGCoal blending can be achieved at either the mine or at the utility. At themine, it is mainly a matter of mixing higher-quality coals with those lessdesirable to produce a blend attractive for purchase. At the utility, thetask is more formidable. Typically, coals are received by train or bargeand stocked in separate piles, by type, using an overhead tripper system. Acoal analyzer is installed downstream of the blending point. Each minute,the analyzer assesses whether or not the mixture is on target; deviationscan quickly be corrected by making an adjustment in the feed rates from thevarious stockpiles. The fuel is then blended by rotary-plow feeders beloweach coal pile, which places pre-determined amounts of each type of coal onthe same conveyor belts--layered in a reasonably blended mix. Thus, coalsof various qualities from different mines can be combined for subsequentcombustion in a boiler.Key advantages   Blending offers these advantages:   --Yields a uniform fuel possessing better combustion properties than theindividual coals making up the blend.   --Allows western coals to be burned in boilers that would otherwise beunable to fire subbituminous coals efficiently.   --Either alone or with physical coal cleaning, can be a valuable methodfor controlling the mineral content of coal.   --Most important of all, by combining low- and high-sulfur coals, ithelps powerplants meet the new SO subscript 2 emissions limits.   Blending is just as much a software as a hardware challenge. Coalsuppliers and powerplants can use commercially available software to selectcoal sources for blending purposes, evaluate the effects of blending onoverall product quality, determine the amount of each coal type needed tomeet product specifications (sulfur, ash, heating value, etc), and designthe least-cost blend.Fuel switching   Switching from high-sulfur coal to a low-sulfur fuel, such as gas, oil,or coal, represents a key option when developing a compliance strategy tomeet the new SO subscript 2 emissions limits. Remember, however, largecoal-fired utility boilers in service today have been custom-designed forselected fuels; changing the fuel may have significant impact on theoperation and reliability of not only the boiler but also many of theauxiliary systems.   Assuming that the original fuel source is an eastern or midwesternhigh-sulfur bituminous coal, fuel-switching alternatives are these: naturalgas, low-sulfur oil, co-firing (usually with gas), low-sulfur coal (eitherwestern or central Appalachian), coal blending. Since the CAA is quiteflexible in how utilities meet emissions limits, the options for fuelswitching are many and diverse among the units and plants in the utility'ssystem.PRECOMBUSTION I&CInstrumentation and control of coal-fired powerplants is becomingincreasingly critical: Emissions limitations, better heat rates, and lifemanagement have imposed this new challenge (see box, p 18). Plantwidenetworks for weighing, sampling, and analyzing coal as it flows from mineto boiler are an integral part of precombustion I&C.Plantwide networks   To move data between field devices and control/monitoring systemsrequires a hierarchy like this (Figure 11):   --Field bus to transmit data from field device to control system andthen transmit commands from control system to final control element.   --High-speed data highway as a means of communications between controland monitoring subsystems, and control-room interface with the operator.   --Plant network to extract information from the data highway andtransmit it to management, operational support, and data-archivingsubsystems.   --Communications gateways to interface between the plant informationnetwork and systems outside the plant proper, such as the utility's energy-and environmental-management systems, corporate computer network, etc.Weighing, sampling   Coal is weighed between bunker and boiler by a scale or feeder. Instoker firing, scales are used exclusively; in p-c firing, either may beselected. Typically, coal scales handle between 10 and 40 tons/hr, whilefeeders process up to about 100 tons/hr. The gravimetric feeder (see above)is among the most accurate weighing mechanisms. Also see the modular beltscale shown in Figure 12, which is controlled by a microcomputer.   Of the many types of p-c sampling systems, most provide isokineticsampling of the full cross-section of the coal pipe between bunker andfeeder. One vendor offers a portable sampler comprising a manual rotatableprobe with collecting cyclone and control box, making it possible to solvefireside problems caused by coal imbalance between burners and minimize NOsubscript x emissions--as well as to measure mill performance withaccuracy.Coal analyzers   Continuous on-line coal analyzers are broadly classified as moisturemeters, ash meters, and elemental analyzers. All of them subject the coalto energy from the electromagnetic spectrum, then correlate the response tomeasure or to infer the coal's constituents and properties. The instrumentsdiffer in accuracy, energy source used to excite the sample, amount ofmaterial that can be sampled, potential analyzer locations, frequency anddifficulty of calibration, and installation costs.   Moisture meters incorporate infrared- or microwave-energy excitation andcapacitance- or conductance-based measurement techniques. Commercialinstruments generally rely on microwave attenuation or capacitancemeasurement because of their higher accuracy. Moisture meters can generallybe mounted directly onto conveyor belts.   Ash meters are based on gamma-energy excitation to determine the coal'smean atomic number (Figure 13). Because ash constituents have much higheratomic numbers than combustible constituents, determining the coal's meanatomic number provides an indirect measure of the ash content. Depending oncoal properties and other variables, ash meters may or may not require asampling system as opposed to direct mounting on coal transport devices.   Elemental analyzers have a higher degree of measurement capability. Theymeasure the content of sulfur, carbon, nitrogen, and many other elementsdirectly. Also, properties such as calorific value, ash fusion temperature,and fouling and slagging indices can be inferred from the elementalcomposition.   Prompt gamma neutron activation (PGNA) is the heart of elementalanalysis (Figure 14). Coal passing through a chute is irradiated withneutrons, which are captured by the various nuclei of the elementscomprising coal. The resulting gamma rays emitted by each nucleus areunique to that nucleus.   The rays are transformed into photons at the gamma-ray detectorassembly, then converted into electronic signals and processed to revealeach element's contribution to the spectrum. Elemental analyzers require asampling system.   Systems available commercially may incorporate one of more or theinstruments mentioned above. For example, an elemental analyzer can becombined with an ash meter, or ash content can be inferred from theanalysis given by a single elemental analyzer. Slurry analyzers areavailable to monitor the composition of coal/water mixtures. Most measureonly ash and solids content, but some under development also are capable ofmeasuring sulfur and iron content.Coal quality--and NO subscript x   Virtually all experts concede that, unlike sulfur, it is impractical toremove nitrogen from coal. But recent investigations underscore theinfluence of coal properties on NO subscript x emissions; morespecifically, how coal properties can be manipulated to reduce NO subscriptx formation. Thus, it is critical that the impact of any coal type orpreparation technique on NO subscript x emissions be thoroughly understoodbefore a change is made to reduce SO subscript 2 emissions.   Already, it is clear that today's low-NO subscript x burners requiremore precise operation if combustion efficiency, CO emissions, bottom-ashquality, flame stabilization, and other factors are not to be compromised.Coal properties are likely to influence operation profoundly.Under investigation   In light of the improved I&C required to meet the new emissions andreporting requirements of the CAA, at least one instrument manufacturer isseeking to provide some answers. Major elements of its exploratory programinclude the application of continuous, real-time coal- and flue-gasanalysis equipment (along with advanced control algorithms run by aminicomputer) that relate coal characteristics to flue-gas parameters. Thegoal is to document how true on-line feedforward and feedback controlschemes can be implemented--showing how precombustion control cancontribute significantly to the lowering of flue-gas emissions frompowerplant stacks.   To test an on-line continuous coal calorimeter from anothermanufacturer, the selected PGNA instrument actually burned the coal andmeasured heating value directly. Different bituminous coals were testedfrom different mines. Sulfur content inthe coal was calculated by measuringSO subscript 2 concentration in the exhaust gas. Moisture in the sample wasdetermined by drying the coal and measuring total moisture (as burned) withan automatic moisture-measurement device.   Ash content was measured by X-ray fluorescence while coal was moving onthe belt feeder. An on-board computer controlled calorimeter operation andcalculated all air- and coal-mass flows as well as coal sulfur, moisture,ash, and heating value.   Key application: determining the proper mix of high- and low-sulfurcoals in coal yards.Acknowledgments   Clark Harrison, CQ Inc; Walter C Womack, William J Ward, Jr, Burns &McDonnell Consulting Engineers Inc; Kevin D Jennison, John H Pavlish,Richard B Rinehart, Richard H McCartney, Black & Veatch; William Weber,Electric Power Research Institute.Figure 1: Coal cleaning reduces ash, sulfur impurities, increases coal'sheating value. Most cleaning facilities are on premises of miningcompaniesFigure 2: Unit train consists of about 110 cars, with each car carryingabout 100 tons of coal--an 11,000-ton-capacity per trainFigure 3: Rotary-car dumper is preferred at most utilities, mainly becauseit offers better control of fugitive-dust emissionsFigure 4: Barge unloader is clamshell-bucket or bucket-ladder type, eitherof which efficiently empties barge coalFigure 5: Stacker/reclaimer is served by a conveyor that feeds coal to themachine (stockout) or traveling tripper that delivers coal to the machine(reclaim)Figure 6: Active coal storage defines coal that has been stored for arelatively short period of time, usually one week or less. Note concretestorage silosFigure 7: Crusher reduces reclaimed coal in size by crushing action priorto pulverizerFigure 8: Gravimetric feeder delivers coal from storage area to locationwhere a conveyor can handle it conveniently for transport (left)Figure 9: Conveyor in plant moves coal from unloading points to storageareas, finally to boiler island (above)Figure 10: Pulverizers reduce the incoming stream of crushed coal to powderso that it will burn more efficiently in the boilerFigure 11: Plantwide networks for weighing, sampling, and analyzing coal asit flows from mine to boiler are an integral part of precombustion I&CFigure 12: Belt scale weighs coal on moving conveyor using load cells,idlers, computer controlFigure 13: Ash meter is based on gamma-energy excitation to determine thecoal's mean atomic number (left)Figure 14: Elemental analyzer depends on prompt gamma neutron activation tomeasure coal passing through chute (right)Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COMING: EXPERT SYSTEMS TO PREDICT IMPACT OF COAL QUALITY ON PLANTOPERATIONWith the continuing sophistication of software, expert systems to relatecoal quality to plant performance are becoming increasingly attractive. Forexample, under the US Clean Coal Technology Program, DOE and EPRI arefunding development and demonstration of a computer softwareprogram--called the Coal Quality Expert (CQE)--that will predict the impactof coal quality on powerplant performance and cost, including emissionscontrol. Already underway, it's a $17.4-million project.   Integrating more than 20 computer models into a single workstation, CQEwill predict the effects of a particular coal on each facet of powergeneration--from mine to stack. To determine the most cost-effective coaland the least-expensive system to control emissions for a given plant, itwill evaluate a range of options, including various coals (26 are currentlyunder investigation), available transportation methods, and alternativeemissions-control strategies.   The expert system will include cost-estimating models for new andretrofit coal-cleaning processes, power production equipment, andemissions-control systems. Individual models will be made available as theyare developed. The first of these models, called the Acid Rain Advisor, isready for use; over 70 EPRI members have models.   When CQE is complete in 1994, users will be able to develop the mosteconomical emissions-control strategies, identify fuel options based onoverall plant economics, and evaluate alternative powerplant engineeringdesigns.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MICRONIZED-COAL MILLS YIELD PRODUCT 10 TIMES FINER THAN PULVERIZED COALMicronized coal (MC) is normally any coal pulverized to a fineness of 80 to90% less than 325 mesh (43 microns), with an average particle diameter of15 to 20 microns. By grinding the coal some 10 times finer thanconventional pulverized coal, the effective particle surface area isgreatly increased. As a result, the combustion chemistry speeds up stillmore, leading to a reaction that begins to act like a gas or oil flame.   Because of this reaction, the MC mill's best application is withexisting oil/gas-fired plants. Modifications are minimal--mostly theaddition of the MC mill, coal-storage/handling and ash-cleanout equipment,and new controls. Boiler-tube modifications aren't necessary. A recentadvance is the simultaneous micronization of limestone and coal in the samemill, leading to a significant reduction in SO subscript 2 emissions   Key mill designs are these:   --Disc and hammer. The mill houses a vertical shaft, four rotating discseach supporting impact hammers, and a radial fan. As coal, entering at thetop, descends to each disc level, coal-particle sizing is progressivelyreduced. The fan creates a downdraft, discharging the micronized coal atthe bottom.   --Centrifugal-pneumatic. There comminution sets up a turbulent flow oflarge and small, fast and slow particles, which impact on each other,causing attrition and fine pulverization. A centrifugal classifier assurescoal with an optimal particle-size distribution.   --Fluid energy. In this mill, a hollow, elongated torus has a lower zonefor grinding, an upper for classifying. Fluid (air or steam) enters thegrinding chamber through nozzles at pressures to 250 psig. As the fluidexpands, it picks up speed, reaching supersonic velocities. Crushed coalenters the grinding chamber, becomes entrained in the rapidly circulatingturbulent flow, and is pulverized by mutual impaction and attrition. Theclassifier passes finer particles, sends larger particles back.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.SUPPRESSANTS CONTROL DUST IN ALASKAN MINEAn Alaskan coal mine produces 1.5-million tons/yr of ultra-low-sulfursubbituminous C coal for domestic and export markets. The coal is crushedin two steps, and then dropped onto a 660-ft-long enclosed belt conveyor,which moves it to a 7500-ton storage bin. To operate year-round in severeconditions, the mine had to be innovative in all aspects of the operation,including dust control.   Dust is generated at the crushers, transfer points, and loadout. Toimprove dust control at these places, a proven method is the use ofchemical dust suppressants that are either water- or hydrocarbon-based.Chemicals are added to increase the wettability of the coal and toagglomerate small airborne particles into larger particles.   After considerable investigation by mine and vendor personnel, theproduct selected had a combination of wetting, foaming, and residual agentsto provide highly effective dust suppression--not only at the treatmentpoint (just upstream of the primary crusher), but throughout the minefacility.--Martin Marietta Magnesia Specialists Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ON-LINE COAL ANALYZER INSURES SO SUBSCRIPT 2 COMPLIANCENewly mandated emissions standards led Ohio Power Co's Muskingum Riverplant to blend coal from an existing AEP-owned mine with low-sulfur coalpurchased from an outside supplier. To blend the coals efficiently, anon-line analyzer was selected to provide constant readings of the sulfurlevel in the mine-supplied coal to the plant, helping the utility to avoid"overblending" large quantities of low-sulfur coal.   With the analyzer (photograph), the plant was able to comply with thenew emissions standards by purchasing only 7% low-sulfur coal annually(percent of total) as opposed to an estimated 30% that would be neededbased on traditional statistical blending methods.--Gamma-Metrics.Photograph: On-line coal analyzer insures SO subscript 2 complianceCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BARGE UNLOADER MOVES COAL INLAND IN A HURRYCompany was selected to design/erect a barge-unloading and yard-handlingsystem for Baltimore Gas & Electric Co's Brandon Shores powerplant, whererun-of-mine coal arrives in open-top barges from transloading facilities inNorfolk, Va. The 1700-ft-long dock accommodates three barges.   A pivoting-arm continuous bucket unloader is capable of unloading a7000-ton barge at the rate of 4000 tons/hr onto the 72-in. collectingconveyor. This conveyor transports the 2 in. x 0 coal to conveyor No. 2,sending it over the water and inland to transfer building No. 1, 2100 ftaway. The control-cab operator on the barge unloader can then direct thestream to either conveyor No. 3, which conveys to the existing Wagnerstation stockpile, or to main conveyor No. 4, which terminates at transferbuilding No. 2.   From transfer building No. 2, coal can be directed to the inactivestorage pile, or go on to the bucket-wheel stacker/reclaimer serving twolive storage piles.--Roberts & Schaefer Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.VALVE ISOLATES BURNER/PULVERIZER LINEThe NFPA code states that every burner line must have at least oneisolating valve between pulverizer and burner for pulverized-coal firing.At Dayton Power & Light Co's 2400-MW Stuart station, the valve is closed toisolate the pipe from the furnace during maintenance of a pulverizer or aleaking coal pipe. A leaking pipe can be repaired while the pulverizersupplies the furnace with coal through the remaining pipes.   Called a knife gate valve (photograph), it can withstand thetemperatures associated with burner lines (up to 1700F in some cases). Thetight-fitting valve comes in diameters from 4 to 18 in., and can bemanually operated or fitted with an actuator.--Stock Equipment Co.Photograph: Knife gate valve isolates burner/pulverizer lineCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FEEDERS PROVIDE CONTINUOUS, DEPENDABLE TRANSFER OF COALVibrating feeders provide continuous and dependable transfer of coal fromstorage to generating plant at rates up to 1500 tons/hr (photograph).Ruggedly designed, many of them have been in service for more than 15years.   Coal from the storage facility is delivered via these vibrating feedersat a fixed rate onto the main conveyor belt and into the powerplant. Theyeasily fit into existing systems where other types of feeders have failedto perform.--Renold Inc.Photograph: Vibrating feeders provide continuous and dependable transfer ofcoal from storage to generating plant at rates up to 1500 tons/hr.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FAMILY OF DUST SUPPRESSANTS BASED ON RESEARCH, TESTINGThe Dust-Buster family of dust-suppressant products is the result ofextensive research and field testing under a range of actual conditions.Products include surfactants, single-application foams for localized dustsuppression, and single-application foams for continued dust suppressionthrough downstream operations.   Since each operation for mining and handling of coal is unique in itsmethods and requirements, a comprehensive site survey is conducted toidentify problem areas and to determine specific dust-suppression needs.Then the company considers where suppression is needed most and whichapplication technique will provide optimum suppression at lowest cost.   Company provides a full-service program from equipment design,installation, and service through on-site performance testing. Equipment isinstalled during normal shutdown times, thereby eliminating costly delays.Personnel remain until all systems are functioning properly.--MartinMarietta Magnesia Specialists Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.RING HAMMERMILL OFFERS DIVERSE SERVICEThe ring hammermill is primarily a coal crusher, but it is not limited tosuch service in powerplants. Its rugged construction makes the hammermilladaptable to the reduction of coal middlings, lignite, gypsum, softlimestone, chemicals, and other friable materials.   To minimize wear and avoid generating excessive fines, the machine isdesigned to operate at relatively low rotor speeds. Ring hammers providemaximum wearing surface and eliminate the necessity of manually turning thehammers. This feature, along with the adjustable cage, reduces maintenancecost and ensures control of product size throughout the service life of thecrushing elements.   The mill is available in sizes ranging from 20 up to 3000 tons/hr ormore, making it suitable for small industrial plants or the largest centralstations. If desired, the machine can be furnished with a built-in bypass,which requires very little extra floor space, no extra headroom, andpractically no extra initial investment.--Allis Mineral Systems, GrindingDiv.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PAIR CRUSHER/DRYER WITH FLUIDIZED-BED COMBUSTORS FOR EFFICIENT FUELPREPARATIONAt this California powerplant, a crusher/dryer is the heart of what isreportedly the first fuel-preparation system to be integrated withfluidized-bed combustors. Hot flue gas at a temperature of 1500 to 1700F isdrawn into the machine, where 23%-moisture fuel is simultaneously crushedand dried to meet the requirements of Combustion Power Co's circulatingfluidized-bed (CFB) boiler at GWF Power Systems' 20-MW powerplant nearHanford, Calif (schematic). CFB-boiler requirements are 228,000 parts/hrfines.   The system features the ability to produce a dry, free-flowing fuelusing the energy available from the combustors for drying, thenclose-looping the exhaust gases back to the boiler with no loss in unitefficiency, while also eliminating a dedicated fabric filter for the dryingprocess. Because of the low O2 content of the flue gas, crushing and dryingtake place in an inert atmosphere. Equipment meets NFPA 69 and 85Frequirements.--Williams Patent Crusher & Pulverizer Co.Schematic: Pair crusher/dryer with fluidized-bed combustors for efficientfuel preparationCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.SAMPLING WITHIN BIAS-TEST ACCURACY LIMITSAt Ireland's Moneypoint generating station, Clean Sweep sampling systemswere selected to replace nonfunctioning, three-stage falling-streamsystems. The new systems are guaranteed to perform reliably, handling wetcoal without hangups and providing sampling results within specifiedbias-test accuracy limits.   The automated belt-sampling system has (1) a primary sampler, whichmounts on the conveyor truss or stringers; and (2) a secondary module,which is at ground level alongside the conveyor. Crushed coal is sampledfrom both stopped and moving belts. A "contoured support" assures correctbelt height, which also corrects for sags and valleys.   At Moneypoint, all Clean Sweep systems are equipped with mechanicalintermediate sampling to recover uncrushed samples without stopping theprimary belt. Also, all systems have crushers capable of single-stagereduction to 1/8 in. x 0 size. Commissioning was completed in October 1990.The systems have been successfully bias-tested and in continuous servicesince installation.--John B Long Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PULVERIZER UPGRADES BOOST PERFORMANCEA Midwest utility experienced problems with its six 1975 coal pulverizers.Mechanical failures led to frequent downtime, resulting in substantial lossof unit availability. The company made an evaluation and installed six newmills, one at a time (photograph), allowing the steam generator to remainon line. Each pulverizer was subassembled into major sections, offeringquick installation. Pulverizerreliability and availability have improveddramatically, while maintenance costs have plunged.   In some retrofits, noncompany mills have been upgraded by re-using asmuch as 30% of the existing components and installing company internals incustom-engineered, modified housings. Improved performance, reduced capitaland maintenance costs were the result.--Babcock & Wilcox Co.Photograph: Installation of six new mills--pulverizer upgrades boostperformanceCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MILL EFFICIENTLY GRINDS WET OR DRY COAL FINESThis vertical-type mill can be a continuous or batch-type stirred-mediamachine that can efficiently grind wet or dry coal fines. Grinding mediasuch as steel balls, ceramic or natural pebbles, or other material isstirred by an overhung double-helix screw (or charge agitator) in anopen-circuit configuration. Material to be ground is fed in at the topalong with mill water. A continuous upward flow of slurry is maintained byan external recycle pump. Small feed particles rise and large particlesfall to the media charge, where they are drawn into the media forgrinding.   Media rises within the screw flights and falls downward in the annularspace between the flight tips and the inside diameters of the mill body.With steel balls as media, typical media depth is 6 to 8 ft. Duringoperation, the lower portion of the mill body is packed with media exceptfor a small space directly below the screw flights. Pulp overflows from themill body into an integral classifier. The overflow is either product orfeed for subsequent classification. Underflow is recycled.--Allis MineralSystems, Grinding Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.TWO-PASS RO EASES DEMINERALIZER REGENERATION BURDENMembrane applications to makeup-water treatment continue to expand. Redesignof a utility pretreatment system, described here, introduced manyimprovements, not least among which was a major reduction in chemical costsBy:Compiled by Sheldon D StraussIon-exchange (IX) demineralization is a common, effective method used forsupplying makeup water for steam production. As one utility learned,however, system modification as a result of open-minded analysis can leadto product improvement and reduction of operating cost.   The utility is TU Electric, and the case in point is the Stryker Creekgenerating station. As described at the recent International WaterConference, the opportunity for improvement arose when deterioration of thetreatment system reached a point where reliability, maintenance costs, andavailability of replacement parts became a source of major concern. Severalother factors compounded the problem: limited availability and rising costof sodium hydroxide, and the impact of IX waste discharges on theenvironment. The need for reduced silica input to the station's twohigh-pressure boilers was another consideration.(Reference 1)   These problems were resolved by substituting membrane treatment for thecation/anion resin-bed combination used to pretreat makeup water for thestation's mixed-bed demineralizer. In almost a year of operation, it hasprovided a better influent for polishing, reducing the frequency ofmixed-bed regeneration. Although the product flow is less, this has beenmore than compensated for by an increase in the pretreatment duty cycle.   The treatment system initially consisted of greensand filters,strong-acid cation and strong-base anionIX units, and a mixed-resin bed; adegasifier following the cation unit provided for CO subscript 2 removal.Operating to a 100-micro-S/cm endpoint, the two-bed (cation/anion) sectionprovided water quality typically in the range 10 to 80 micro-S/cm. Themixed bed was operated to an endpoint of 1 micro-S/cm or 10 ppb silica,concentration of the latter ranging from 10 to 20 ppb SiO subscript 2during service runs.   Several options, all involving membrane treatment with reverse osmosis(RO) in various configurations, were proposed when the need for improvementbecame apparent. To process raw makeup with 400 mg/L dissolved solids,several membrane types were considered, including "seawater" polyamidemembranes because of their 99.5% salt-rejection capability.(Reference 2)Other choices were between single-pass and two-pass RO systems and possibleelimination of the cation/anion-bed combination as opposed to rebedding.   Compared to a single-pass RO with two new cation/anion trains, asingle-train system with two RO passes offered advantages with respect toboth capital and operating costs; service runs of the mixed bed with asingle-pass seawater RO array, moreover, was not judged to be satisfactory.The cost premium for using seawater elements in the first pass of atwo-pass unit was not justified, on the basis of salt passage relative tobrackish-water elements.   These considerations led to the configuration of choice: A two-pass,single-train RO featuring thin-film composite (TFC) polyamide membranes.The dominant factor in this decision was the chemical consumption inoperating the original treatment system--over 462,000 lb of sulfuric acidand 274,000 lb of sodium hydroxide in more than 600 regenerations of thecation and anion beds each year. Substitution of the membrane units wasprojected to reduce IX-bed regenerations by 98% overall.   The new system retains greensand filtration and degasification in thepretreatment section. New greensand media is used, and permanganate isadded continuously to reduce the iron content of the feed; sodium bisulfiteis fed downstream to remove residual free permanganate for protection ofthe thin membranes from oxidation (Figure 1). Sulfuric acid injectionreduces influent pH to 4.5, converting the initial 130-ppm bicarbonatealkalinity to CO subscript 2 for reduction (to about 10 ppm) by thedecarbonator. Subsequent pH elevation to 8.3 by caustic addition furtherreduces CO subscript 2 pass-through and improves membrane rejectioncapability.   Cartridge filters provide 5-micron filtration of solids, followed byinjection of antiscalant/dispersant for additional protection of themembrane system. Under a 500-psi pressure differential supplied by amultistage centifugal pump, makeup flows in sequence to the two passes,each of which comprises two stages. Each of the membrane pressure vesselscontains six FilmTec Corp (Minneapolis, Minn) type BW30-840 membraneelements (Figure 2). Because the second-pass reject is of high quality, itis returned to the first-pass feed stream. First-pass reject is normallydischarged, but held for neutralization if pH is excessive. The membranesystem has averaged 75% recovery.   The system modification and quality improvement of treated makeupaccount for 96% reduction in the cost of chemicals (over $2/1000 gal ofproduct water), more than offsetting the added cost to operate and maintainthe system membranes, pumps, membranes, filters, etc (about $1.7/1000 galto date, and projected at $1.3/1000 gal). Indicative of the water-qualityimprovement is the 1.2-micro-S/cm conductivity and 3-ppb silica leakage(average values) of the two-pass RO vs 30 micro-S and 15 ppb, respectively,for the two-bed ion exchangers.   Resulting improvement of the final product has been the reduction ofconductivity from 0.5 to 0.08 micro-S/cm and silica from 5-10 ppb down tobare detectability. As added benefits, the modification has obviated theneed for new bulk chemical storage tanks, reduced labor costs dramatically,and has reduced the accident potential inhandling of regenerant.Figure 1: New pretreatment for mixed-bed demineralizer substitutes two-passreverse osmosis for two-bed ion exchangeFigure 2: Both passes in RO pretreatment system feature six 8-in. 40-in.polyamide TFC membrane elements per vesselReference(s):1 C Henry and S Parker, TU Electric, and D Reed, Medro Systems Inc,"Benefits of Replacing Two-Bed IX with Two-Pass Reverse Osmosis inHigh-Pressure Drum Boiler Application for the Power Utility Industry,"International Water Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 19912 D Reed, personal communicationCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UTILITIES CONTEND WITH COPPER TO ENHANCE CYCLE RELIABILITYRemedies for corrosion and fouling include replacement of copper-bearingcomponents, improvement of condensate polishing procedures, intensivechemistry monitoringBy:Sheldon D Strauss, Senior EditorThe advantages of copper for heat transfer in steam generating systems areindisputable. At the same time, corrosion of copper and copper alloyspresent in condensers, feedwater heaters, etc can impact heavily on othersystem components. Evidence of the problem in steam and cooling cycles isdescribed repeatedly in the literature and at technical meetings, andremedial steps range from eliminating the source to removal of depositaccumulations.   Copper-related problems in various forms have been encountered at manynuclear and fossil-fueled installations. Both reactor coolant andsecondary-cycle water are involved at nuclear stations. In BWR(boiling-water reactor) plants, copper has impacted on recirc-pipingcorrosion control--through interference with hydrogen water chemistry(HWC)--and on fuel-rod integrity. Crud-induced localized corrosion (CILC)of fuel rods results from interaction between a tenacious scale (mostlycopper-rich oxide crud) and nodular zirconium oxide deposits formed oncladding surfaces. Ensuing thermal stresses, cracking of the oxide layer,and spalling results in formation of pits, which can penetrate the claddingif not arrested.   Identified with plants having copper-alloy condenser tubing and usingfilter/demineralizers for condensate cleanup, the phenomenon was reportedin 1985 to have affected 12-15% of operating BWRs.(Reference 1) While someutilities have replaced copper-alloy condenser tubing with titanium orstainless steel, remedies sought by others--or applied for furtherperformance improvement--include tightened control over the production ofZircaloy tubing and control of copper transport to the reactor. Modifiedlayup and startup procedures and improved water-chemistry monitoring havebeen helpful, but the area receiving greatest emphasis has been treatmentof condensate returns for removal of ionic and particulate matter.   Considerable attention has been given to improving the design andoperation of condensate filter/demineralizers (CFDs), which incorporatepowdered ion-exchange resins for both purposes (as opposed to separatefilters and deep resin beds). Approaches taken have focused on modificationof both precoat septa and CFD vessel designs, and on improvement of theprecoating technique.(Reference 2) The latter includes use of inert fiberin the precoat mixture, protective cellulose fiber overlays, andbodyfeeding of precoat mixtures during service runs. These methods haveproven successful for Georgia Power Co at Plant Hatch, PhiladelphiaElectric Co (Limerick and Peach Bottom), and others, with reactor-feedwatercopper levels reported in the range of 0.1 to 0.3 ppb together withlengthened service runs.   Step precoating, a variant on bodyfeeding, is a procedure applied atVermont Yankee because of deteriorating polisher performance at summerwater temperatures. To improve performance, especially for copper removal,the utility has been using one or more step-precoat operations involvingthe addition of powdered resin, fiber, and resin-fiber mixtures toindividual vessels over short periods of time with the vessels in service.As shown in Figure 1, step precoating after 10 days has been extremelyeffective.(Reference 3) On the average, use of this method has reducedinfluent copper from about 4 ppb to less than 0.7 ppb, and extended summerservice runs to 20 days.   A novel variation on this technique makes use of Ionex cationfiber(Toray Co, Tokyo, Japan), which has excellent crud-removal properties.Applied together with the standard coating mixture (Ecodex P-202H, GraverCo, Union, NJ) in a second step precoat, it has been effective in removing90% of the undissolved copper present in the condensate. Note that othertechniques are being followed for improved copper removal--unprecoatedelements, backflushable filters, and hollow-fiber filtration forparticulate matter, deep-bed vessels for dissolved copper. Limerick stationis in the process of adding the latter to supplement its CDF for twopurposes: protection from condenser inleakage, and copper reduction to 0.5ppb.(Reference 4)   At PWR (pressurized-water reactor) plants, corrosion problems arecentered in steam generators and take several forms: pitting under sludgepiles, denting at tube supports, and intergranular-attack/stress-corrosioncracking (IGA-SCC). Representative of PWR experience is the history atNortheast Utilities' Millstone Unit 2, where tube denting occurred afterthe first year of operation, pitting after six years, and IGA-SCC four tosix years later (1986).   Copper has been implicated to some degree in each of these problems,leading to major steps by the utility to eliminate it. These includereplacement of 70/30 copper/nickel (Cu/Ni) tubing in condensers withtitanium, and in feedwater heaters and moisture separator with stainlesssteel. The heater-drains cooler, the only copper-bearing componentremaining in service, will be retubed during a scheduled steam-generatorreplacement outage in 1992.   Steps are also being initiated to remove copper that has plated out onsecondary-cycle piping surfaces during the life of the plant. The preferredapproach is elevation of secondary-system pH to at least 9.6 duringoperation by increasing ammonia additions. Recirculation of a high-pHsolution (ammonia plus air) during the outage is another possibility, withthe use of a more effective amine (such as di-aminoethane) for copperdissolution as an alternative.(Reference 5) A similar procedure, describedas an elevated pH rinse, was applied to Consumers Power Co's Palisadesstation to remove residual copper from the hotwell and feedwater pipingpreparatory to installing new steam generators.(Reference 6)   Fossil-fueled plants. Recognizing the sensitivity of high-pressurecycles to copper, industry chemical guidelines limit its content infeedwater to 2 ppb.(Reference 7) In cycles containing copper-bearingcomponents or lacking adequate condensate polishing, the degree ofcorrosion-product transport and deposition in piping, boilers, and theafterboiler circuit can be surprising. Attesting to this is recentexperience at Laramie River station, operated by Basin Electric PowerCooperative.(Reference 8) The cycle is replete with copper--Admiralty brassand 90/10 Cu/Ni in the condensers and low-pressure (l-p) feedwater heaters,70/30 Cu/Ni tubing in the high-pressure (h-p) heaters. Affected areasincluded the station's 2400-psig boilers, high-pressure turbines and f-wheaters, pumps, valves, etc.   Boiler-waterwall leaks that began in 1989 caused particular concern.Examination of a section cut from a leaker in Unit 3 early in 1990 revealeda deep pit adjacent to thick copper-colored deposits (Figure 2); analysisindicated under-deposit caustic gouging. Subsequent visual examination ofUnit 2 revealed tiny copper particles uniformly scattered over almost theentire surface of every tube inspected--probably typical of all threeunits. It was decided to chemically clean Unit 2, and to make severaloperational changes to minimize further damage from copper deposits:increase condensate pH from 8.6-8.7 to 8.8-9.2, blanket h-p heaters withnitrogen during outages, and shorten run lengths for deep-bed condensatepolishers.   As a prelude to cleaning, deposit densities were determined byenergy-dispersive X-ray analysis to range from 13 to 28 g/ft superscript 2,with copper and copper oxides constituting 61 to 80% of the total (and ironoxide 12-14%). Screening tests indicated thata two-stage cleaningconsisting of ammoniacal oxygen solvent followed by EDTA for iron oxideremoval would effectively clean and passivate tube surfaces.   Cleaning began by filling the boiler with demineralized water at pHabout 9 to the normal operating level. After the primary superheater wasbackfilled through the attemperator sprays, the boiler was heated slowly toabout 150F, with draining to keep the swelled volume from rising abovenormal drum level. Water was then drained to make room for the ammoniumhydroxide and ammonium bicarbonate solutions; these were pumped to theboiler, and circulated through the economizer and boiler. Whenconcentrations appeared uniform, O subscript 2 gas was injected through thedowncomer drains while circulation (at about 150F) was continued.   After some eight hours, with dissolution apparently complete, the boilerwas drained hot and rinsed with demineralized water through the superheaterattemperator sprays, overflowing through the drum down to the pump suctionand pumped to waste tanks. The boiler was then refilled with hot deminwater and rinsed until copper and ammonia levels allowed for discharge tothe station ponds. Next, boiler and economizer were filled again with deminwater, heated, the expansion drained, and an EDTA solution circulated withtemperature held at 275F maximum. The solvent was cooled to 150F when irondissolution was complete.   The last stage, passivation and dissolution of residual copper withgaseous O subscript 2 admitted to the downcomer drains, was completedwithin 45 minutes--an important point, because boiler-tube steel cancorrode rapidly in the process.   An astounding amount of copper was removed from the station economizersand boilers, ranging from 2616 lb from Unit 2 to 7508 lb from Unit 1.Inspection after cleaning showed the drums and headers of all units to beclean and passive. Waterwall tube sections were coated with 3-4 g/ftsuperscript 2 of mixed iron oxides, typical of freshly cleaned andpassivated steel surfaces.   This experience sharpened understanding of earlier episodes involvingplugging of boiler-feedpump screens (1982-84), turbine copper deposits(first detected in 1983), and pressure losses across h-p heater tubes(1984-89), all treated by chemical or physical cleaning. With regard to theh-p turbines, for example, a need for inspection and cleaning was notindicated until a capacity-loss trend became evident early in 1990. It wasalso noted that Unit 2 did not exhibit a capacity loss; that unit had lesssteam attemperation, accounting for lack of copper deposits in theturbine.   In sum, the evidence indicates that the 70/30 Cu/Ni is de-nickelizing onboth tube and shell sides of the h-p heaters, and that the copper remainingflakes off. This would explain the presence of copper in the attemperationwater of Units 1 and 3, and in the water of all three boilers, andidentifies the h-p heaters as the problem source.   This resulted in two operating changes as a short-term fix: Dumping ofh-p heater drains to the condenser on startup until copper levels dropsignificantly, and increasing hydrazine injection at the economizer (to 40ppb) to encourage production of a less volatile copper form (cuprousoxide), to minimize carryover to the turbine. A decision has already beenmade to retube the h-p feedwater heaters. Additional steps initiatedinclude extensive monitoring for copper throughout the cycle and locationand elimination of all possible points of air ingress. Injection ofhydrazine scavenger into the crossover pipe between intermediate- andlow-pressure turbines is also under consideration.Figure 1: Step precoating of individual demineralizers between days 10 and20 produced sharp copper drop in effluent of vessels B, C, D, smallerreductions for three-year-old vessels A and E. Dotted line indicatestransitionFigure 2: Boiler-tube section from Laramie River station shows heavy copperdeposit plus caustic gougingReference(s):1 M O Marlowe and others, "Nuclear Fuel Cladding: Localized Corrosion,"American Nuclear Society International Topical Meeting onLight-Water-Reactor Fuel Performance, Orlando, Fla, April 19852 E Salem and M O'Brien, "Body Feeding, Design Advances Aid Precoat-FilterPerformance," Power, June 1991, p 903 R P Gerdus, "Step Precoating with Powdered Resin and Cation Fibers,"EPRI Workshop on Filtration of Precipitates in LWR Systems, King ofPrussia, Pa, September 19914 P D'Angelo, Philadelphia Electric Co, personal communication5 V Jones, Northeast Utilities, personal communication6 W Ciccarelli and J McElrath, "Use of Elevated pH and Cation Resin forRemoval of Residual Copper from a PWR Feedwater System," InternationalWater Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 19917 "Interim Consensus Guidelines on Fossil Plant Cycle Chemistry," ElectricPower Research Institute Report CS-4629, June 19868 T Fitzsimmons and others, "Copper Problems at Laramie River Station,"International Water Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, October 1991Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Energy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director ofEnergy & Environmental Research Corp appoints Dr Anu Sanyal director ofperformance engineering...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.STONE & WEBSTER ENGINEERING CORPStone & WebsterEngineering Corp names Philip Garfinkel chairman, BenCarlson president, and Jean L McCluskey board member...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president...Stone & Webster Inc elects James N White senior vice president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of internationalFoster Wheeler Energy Corp appoints Elias Gedeon manager of internationalsales...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology...Osmonics Inc appoints Andrew T Rensink vice president of technology...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Hadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and ScottHadson Power Systems Inc names Lawrence S Folk president and CEO and ScottA Noll president of Hadson Development Corp...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president...Gibbs & Hill Inc names Irvin E Richter president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UNITED ENGINEERS 7 CONSTRUCTORS INCUnited Engineers & Constructors Inc names Peter A Russo vice president ofinternational development...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gasABB Power Generation Inc appoints Harvey Padewer president of its gasturbine division and Jim R Thompson vice president of sales andmarketing...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director ofCRS Sirrine Engineers Inc appoints Gary F Payne senior project director ofits power division...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president...Flexitallic Inc names Michael Berry president...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names DrResearch Cottrell, a subsidiary of Air & Water Technologies Corp, names DrRobert H Caldwell vice president of operations...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.The Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for itsThe Atlantic Group names W H Robinson manager of valve services for itspower division.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Newport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valveNewport News Industrial Corp, Newport News, Va, receives a major valverepair contract from Houston Lighting & Power Co's South Texas Project.Also, the company will provide specialty valve services to Public ServiceCo of New Hampshire during Seabrook nuclear station's first refuelingoutage...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Power Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize andPower Safety International will train NRC inspectors to recognize andcorrect electromechanical problems associated with motorized-valveactuators in nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply theABB Combustion Engineering Services, Windsor, Conn, will supply thefollowing equipment: a low-NO subscript x concentric burner system to UnionElectric Co's Labadie Unit 4; a replacement economizer for Utah Power &Light Co's Hunter station; design and engineering services for themodification of steam generators at Consolidated Edison Co of New YorkInc's Astoria and Ravenswood generating stations; and reheater andsuperheater assemblies for Unit 4 of Atlantic Electric Co's Englandstation. In addition, the company will install coal pulverizers at NewEngland Power Co's Brayton Point Units 1 and 2; replace an economizer andretrofit a low-NO subscript x concentric-firing burner system at KentuckyUtilities' Brown station; retrofit a low-NO subscript x firing system atIndianapolis Power & Light Co's Stout station; and supply two3.8-million-lb/hr boilers, a plant-wide control system, auxiliaryequipment, engineering services, and training to Korea Electric Power Cofor the utility's planned 1000-MW Taean station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies threeABB Resource Recovery Systems, Windsor, Conn, supplies threedry-scrubber/fabric-filter emissions control systems for the GreaterDetroit Resource Recovery Authority's waste-to-energy plant...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturingABB Power Generation Inc, Manufacturing Div, begins manufacturinggas-turbine combustor sections at its Richmond (Va) facility...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit ofHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, conducts an audit ofTemlin nuclear station's Units 1 and 2 for the Czechoslovakia ElectricityBoard...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW,Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, will construct a 135-MW,combined-cycle cogeneration plant in Newark, NJ, for the Newark BayCogeneration Partnership...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Chas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-basedChas T Main Inc, Boston, Mass, will construct a 54-MW, gas-turbine-basedcogeneration plant at Mobil Oil Corp's Beaumont (Tex) refinery...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,is working with the Czechoslovakian manufacturer Orgrez to build asimulator for training operators at the Temelin nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Chem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration andChem-Nuclear Systems Inc, Columbia, SC, supplies water filtration anddemineralization equipment to GPU nuclear's Oyster Creek station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul,PaR Systems Group, a subsidiary of Cimcorp Precision Systems Inc, St. Paul,Minn, will replace the existing control systems on the Unit 2 refuelingplatform of Niagara Mohawk Power Corp's Nine Mile Point nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts byStone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass, is awarded contracts byPotomac Electric Power Co (Pepco), Potomac Edison Co (PE), and MonongahelaPower Co (Mon Power) to improve the performance--through clean-coalretrofits and/or upgraded controls--of certain coal-fired stations,including: Pepco's Chalk Point Units 1 and 2, PE's Smith station Unit 4,and Mon Power's Rivesville station Units 5 and 6. The company's Denveroffice will engineer and construct a 20-MW addition to an existinghydroelectric station near Ione, Wash. Also, Central Hudson Gas & ElectricCorp contracts Stone & Webster, New York, NY, to convert two 600-MW,oil-fired units to oil/gas firing...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water TechnologiesResearch-Cottrell, Branchburg, NJ, a subsidiary of Air & Water TechnologiesCorp, is part of a team selected by DOE to design and build a full-scalemicronized-coal reburn system for controlling NO subscript x emissions fromwall-fired steam generators...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Primesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-firedPrimesouth Inc, Columbia, SC, will operate and maintain a 19-MW, wood-firedcogeneration plant being built in Lewis County, NY, by Diamond Energy Inc,Los Angeles, Calif...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW,Metric Constructors Inc, Charlotte, NC, will build a 340-MW,gas-turbine-based peaking powerplant in DeBary, Fla, for Florida PowerCorp, St. Petersburg, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Papco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion jointsPapco Industries Inc, Northvale, NJ, supplies non-metallic expansion jointsfor FGD systems at Ratcliffe station, Nottinghamshire, UK, Northern IndianaPublic Service Co's Bailey station, and Taiwan Power Co's Hsintastation...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Resorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, suppliesResorcon Inc, a division of Niagara Blower Co, Pittsburgh, Pa, supplieswet-surface air-cooled condensers to the MassPower combined-cyclecogeneration plant being built in Springfield, Mass, by Bechtel Power Corp,San Francisco, Calif...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Conversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGDConversion Systems Inc, Horsham, Pa, provides a system to stabilize FGDscrubber waste at Allegheny Power System's 1920-MW Harrison station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclearFoxboro Co, Foxboro, Mass, will supply hardware for a prototype nuclearpowerplant control system being developed by B&W Nuclear Service,Lynchburg, Va...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop aHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Walnut Creek, Calif, will develop areliability-centered maintenance (RCM) workstation for EPRI; supplymanagement software to Public Service Electric & Gas Co, Newark, NJ; andhelp develop an RCM program for Ontario Hydro'sBruce-A nuclear station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div,Research-Cottrell Companies, Environmental Services & Technologies Div,Branchburg, NJ, will install noncatalytic NO subscript x-reduction systemson two boilers at Garden State Paper Co, Garfield, NJ...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Custom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of DuquesneCustom Coals International, Pittsburgh, Pa, a joint venture of DuquesneVentures, Pittsburgh, Pa, and Genesis Research, Carefree, Ariz, is selectedby DOE to build a 250-ton/day coal-processing plant, which will remove80-90% of the sulfur from high-sulfur coals...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Foster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript xFoster Wheeler Energy Corp, Clinton, NJ, will supply 12 low-NO subscript xburners to West Penn Power Co's Armstrong station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Black & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuousBlack & Veatch, Kansas City, Mo, will install continuousemissions-monitoring equipment on two coal-fired cogeneration plants--onein Ewa Beach, Oahu, Hawaii, and one in Jacksonville, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaimFMC Corp, Chalfont, Pa, will supply coal unloading, storage, and reclaimsystems for the Chamber Works cogeneration project, Carney Point, NJ...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.GEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generatorGEC Alsthom, Paris, France, will supply a 285-MW steam turbine/generatorfor the Chamber Works cogeneration project...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Leeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, willLeeds & Northrup, a unit of General Signal Corp, North Wales, Pa, willsupply a distributed control system for the new 42-MW cogeneration facilitybeing built in Pawtucket, RI, and two distributed control systems for the850-MW, oil-fired Units 3 and 4 of Pennsylvania Power & Light Co's MartinsCreek station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Vortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop anVortec Corp, Collegeville, Pa, receives a DOE contract to develop anadvanced, multifuel-capable, combustion-and-melting system to vitrify andrecycle various hazardous and nonhazardous wastes...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Environmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostaticEnvironmental Elements Corp, Baltimore, Md, will supply an electrostaticprecipitator for a 350-MW unit at Public Service Co of Indiana's WabashRiver station...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11Johnston Pump Co, Nuclear Services Div, Chattanooga, Tenn, will supply 11replacement service-water pumps to Carolina Power & Light Co...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Research-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supplyResearch-Cottrell Companies' subsidiary KVB, Branchburg, NJ, will supplycontinuous emissions-monitoring systems to Indianapolis Power & Light Co'sPetersburg and Pritchard stations...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.United Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provideUnited Engineers & Constructors Inc, Englewood, Colo, will provideengineering services for the addition of an FGD system to DakotaGasification Co's Great Plains synfuels plant...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,General Physics International Engineering & Simulation Inc, Columbia, Md,will provide a training system for the soviet-designed Leningrad nuclearstation, St. Petersburg, USSR...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance andBW/IP International Inc, Long Beach, Calif, will provide maintenance andreplacement parts to four reactor coolant pumps at Florida Power Corp'sCrystal River Plant.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Halliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires ResourcesHalliburton NUS Environmental Corp, Gaithersburg, Md, acquires ResourcesConservation Co, Bellevue, Wash, and joins with Precision MechanicalAnalysis Inc to form a predictive maintenance applications department inTampa, Fla...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Aquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering andAquagenics Inc, Londberry, NH, is established to provide engineering andconsulting services for utility/industrial water and wastewatertreatment...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ronan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, IndustrialRonan Engineering Co, Woodland Hills, Calif, Honeywell Inc, IndustrialAutomation & Control Div, Phoenix, Ariz, and Rosemount Inc, Eden Prairie,Minn, will jointly develop and manufacture an integrated-circuit chipset tosupport the emerging Fieldbus communications standard...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.B&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts serviceB&W Nuclear Services Co, Lynchburg, Va, opens a new nuclear parts servicecenter in Lynchburg...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc,Bergmann USA Inc, Houston, Tex, establishes Bergmann Heavy Industries Inc,Houston, to manufacture large pressure vessels for use in power generationand other industries...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.BURNS & MCDONNEL ENGINEERING COBurns & McDonnell Engineering Co, Kansas City, Mo, and W S Atkins Ltd, UK,agree to cooperate on international architectural and engineeringprojects...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Westinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, formWestinghouse Electric Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa, and IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, forma partnership to integrate IBM's PS-2 and RISC-6000 computers intoWestinghouse distributed control systems...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Coppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreementCoppus Murray Turbomachinery Corp, Burlington, Iowa, signs an agreementwith Blohm & Voss GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, to market and service eachother's steam turbine/generator packages...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh,Mobay Corp, Miles Inc, and Agfa Corp merge to form Miles, Inc, Pittsburgh,Pa...Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PRECISION SAMPLERS INCMoved: Because of a fire, Precision Samplers Inc moves to 900 MacCorkle AveSW, Charleston, WVa 25303-1319.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CIRC-WATER PIPING REPLACEMENT: GIVE IT THE ATTENTION IT DEMANDSWhen a vital piping system runs out of life, there is a chance to rethinkpossibilities, reconsider principles, and even to come up with uniquesolutionsBy:Ronald D Vering and John A Bugni, Burns & McDonnellEdited by W O'KeefeCirc-water piping between condensers and either cooling tower (CT) or otherheat sink is a lifeline for unit operation. Failures occur in theselarge-diameter piping systems, of course, requiring repair. The repairsusually call for little or no engineering effort. After several failuresand repairs, however, the system may become a candidate for replacement. Atthis juncture, the situation justifies extensive study and engineeringwork. The result is often a decision for replacement.   Preparing for the retrofit will present several challenges, comprisingthe key engineering questions about the proposed project. Look at thesechallenges and then at their influence on an actual retrofit operation at autility station:   --Optimizing the pipeline route. Economics require that you keepoperating-facility disruption to a minimum, and considerations concerningspace for plant operation and future expansion are three factors here.Changes in the plant or additions to structures and equipment since theoriginal circ-water piping went in may influence planning, and the verticaldimension of route is important, as well. Decision may be for anabove-ground or a below-grade installation.   --Optimizing piping configuration. After route selection, theconfiguration or layout of the piping calls for attention. An above-groundline is quite different from a below-grade one, as one example of theconsiderations. The configuration must suit site-specific conditions andplant-operation philosophy. At this stage, primary objectives may bereduction in disruption of plant operations and limitation of generationdowntime. Give thought, too, to how much of the retrofit lines the plantcan install without interrupting the existing circ-water lines.   --Accommodating thermal expansion. Conventional longitudinal expansionjoints and anchors are available. Flexible couplings are also worthconsidering.   --Reducing pipe-support costs. These components of the system allowthermal movement and relieve beam bending stress in the pipe. They alsomust prevent excessive pipe movement. Pipe-support costs can be animportant factor in installation cost for the retrofit system and deserveengineering attention.   --Retrofitting with minimal downtime. If generation is not to be lost,pipe installation needs care. Should an outage for installation be long,then perhaps the plant can wait for a fairly long outage for otherrepairs.Retrofit follows precepts   The city of Lakeland's 333-MW McIntosh Unit 3 was equipped with7-ft-diameter circ-water pipes between condenser and cooling tower. Afterseveral failures had occurred in the below-grade system, the Floridautility's engineers decided to replace the lines. The study followed theprinciples outlined above, and both engineering and installation facedseveral unique situations.   Optimizing the route in this case came down to a choice between twopossibilities. One was a repeat of the original below-grade choice,following an existing secondary road in the plant. The other was anabove-ground installation through an open space in the plant's 230-kVswitchyard.   Decision was for the above-ground configuration. Figure 1 pictures thepiping and the switchyard during construction. The decision was a difficultone. From a plant-operation standpoint, a below-grade installation waspreferable, as even casual study of Figure 2 makes clear. Nevertheless,going below the surface would call for extensive trench shoring to protectexisting structures and for dewatering, because of a high groundwatertable. In addition, a below-grade installation would have needed trenchdepths to 15 ft in some areas to clear existing electrical duct banks.   Because of the cost impact of these site-related installationconditions, the above-ground configuration won out. The projected costsaving of the above-ground over the below-grade installation was about$3.5-million.   Pipe-material cost was an important component of total project cost, andtherefore required evaluation during the route-selection process. Concrete,fiberglass, and steel were the possibilities, judged on a comparable basisthat considered strength, corrosion resistance, and maintenance. Decisionwould have been for concrete as most economical for a below-gradeinstallation. Steel was the choice for the selected above-ground system.   Running the lines above-ground posed many unique challenges. Theconfiguration finally chosen, however, allowed installation of most of thepipeline without upsetting the old circ-water system. The amount of pipeawaiting installation during a Unit-3 outage finally amounted to only thatfor tie-in at the condenser, the circulating-water pumps, and the coolingtower, plus some pipe under a 69-kV electrical bus and a 230-kV transferswitch in the switchyard area.   Figure 2 outlines major considerations affecting piping configurationand details four of the most critical design areas. It gives the choices ofroutes and makes clear the pipe stretches installed during unit outage.   Maximum access and laydown space in the area between Unit 1 and Unit 3resulted from the stacked pipe arrangement along the west side of Unit 3(Figure 3). Jointing of the pipe in this area, by couplings and flanges,makes possible the dismantlement of the pipe and thereby the accommodationof future removal of such major equipment as Unit-3 transformers. Eyeswelded at the tops of pipe spools help in this.   The crossing (Figure 4) under both the existing 230-kV switch structure,which transfers Unit-3 generated power to the switchyard, and the 69-kV tiebus connecting the switchyard for Units 1 and 2 to the Unit-3 switchyard,demanded special consideration. Clearance needs mandated raising of bothstructures.   Pipeline clearance from overhead power lines throughout the plant site,as well as electrical bus inside the switchyard, was another concern. Thedesign met fault-current potential considerations by grounding the pipelineat approximately 40-ft increments, at each pipe joint.   Reaching the cooling tower required crossing the main plant-entranceroad. Partial burying of the pipes in this area reduced installation costs.Although setting the bottom of the pipe about 4 ft below existing gradeeliminated need for extensive shoring and dewatering here, the concept madenecessary an adjustment to the existing road's profile to accommodate the3-ft abovegrade projection of the 7-ft-diameter pipe, plus 30 in. of fillover the pipes.   Existing facilities near the road crossing further complicated roadrevisions. Nevertheless, the completed change of road grade added minimalcost without impairing existing facility access.   At the CT, setting the replacement pipe header outside the existing CTpipes (Figure 5) allowed installation of the new CT header during operationof the old pipeline. In addition, maintenance cranes placed either outsidethe new CT header or in the alleyway left between the new header and the CTcan remove CT equipment or work on the circ-water pumps.   Thermal expansion of piping can make longitudinal-expansion elements andanchors necessary, but these devices would have cost too much for theMcIntosh project. Anchoring the 7-ft above-ground pipe against its possible470-kip internal-pressure thrust load combined with a possible 150-kipfriction load resulting from pipe movement would have been expensive. Therequired route included five bend points, raising costs even higher.   Part of the solution was to allow the pipe to move near bend points,which eliminated need for anchors. Pipe geometry still had to be flexibleenough to give the needed thermal-stress relief, however, and there wereseveral locations where the geometry fell short. Inserting a set offlexible couplings at pipe joints at these locations gave flexibility atlow cost. The couplings relieve pipe thermal stress by functioning ashinges that allow point rotation at consecutive pipe joints. Anotherpurpose for flexible couplings was reduction of loads on connections toexisting equipment and piping.   Flexible couplings for pipe-stress relief make necessary jointharness-rod assemblies to transmit the pipe-pressure thrust force acrossthe couplings. Conventional multi-bolt tie-rod assemblies restrict freerotation at the coupling, however, so the arrangement of Figure 6, withonly two bolts, one on each side of the plane of joint rotation, waspreferred. There is free hinge rotation at the coupling. The speciallydesigned ring-girder stiffeners in the figure are necessary to preventlocal pipe buckling in the vicinity of the harness-rod attachment.   Four regions of interest from the thermal-expansion standpoint arehighlighted in Figure 2. Near the circ-water pumps, a tee branch instead ofa wye gives a better distribution of thermal loads on the pump connections.At the west end of the cooling tower, an expansion loop in the connectionto the CT blowdown line reduces thermal loads on the blowdown-lineconnection.   Pipe-support costs were a key factor in installation costs. To keepcosts to a minimum, designers chose three types of supports, each intendedto accommodate pipe thermal movement and relieve beam bending stress in thepipe.   One type exploited the ring girders already employed at theflexible-coupling harness assemblies, adding steel-plate support-legattachments welded to the girder (Figure 6). Another type, for the vicinityof pipeline bend points, was a steel saddle welded to the pipe's hauncharea.   The base plates for both of these support types have slide surfaces withtetrafluoro-ethylene on both faces to permit pipe movement in alldirections. Guides prevent excessive movement.   The third type of support, the concrete cradle, is in the straight runsof pipe, where longitudinal movement is the sole concern.Graphite-impregnated felt between pipe and concrete cradle eases pipemovement on the support surface.   To reduce costs, the pipe-support foundation system received shallowspread footings except where loads were excessive. Where pipe loadstransmitted large moments into the foundation, pile foundations becamenecessary. Only two locations required them: the stacked pipe arrangementat the condenser and the riser pipes at the cooling tower.   It was important in the Lakeland replacement project to minimize loss ofgeneration during pipe installation. The final design configuration allowedinstalling most of the pipe while Unit 3 was operating. The estimate ofoutage time for tie-in of that pipe was four to six weeks, assumingdouble-shift work and separate crews for the condenser, switchyard,circ-water-pump, and CT areas.   Tie-in was set for a planned annual unit outage, but the outage durationhad to be extended beyond the normal period to allow the tie-in. For bettermaintenance-time utilization during the longer-than-normal outage, Lakelandscheduled a turbine overhaul to coincide with the tie-in.   A single crew, working a normal 40-hr work week during a four-monthperiod, put in the 2220 ft of pipe scheduled for pre-outage installation.The pipe to be installed during the outage required four weeks, withdouble-shift work for the first outage week and then three weeks of single12-hr shifts.   During the outage, four separate crews worked in the four areasmentioned above. Curing the coating on the pipe's field-welded closurejoints and filling and hydrotesting took about a week.   There were no significant problems during hydrotest and return toservice of the circ-water line. Weld inspection and testing of individualjoints, done during installation of the pipe, contributed to the freedomfrom trouble in the hydro test. Minor leakage occurred at one 7-ft andseveral 24-in. flexible couplings, but retightening the coupling bolts tocompress the joint gaskets properly stopped the leakage.   High vibration occurred on one circ-water pump during startup. The newpump discharge pipe's stiffness differed from that of the old, aggravatingan inherent pump-column/pipe-system resonant frequency condition. Addingweight to the top of the vertical circ-water pump's motor lowered thenatural frequency and eliminated the high vibration.   Data obtained after startup indicates that pipe movement is in thedirection and of the magnitude foreseen by the system design. Long-termreliability can be expected from the replacement system.Figure 1: Circ-water pipe run at McIntosh station follows above-groundroute from cooling tower in background toward Unit 3, but planning keptdisruptions to unit operation to a minimumFigure 2: Support and provision for expansion are important followup todecision on basic route. Four critical zones at McIntosh illustratesolutions required for a troublefree jobFigure 3: Stacked pipe arrangement in close quarters improves access butcalls for provision for future dismantlement of the large-bore pipeFigure 4: Crossing under switch structures and tie buses demands study ofclearances, assured at McIntosh by raising existing structuresFigure 5: Air flow and maintenance accessibility are two added subjects forconsideration in header and riser layout at the cooling towerFigure 6: Two-bolt tie-rod arrangement gives hinge effect at couplings,avoiding restrictions of the usual multi-bolt tie-rod assembliesCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.LOOK AT SUCTION SPECIFIC SPEED FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVERework of experience-based limits for impeller performance makes theconcept more helpful in practical pump selectionBy:D H Cavi, Sargent & LundyEdited by W O'KeefeIt has been said that engineering is a blend of art and science. Hence,phrases such as "if it looks right, it probably is" were coined.Centrifugal-pump hydraulic design is a technology that has typified thisblend of art and science in engineering. In the hydraulic-design process,the impeller is of primary concern. In addition, the pump's casing isdesigned to accommodate the performance requirements and characteristics ofthe impeller and therefore has a supporting role in the hydraulic-designprocess.   A well-designed impeller is proportioned to accelerate liquid smoothlyand uniformly from point of entry at the impeller eye, through the vanepassages, and on out to the discharge side of the impeller. If the inleteye is disproportionately large, the liquid acceleration may not be smoothand uniform. In consequence, eddies can form within the impeller and causehydraulic instability. In severe cases, the eddies cause cavitation-likeerosion of the impeller and the casing near the impeller eye, along withharmful pressure pulsations and vibrations.   Certain centrifugal pumps are designed for low required net positivesuction head (NPSH subscript r). These pumps are in industrial, process,and powerplant services where specified available net positive suction head(NPSH subscript a) at the pump suction is relatively low. The impellers inthese pumps, typically identified as "large-eye" impellers, have had theabove-described unstable and damaging characteristics when the pumpsoperate at flows away from the best-efficiency flow region on theperformance curve.   Pump-application guidelines that caution the user on potentiallimitations for impeller-inlet and -discharge design interrelations are thefocus here. Previously published guidelines, based on specific speed,developed head, and suction lift (or suction head), can be simplified andrealigned to conform with current industry parameters of suction specificspeed (S subscript s) and specific speed (N subscript s).   Early researchers recognized that actual performance of centrifugalpumps deviated from the theoretical. Main causes of the deviations arenatural and inescapable phenomena--such as fluid friction, turbulence,pre-rotation, and slip. There were no high-confidence analytical means tocompensate for the effects. Consequently, researchers quantified andcorrelated the performance deviations with physical design parameters. Thecorrelations became a basis for design factors to bridge the gap betweentheoretical and actual performance. Parameters such as "specific speed" ofan impeller (N subscript s = rpm x gpm superscript 0.5 divided by Hsuperscript 0.75, based on conditions at the best-efficiency point, BEP, onthe performance curve--see Reference 1) came into use to facilitateapplication of design factors to the variety of impeller types that wereand still are widely used. (Note that H is head in feet of liquid.)   Impeller specific speed N subscript s is an indication of three factors:the shape of the flow path through the impeller, whether axial, radial, ormixed-flow; the design proportions of the impeller at the outer (ordischarge) diameter; and the spacing between the shroud and back disc ofthe impeller. Specific speed therefore concerns primarily the configurationof the discharge side of an impeller. Figure 1 makes clear the correlationbetween impeller geometry and specific speed.   The suction capability of a pump was designated as the maximum "suctionlift" that the pump could produce at a specified flow. When this suctionlift was exceeded, the pump was said to have "lost its prime." In realterms, the pressure at the eye of the impeller had fallen below the vaporpressure of the liquid, causing the liquid to flash. The resulting vaporbubbles choked the liquid flow at the impeller eye, so that the flow surgedor completely stalled.   "Suction lift" was an adequate means of defining suction capability ofan impeller in situations where vapor pressure of the pumped liquid waslow--such as with ambient-temperature water. The concept is not adequate,however, when vapor pressure approaches suction pressure. To account forvapor pressure of the liquid, the concept of "net positive suction head"(total absolute suction head minus vapor pressure of the liquid, in feet ofliquid) was devised (Reference 1).   NPSH subscript r characteristic of a pump is determined by test. It is afunction of pump-inlet design, impeller-eye diameter, impeller-vane inletgeometry, and speed. Researchers have found that conditions at the impellerdischarge also affect NPSH subscript r (Reference 2,3). Some pumpmanufacturers clearly indicate in published performance curves thatreduction of impeller diameter can increase NPSH subscript r at aparticular flow condition.   The Hydraulic Institute recognized that a relationship exists between animpeller's specific speed which, as discussed above, pertains to theimpeller discharge configuration, and suction conditions. Exceeding certainlimits would increase the potential for serious trouble from "vibration,noise, and pitting."(Reference 4)   In 1932, the Hydraulic Institute first published charts for "upperlimits of specific speeds," correlating the specific speed of an impellerwith its developed head and either the maximum suction lift that should beproduced or the minimum suction head needed to avoid serious trouble.   The Hydraulic Institute Standards had four charts, each for a family ofcurves applying to double-suction pumps, single-suction shaft-through-eyepumps, single-suction overhung impeller pumps, and axial and mixed-flowpumps. Figures 2 and 3 are those for the first- and last-mentioned types.The last version was in 1975.(Reference 4) They apply to operation at ornear BEP and base on statistics of the Institute reflecting operatingexperience in industrial applications.(Reference 5)   Of late, the concept of suction specific speed S subscript s has comeinto use. An impeller's S subscript s derives from pump test data andrelates flow entering the impeller eye to operating speed and NPSHsubscript r at BEP. In a comparison of different pumps or differentimpellers for a particular pump, S subscript s is a useful indication ofrelative size of the impeller eye. An impeller with higher S subscript swould require lower NPSH and would typically have a larger inlet eye thanan impeller with lower S subscript s. S subscript s therefore indicates theinlet configuration of an impeller in the same sense that N subscript sindicates the impeller discharge configuration.   The curves in Figures 2 and 3 are for clear water at 85F and sea level.This establishes vapor pressure and atmospheric pressure, allowingconversion of lift or suction-head conditions to equivalent NPSH values.Vapor pressure of water at 85F is 0.6 psia or 1.4 ft, and atmosphericpressure is 34 ft of water at sea level. NPSH for conditions in Figures 2and 3 equals 34 - 1.4 + suction head (or - suction lift).   Additionally, for any point on the curves, there is an N subscript svalue and a corresponding head value. From these, the quantity: rpm x gpmsuperscript 0.5 can be calculated from the specific-speed equation. Lift orsuction head conditions are convertible to NPSH, so S subscript s iscalculable for any curve point by dividing rpm x gpm superscript 0.5 byNPSH subscript r superscript 0.75. For a double-suction impeller, dividefurther by (2) superscript 0.5.   Figure 4 is an example of the conversion of points in Figure 2 toequivalents relating S subscript s to N subscript s. The family of curvesin Figure 2 reduces to a single curve for the parameters of N subscript sand S subscript s. For other types of pumps, Figures 5-7 hold, each plottedsimilarly from the Hydraulic Institute charts for the particular pump type.The equivalent "safe" region that corresponds to the upper limit of Nsubscript s on the Hydraulic Institute curves would be the area below theFigure 4-7 curves.   Admittedly, some pump designs may exceed the limits in the curves. Insuch instances, review of test data and operating experience is advisableto prove capability for the required duty and range of flow.   Typically, pumps that exceed the limits have a relatively large impellereye (in a multistage pump, the first stage). Experience indicates that suchpumps have a comparatively narrow stable operating range, near the BEP.Operation outside the stable range can result in liquid recirculation atthe impeller eye (eddies), causing high vibration, pitting on the impellerand adjacent casing areas, and axial shuttling of the shaft. Prolongedoperation this way can lead to bearing and shaft-seal failure, and damageto impeller and casing.   The condition may not be a concern if the pump runs only in theoptimum-efficiency flow range or handles viscous liquids. Pumps below thecurve limits generally have a broader stable operating range.   Conversely, if a pump's S subscript s vs N subscript s characteristicfalls far below the curves, the impeller eye would be comparatively small,leading to a choking condition at certain flows. Choking can result in lowefficiency, degraded head, inlet cavitation, and recirculation (eddies) atthe impeller discharge.   The latest edition of the Hydraulic Institute Standards (Reference 1)does not include curves such as Figures 2 and 3. Instead, an S subscript svalue of 8500 is assumed satisfactory for most applications. The Ssubscript s equation is rearranged to solve for rpm, using NPSH, and theresulting pump speed is the suggested maximum operating speed. For pumpswith constant-speed motor drive, the next lower synchronous speed wouldapply.   Figures 4-7 indicate that a S subscript s of 8500 would be conservativefor some pumps but needs examination for others. The 8500 value isquestionable for impellers with N subscript s from around 2000 up, exceptfor end-suction single-inlet pumps, where 8500 would be questionable for Nsubscript s of 2500 and up.   For impellers of higher N subscript s design, Figures 4-7 indicate thatS subscript s is lower than 8500. Figure 1 makes clear that high-Nsubscript s impellers have relatively small outer diameters. If S subscripts is high, then the impeller's inlet-eye diameter is large.   Combination of high S subscript s and high N subscript s for an impellerindicates a relatively short flowpath between inlet and discharge, causingan abrupt acceleration of the liquid and adversely affecting hydraulicstability of the impeller. The slope of the Figure 4-7 curves agrees withthis analysis. According to the Hydraulic Institute standards committee(Reference 5), impellers of low N subscript s can be designed for high Ssubscript s values; this agrees with the trend of Figures 4-6 curves.   The Hydraulic Institute curves typified by Figures 2 and 3 stemmed fromfield operating experience, and the S subscript s/N subscript s curves ofFigures 4-7 have the same basis, because they were calculated directly fromthe Hydraulic Institute curves.Figure 1: Specific speed primarily concerns the discharge side of theimpeller and indicates impeller cross-section geometryFigure 2, 3: Recommendations for necessary suction head for double-suctionimpeller (left) and for single-suction mixed-flow and axial-flow pumps(right) stemmed from Hydraulic Institute statistical dataFigure 4: Conversion of points such as Point A in Figure 2 give a curveforsuction-specific-speed limit for double-suction impellersFigure 5: Shaft-through-eye impeller, such as in higher stages of feedpumps, has similarly derived suction-specific-speed limitsFigure 6: Single-inlet, end-suction pump also has descending curve derivedfrom charts resembling those of Figures 2 and 3Figure 7: Axial-flow and mixed-flow pumps, with inherently high values ofspecific speed, have a flat limit on suction specific speedReference(s):1 Hydraulic Institute Standards, 14th edit, 19822 W H Fraser, "Recirculation in Centrifugal Pumps," ASME Winter Meeting,November 19813 D Konno and Y Yamada, "Does Impeller Affect NPSH subscript r?" FirstInternational Pump Symposium, Turbomachinery Labs, Texas A&M Univ, May19844 Hydraulic Institute Standards, 13th edit, 19755 Discussions with H A J Greutink, chairman, Hydraulic Institute standardscommitteeCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.KNOW CAUSES OF, SOLUTIONS TO CFB-BOILER REFRACTORY PROBLEMSRefractories are used extensively in CFB boilers. Because early systemswere prone to failures, advanced refractory systems have been developed andapplied successfullyBy:M S Crowley, ConsultantEdited by Steven CollinsCirculating fluidized-bed (CFB) boilers use extensive amounts ofrefractories to withstand harsh operating conditions--includingtemperatures topping 2000F, frequent thermal cycling, and continuous attackby erosive high-velocity particles. Thermal cycling alone, encountered on adaily basis by many units, can eventually destroy almost any refractory.Specific areas requiring protective refractories include the combustor,cyclones, external heat exchanger (EHE), ducts, and transfer lines (Figure1).   Correct selection and installation of materials is critical tominimizing refractory failures. The following material provides valuableinsights into the construction and repair of CFB refractories.Typical CFB linings   Refractory selection is complicated by reciprocal physical properties.Example: Good insulating materials often have poor erosion resistance. Tomake up for trade-offs, refractory systems are often made of severalmaterials applied in layers.   Three general types of liner designs are used in advanced CFBs:Waterwall and thin or thick linings for non-waterwall surfaces. Waterwalllinings, used in the combustor and cyclone areas, use short studs to holda thin, 1/2-2-in.-thick layer of dense refractory to the flue-gas side ofboiler tube assemblies. Conventional insulation is affixed outside tomaintain high water/steam temperatures. The linings withstand rapidthermal upsets better than thick lining. Steel fiber is often added towaterwall liners for toughness and shock resistance.   Thin linings, typically 6 in. or less in total thickness and usuallyhave both dense and insulating layers. They are more economical to installand maintain than thick linings. However, a hotter shell--ranging from 300to 500F--can make thin-lined components less efficient and uncomfortable towork around.   Thick linings usually consist of two or three layers totaling 12-18 in.A dense, "hot face'' of abrasion-resistant brick, plastic, or castableprotects against the erosive action of hot, high-velocity particles. Backuplayers of insulating material reduce heat loss, decrease shelltemperatures, and improve overall efficiency.Refractory materials   Refractories consist of mineral combinations--usually oxides--formedinto rigid shapes with the aid of a binder. They are classified as eitherpreformed or unformed. Preformed refractory materials--brick and tile--arefired before installation. Unformed materials--castables and plastics--arefired after installation to create seamless monoliths. Castables differfrom putty-like plastics in that they must be mixed with water at the worksite.   Physical properties. To obtain desired physical properties--such asstrength, erosion resistance, and volume stability--refractorymanufacturers blend the appropriate prefired aggregates with suitablebinders. The latter includes raw clay, calcium aluminate cements, orphosphate-based materials. The important physical properties of brick,tile, plastic, and castable refractories differ, depending on chemicalcomposition and manufacturing and installation techniques used (see table).Thermal stability, a measure of how well a material resists repeatedthermal cycling, is perhaps the most important property for CFBapplications. However, erosion-resistance, hot-strength, creep-resistance,heat-transfer, and shrinkage characteristics must also be considered for agiven application.   Clay binders are often added to ceramic oxides before firing when makingbrick or tile. With some materials, a ceramic bond can be formed withoutthe help of binder by firing them at a higher temperature. Otherwise amaterial that promotes bonding such as monoaluminum phosphate, may be usedto form a strong bond after firing temperatures reach 1000F.   Because they are easy to apply and shape, monolithic refractories--bothcastables and plastics--are most commonly used. Castables are composed ofcalcined mineral aggregates and a calcium-aluminate or hydraulic cement,along with additives that ease wetting and placement.   Castables are shipped dry to the site. Water is added in a mixer if thematerial is to be cast in a form, or at the gun nozzle if "gunning'' isused to place the lining (Figure 2). Advanced castables are becoming morepopular because they offer minimal shrinkage and enhanced formability.   Plastics are similar to castables in formulation. Both use calcinedaggregates and a binder. However, plastics--which are premixed at thefactory--use phosphates or other heat-setting agents to cause the materialto bond or "setup'' when fired. Castables use hydraulic cements which formthe permanent bond when mixed with water and fired.   Fibers. Stainless steel fibers and organic "burn-out'' fibers are oftenadded to both plastics and castables. Stainless steel fibers improvetoughness and crack resistance. Organic fibers, which are finer than sewingthread, melt or burn-out the first time a refractory is fired, leaving amaze of tiny tunnels behind. These allow steam to escape and reduce theoccurrence of explosive spalling--particularly during the initial firing ofmoisture-laden materials. Virtually no detrimental changes in physicalproperties result from adding organic fiber.   The use of ceramic fiber by itself as a refractory material is generallylimited to packing around metal components such as door jams to allow forthermal expansion. The erosive action of sand, limestone, and ash generallyprecludes the use of ceramic fiber in most areas of a CFB boiler.Installation techniques   To ensure that a finished castable product comes out as planned, excesswater must be kept to a minimum, manufacturer's curing instructions closelyfollowed, and anchors correctly positioned. Slow initial dryingperiods--where temperaturesare raised at a rate of about 100-deg-F perhour--are recommended to ensure that a new lining will not explode uponstartup. Anchors should be spaced at intervals equal to two to three timesthe thickness of the lining and extend two-thirds to three-quarters of theway through the refractory.   A pneumatic rammer is often used to work putty-like plastics andcastables into the desired area (Figure 3). While most plastics are stillinstalled using rammers, advanced gunning machines are now available thatapply certain plastics by a pneumatic technique that does not require wateraddition at the gun nozzle. The new gunning techniques are likely to becomemore popular because they are faster, require fewer people to operate, andallow some of the rebound to be reused rather than thrown away. Inaddition, these pneumatically installed materials are said to be stronger,denser, and longer lasting.   Vibratory casting, a relatively new placement method, uses vibratoryaction to force thick material to flow into forms. Vibratory castables havespecial additives which greatly improve flowability, strength, and erosionresistance without increasing the water content of the mixture. Gunning orvibratory casting are the installation methods preferred for large areaswhile ramming or hand-packing may be acceptable for small ordifficult-to-reach areas.   Brick and tile are installed with little mortar using a "dip-joint"technique. The brick is dipped into a pool of gravy-like mortar, theninstalled. Only a thin coating of mortar remains on its surface. Joints aretypically 1/16 in. thick or less. This reduces the chances of creep or theentry of pieces of slag and particulate matter.   Contractors. The use of third-party inspectors to monitor theinstallation and repair of refractories is recommended. Most owners do nothave the necessary in-house expertise to effectively oversee theinstallation of advanced refractories. Preliminary testing of both thematerials and the skill-level of installation personnel will go a long waytowards reducing future maintenance costs (Figure 4).   Refractory testing. When purchasing a refractory, it is important torequest the manufacturer's test results. Most refractory tests are based onASTM procedures which can be performed by many independent laboratories(see Reference 7). Generally, flexural and compressive strengths, thermalconductivity, erosion and thermal-shock resistance, and thermal expansionare the main items of concern. Strengths should be measured at expectedoperating temperatures to ensure an adequate service life.Areas of most concern   The combustion zone in many CFB units reaches temperatures of 1600 to1800F, is usually oxygen-deficient, and is generally under a slightpositive pressure of 1 to 3 psig. Severe thermal shock and cycling arecommon. Combustor temperatures may swing by 1000-deg-F in a few minutes. Adozen or more startup/shutdown cycles in a week are possible.   The reducing atmosphere here may call for refractories low in free ironor iron oxide. Chemically, iron catalyzes the subsequent breakdown of COinto CO subscript 2 and carbon. This process results in the deposition ofcarbon inside refractories, which causes internal expansion and thegradual destruction of the material.   In most CFB units, sand, limestone, and ash act as the primary heatexchange media to combust the coal or other organic matter. If possible,sand should be removed after startup because it is extremely erosive. Thicklinings, consisting of 3 to 6 in. of dense erosion-resistant castable orplastic covering a similar thickness of insulating material, frequentlyfail by excessive cracking and "pinch-spalling.'' Shrinkage upon drying,thermal shock, and creep of the hot face under compressive stresses are themain causes of cracks. Stainless steel fibers help to reduce cracking, butcan not stop it completely. Pinch spalling occurs as bed material becomestrapped and the lining experiences repeated thermal cycling (Figure 5).   Phosphate-bonded mullite-based plastics stand up well in combustion-zoneservice because of their good volume stability (resistance to thermalexpansion and contraction) in cyclic service and excellent erosionresistance. These materials can be used to repair defective areas becausethe phosphate binder adheres well to existing materials. To ensure that thepatch holds, a minimum of two anchors should be used. Ceramic or cast alloyanchors are recommended for holding plastic linings exposed to extremetemperatures. Additional anchors may also be needed to retain theinsulating layer independently.   In the freeboard area above the combustion zone, silicon carbide (SiC)tiles have been used to reduce erosion of waterwall tubes. Often, a siliconcarbide mortar is used behind the tile to improve heat transfer to thetube. The tile is usually held onto the tubes with welded inserts. Indesigns where the waterwall tubes extend down to the combustor floor,linings often include a thin layer of a dense high-thermal-conductivity,abrasion-resistant plastic or castable.   Often SiC-based castables are initially specified on studded tubes.These can be repaired with phosphate-bonded plastics--preferably containingSiC aggregate for high thermal conductivity. Phosphate-bonded materials arealso recommended if the feedstock or recycle ash is high in alkali content.Reason: Calcium aluminate cements break down under high-temperature alkaliattack.   Cyclone inlet and barrel. Combustor roofs and cyclone inlets experiencetemperatures of 1000 to 1800F, with occasional excursions above 2000F.Here, a two-component lining of insulating material covered by a denseabrasion-resistant layer containing stainless steel fiber has providedacceptable service life. If severe thermal shock causes excessive cracking,a fused silica-based castable may be used instead.   The cyclone barrel and cone experience very severe conditions, includingtemperature swings of 1000 deg F within a few minutes, repeated cycling,and some erosion. For many thick linings, the repeated thermal shock andcycling coupled with erosion and pinch-spalling have caused large sectionsto fail. Poor results with various repair schemes have led some operatorsto replace thick castable linings with brick ones made of insulating brickor block covered with abrasion-resistant mullite brick. Repairs to theselinings can be made with phosphate-bonded plastic.   Another possibility is to use a thinner lining made from material with alow coefficient of thermal expansion--such as a fused silica castable.However, most fused silica castables have low erosion resistance comparedto phosphate-bonded mullite plastics. Thus, service life is shorter.   The cyclone cone experiences conditions similar to those of the barrel.However, here the lining rests on the shell. Vibratory casting isrecommended for strength, erosion resistance, and low thermal expansion ofcastables placed in the cone.   Cyclone dipleg and loop seal. This area has been a source of continuingproblems in some units. Thermal shock coupled with severe erosion andthermal cycling have resulted in repeated failures. Many of the initialdesigns employed thick layers of both dense and insulatingcastables--difficult materials to install properly, given the area'sconfined spaces and limited accessibility. When installing linings,insulating castable covered by vibration-cast, shock/abrasion-resistantcastable with both stainless-steel and burn-out fibers should beconsidered. Erosion-resistant brick with a backup layer of insulating brickor castable has also worked well. Phosphate-bonded plastic with stainlesssteel fibers is typically used to repair existing units.   External heat exchangers (EHE), used in some CFB designs, often employrefractory-covered internal division walls to force ash to flow in apattern of hair-pin turns over a bed of heat-transfer tubes. Unlikeexternal walls, division walls are heated on both sides and are notfastened to a cool shell. Lack of a supporting shell with anchors means thewall can bend in and out of its original plane under the influence ofthermal stresses. This out-of-plane movement allows large cracks to open upand trap circulating bed media, which aggravates the bending action (Figure6).   Transfer lines. The insides of transfer lines are covered withrefractories that resist erosion and thermal cycling. The most popularchoice consists of vibration-cast material having excellent volumestability and erosion resistance. Adding stainless steel and organic fibersis advisable. Phosphate-bonded plastics, preferably with mullite-basedaggregate for volume stability, can be considered for repairs.Failures and repairs   Cracks wider than 1/16 in. can trap limestone and ash particles andeventually cause a lining failure as thermal cycling induces a wedgingaction. The loss of thin layers--down to the anchor tips--can often betolerated if the lining is not separating from the shell. Fusedsilica-based castables and phosphate-bonded plastics are popularcrack-repair materials.   Spalling. There are two forms of spalling that are likely to occur inCFB linings. Explosive spalling usually occurs on the initial heat-up of anew installation when the water present in the castable or plastic isconverted to steam faster than it can escape from the lining. The buildupof steam pressure exceeds the tensile strength of the material, at whichpoint the lining explodes. Organic burn-out fibers used in both castablesand plastics can greatly reduce the chance of explosive spalling. Bricklinings are usually not subject to this failure because the bricks areprefired and moisture in mortar can escape out the joints between adjacentbricks. Thermal-shock spalling can occur in both brick and monolithiclinings when sudden changes in temperature force the lining to expand orcontract faster than the material can accommodate the stress.   Repair methods for spalled areas vary. Brick linings should be replacedwith more spall-resistant brick if large areas fail. Small areas can berepaired using a phosphate-bonded plastic if an adequate number of anchorscan be installed. Monolithic linings are repaired using eitherphosphate-bonded plastics--for small areas--or low-thermal-expansioncastables.   Erosion. In general, erosion values below 10 cm superscript 3--based onASTM test C-704--are required for severe erosion service. A better testruns at operating temperatures using the actual abrading media (Reference4). Equipment for this test is not yet widely available.   The best materials for erosion resistance are the new vibration-cast,low-moisture castables and phosphate-bonded plastics. The erosion valuevaries, depending on the material, the placement method, and the percentwater used.   Anchor failures can be caused by several factors (Figure 7). Faultywelding, incorrect spacing, poor anchor selection, corrosion, andoverheating are the most common causes. Ceramic and cast alloy anchors arerecommended for plastic linings because of their superior holding power andresistance to high temperatures. Stainless steel anchors are used forcastable linings because they cost less and have excellent holding powerwhen properly designed. Welding specifications should be carefully reviewedto avoid premature failure.   Ceramic anchors usually extend all the way to the hot face while metalanchors are held back at least an inch from the hot face. Thus, if an inchor more of metal anchor is exposed because of erosion or spalling, anestimate of the amount of lining left can be made. A decision on whether ornot to reline is then made based on the desired run time until the nextmajor shutdown.Figure 1: Circulating fluid-bed combustors (CFB) require extensive amountsof refractory to combat high temperatures, erosive forces, and thermalcyclingFigure 2: Gunningrefractory into place is popular because large areas canbe covered quicklyFigure 3: Pneumatic rammers are used to work castables and plastics intoplace. Both ceramic and metallic anchors are shown hereFigure 4: Training and testing refractory installers before a job helpsensure correct placement of materials and longer service lifeFigure 5: Pinch spalling can occur as shown when an area undergoes repeatedthermal cyclingFigure 6: External heat exchangers may develop large cracks because theirwalls are heated on both sides, not fastened to a cool external shell.Here, steel plates help hold sections togetherFigure 7: Anchor failures can cause large sections of refractory to failTable: Physical properties of CFB refractories (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see January, 1992 issue.)Reference(s):1 M S Crowley (Crete, Ill), "Guidelines for Using Refractories inCirculating Fluid-Bed Combustors,'' Electric Power Research Institute,Research Project No 979-27, 19912 D A Bell, "A Computer Simulation of Cracking in MonolithicRefractories," British Ceramic Transactions Journal 1987, p 133, 19893 C A Schacht, "Influence of Lining Restraint and Nonlinear MaterialProperties in Predicting Thermal Shock Fracture in Refractory Linings,''UNITECR 1989 Proceedings, p 1286, American Ceramic Society, 19894 R C Johnson and M Seshamani, "Refractory lining Systems for CircualtingFluidized Bed Water-cooled Cyclones,'' ASME 10th International Conferenceon Fluidized Bed Combustion, San Francisco, Calif, 19895 M S Crowley, "Steel Fibers in Refractory Applications,'' NPRA Refiningand Petrochemical Plant Maintenance Conference, Pittsburgh, Pa, February19816 M S Crowley and J S Young, "Evaluation of Thermal Film Coefficients inFurnace Walls,'' Ceramic Transactions (Vol 4),1 p 547-556, The AmericanCeramic Society, May 19887 E Ruh, "Refractories for the Chemical Process Industries, MaterialsTechnology Institute of the Chemical Process Industries, Manual No. 9,19848 L P Krietz and others, "Evolution and Status of Refractory CastableEntering the 1990s,'' American Ceramic Society Bulletin 69, p 1690, 19909 M S Crowley, "Anchors for Refractory Concrete Linings,'' Oil & GasJournal (Vol 80, No. 35), p 122, 198910 L P Krietz and others, "A Review of International Experiences inPlastic Gunning,'' Advances in Ceramics (Vol 13), The American CeramicSociety, 198411 S F Rahman, "Advances in Vibration-Cast Refractories for Application asAbrasion-Resistant Linings,'' UNITECR 1989 Proceedings, p 955, AmericanCeramic Society, 198912 C E Semler, "Thermal Shock Evaluation of Refractories,'' 14th AnnualSymposium on Refractories, American Ceramic Society, 197813 "Extensive Review of Current Refractory Technology,'' UNITECR 1989Proceedings, American Ceramic SocietyCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.STOKERS KEEP PACE WITH MODERN COMBUSTIONOften-subtle design and operating details ensure maximum performance fromspreader stokers firing most types of coal and solid waste fuelsBy:Neil H Johnson, Detroit Stoker CoEdited by Steven CollinsFor boilers up to 300,000 lb/hr of steam output, the traveling-gratespreader stoker remains a viable process for burning coal or waste (Fig 1).To keep pace with the requirements of modern steam production, improvementshave been made in many areas of the spreader-stoker system-- includingcontrol of fuel and air flow, and emissions reduction.   Fuel types. The spreader-stoker-fired boiler can burn a wide range ofcoals, regardless of their free-swelling characteristics or Hardgroveindex. In general, bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite all can beburned in a given unit to generate similar heat-release rates. Unlike otherboiler types, the requirements of the furnace and gas path, not thefuel-feed systems, are the main concerns when contemplating a fuel switch.However, the volatile-matter content of any fuel burned in a spreaderstoker should be above 20% on a dry, basis.   Theoretically, the coal burned in spreader-stoker-fired boilers shouldbe sized to include equal proportions of 3/4-in. x 1/2-in., 1/2-in. x1/4-in., and 1/4-in. x 1/8-in. particles. This ensures even spreading ofthe fuel thrown out onto the moving--or vibrating--grate. However, thesesizing recommendations are impractical. To ease the task of sizing coalcorrectly, empirical correlations are used. These include: "Distribution ofSizes of Coal and Recommended Limits of Coal Sizing for Spreader Stokers''published by American Boiler Manufacturers Assn (ABMA), Arlington, Va.   In general, coal that is too coarse is more troublesome than coal thatis too fine. Coarse coal requires slower grate speeds and more combustionair. Many plants are successfully burning coals finer than those specifiedby the ABMA curve. However, combustion of fines does create higher levelsof unburned carbon in the flyash, especially as the percentage ofminus-16-mesh coal increases. Higher NO subscript x emissions have alsobeen linked to excessive fines.   Spreader-stoker-fired boilers have also been used extensively to burnmany types of waste fuels, including:   --Wood--from hogged trees to sawdust.   --Garbage--as refuse-derived fuel (RDF).   --Bagasse--sugar-cane residue.   --Industrial wastes--paper, plastics, and wood.   --Furfural residue.   --Peanut shells.   Water-cooled vibrating-grate spreader stokers burning waste fuels aremore reliable and require less maintenance than do traveling-grate units.   Grate types. The main functions of grates in a spreader-stoker-firedboiler are to provide a platform on which to burn fuel, to pass combustionair, and to remove ash. Many different types of grates have been used. Butonly the traveling and vibrating grates are able to balance today'srequirements for cost, efficiency, emissions control, availability, andsafety.   With the traveling grate, fuel is propelled into the furnace towards therear wall of the boiler. Some of the fuel is burned in suspension, theremainder on the grate, which moves towards the fuel-feed end of theboiler. The speed of the grate is varied according to load. However, speedalso depends on the amount of fuel being burned per square foot of gratearea--an important design value.   Systems can be designed to produce a heat release rate of up to 750kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr for most bituminous coals, subbituminous coal, andlignite. For firing low-volatile bituminous coals, maximum heat releaseshould be 600 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr to minimize unburned carbon loss.   The heat-release rate for refuse fuels such as wood or bagasse canextend up to 1-million Btu/ft superscript 2/hr. Grate speeds must be slowerfor RDF to reduce wear associated with the high amount of abrasivenon-combustibles found in this fuel. Therefore, the maximum design heatrelease should be limited to 750 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   Design heat release rates for vibrating grate stokers are moreconservative because the vibrating action can over-agitate the fuel and ashbed, hampering complete combustion. Units burning waste fuels having amoisture content less than 40% have been designed for release rates up to250 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr. Coal-burning vibrating-grate units can employheat-release rates up to 650 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   Combustion air. Because the goal of the spreader stoker is to achieveuniform burning over the entire active grate surface, evenly distributingair flow throughout the grates is necessary. Careful attention must be paidto the design of the plenum chamber under the grates. Abrupt changes inflow direction or other hardware configurations which might cause air-flowimbalances should be avoided. High-resistance grates, which put most of theresistance to air flow across the grate rather than the ash bed,significantly improve air distribution.   Inlet-air temperature can be at ambient or preheated up to 350F whenburning bituminous or subbituminous coals. If moisture content exceeds 25%,preheated air is recommended. Lignite, for example, requires preheated air,typically to 400F.   Virtually all refuse contains more than 25% moisture and requirespreheated combustion air. Air temperature should be limited to 350F forsystems burning RDF because of the varying characteristics of this fuel.Water-cooled vibrating-grate units burning high-moisture refuse--above35%--utilize air preheated to 650F.   Until recently, overfire-air systems for coal-fired spreader stokerswere limited to supplying 15-18% of the overall air. In light ofincreasingly restrictive NO subscript x regulations, new systems use threelevels of overfire air--supplying up to 35% of total air input--to achievestaged combustion. Overfire air must be supplied with sufficient energy toproduce turbulence and thoroughly mix fuel with oxygen to completecombustion. Nozzle design is the most important factor affecting theefficient utilization of overfire-air fan energy.   Flyash reinjection. The two factors controlling efficiency of thespreader-stoker combustion system are excess air and carbon loss. Unitsshould be able to operate at 25% excess air or less if air plenums andnozzles are designed correctly.   Carbon loss is the sum of carbon lost in flyash and bottom ash. Awell-run and well-designed spreader stoker exhibits a very low bottom-ashcarbon loss. Therefore, efforts to minimize carbon loss concentrate onflyash. The most popular technique is reinjecting the flyash caught by thefirst-stage of ash removal--usually the mechanical dust collector.   In the case of units burning eastern bituminous coals, the combustiblecontent of flyash caught in mechanical dust collectors is about 60%.Properly designed reinjection systems can reduce this value to about 25%.Reinjection can improve efficiency significantly and reduce the amount ofash requiring disposal.   Emissions. Several factors influence the amount of NO subscript xproduced by a spreader stoker, including: (1) amount of excess air, (2)design heat-release rate, (3) air temperature, (4) fuel size distribution,(5) method of fuel feed, and (6) furnace temperature. When possible, followthese suggestions for reducing NO subscript x output:   --Limit design heat release to 700 kBtu/ft superscript 2/hr.   --Maintain under-grate air temperatures near ambient.   --Keep coal fines--particles below 0.1-in.--to a minimum.   --Reduce furnace temperature by staging overfire air or recirculatingflue gas.   Spreader-stoker-fired systems convert virtually all of the sulfur foundin the fuel to SO subscript 2. Thus, some sort of post-combustion SOsubscript 2-control device is necessary. Both wet and dry scrubbers havebeen used successfully. There are also many emerging technologies aimed atcombined SO subscript 2 and NO subscript x control (Power, September 1990,p 26).Figure 1: Stoker-fired boilers have been popular since the 1930s. Shown isa modern moving-grateunit under constructionCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DIAGNOSTIC MONITORING--AN OVERVIEWDiagnostic engineering is a recognized plant-maintenance function. Thisarticle outlines the use of diagnostic monitoring for detection ofincipient failure, to facilitate predictive maintenanceBy:Otakar Jonas, Jonas IncEdited by Sheldon D StraussUtilities are in constant pursuit of methods to increase plant availabilityin their ongoing effort to improve power generation and reduce operatingcosts. A fast-developing approach makes use of diagnostic monitoring of keyplant components and systems as a basis for forecasting incipient failuresand for predictive maintenence. Either continuous on-line or periodic,diagnostic monitoring includes non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques,while expert systems, knowledge bases, and other computer-based toolscontribute to forecasting of failures.   Upwards of 30 monitoring techniques are available for use in detectionof problems having potential impact on the integrity of almost everycomponent in a nuclear or fossil-fueled powerplant. Established techniquesare based on analysis of stress, crack growth, leakage, vibration,metallic-particle content of lube oil, temperature change and distribution,water chemistry, and corrosion. Across-the-board application of thismonitoring technology could enhance plant availability by at least 2%.Their application to predictive rather than scheduled maintenance cancontribute to reduced forced-outage rates, shortened scheduled outages,reduced maintenance and operating costs (through damage reduction andefficiency increases), better record-keeping, and easier licensing.   The value of the approach lies in its ability to diagnose abnormalmechanical behavior at an early stage as a focal point for preventiveequipment maintenance. Thus, the information provided can help avoid aforced outage and makes it possible to perform repairs on a scheduledbasis. It also is used to ensure that the needed parts and tools are athand when the equipment is taken out of service. At the same time,monitoring systems can reduce plant downtime by avoiding unnecessarycomponent maintenance during a scheduled outage. Still another benefit isassessment of equipment life.   Incipient failure detection and predictive maintenance are addressedperiodically by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) at theirperiodic "Incipient Failure Detection Conferences." (Refs 1-3 are typical.)EPRI's Monitoring and Diagnostic Center at Philadelphia Electric Co'sEddystone station (Philadelphia, Pa) and Non-Destructive Evaluation Center(Charlotte, N Car) are in the forefront of development of applicablediagnostic methods. Much can be learned from proceedings and reportsemanating from these and other sources, some of which are referencedbelow.4-12 Technical Briefs issued periodically by EPRI are anotherparticularly useful source.   Rather than an in-depth review of the subject, this discussion islimited to a brief overview of practical diagnostic monitoring methodsavailable to the industry. Diagnostic monitoring involves a range of sensortypes and signal forms covering the entire electromagnetic spectrum.Depending on the particular component under study, a predictive maintenancesystem will usually make use of several of these diagnostic monitoringsystems, grouped according to application.   Crack, leak detection. (1) Helium and SF subscript 6 are used as tracersto locate leaks in steam condensers and general air inleakage, inconjunction with a mass spectrometer. (2) Acoustic monitors (resonant100-900 kHz transducers) detect minute shock waves generated by cracks,material and weld defects, rubbing, or plastic deformation; audible- andultrasonic-frequency microphones or acoustic-emission transducers detectenergy generated by a leaking fluid; broad-band acoustic sensors mounted onpiping downstream of valves detect noise produced by flow turbulence. (3)Fatigue monitors are used to calculate fatigue stresses and life fromtemperature and pressure transients. (4) Special electrical conductivityprobe measures moisture on vessels and piping.   Bearing condition. (1) Ultrasonic piezoelectric sensors embedded inbearings enable detection of wear through measurement of bearing-padthickness. (2) Spectrophotometry is used to monitor non-metallic compoundsin oils by infrared absorption; ferrography is a technique for examiningthe composition, size distribution, and quantity of metallic particles inlubricating oil. (3) Oil temperature is monitored in comparison to baselinetemperature as indicative of a problem, but the method may not havesufficient sensitivity in particular cases.   Rotating machinery. (1) Vibration signature analysis is used formonitoring vibration frequencies, amplitudes, and phases; rotor cracks(including shallow, transverse types) are detected by use of 1st, 2nd, and3rd harmonics to separate vibration signals from background noise;rotor-dynamics balance technique uses vibration signature analysis to trackand diagnose rotor/bearing vibration problems; laser doppler vibrometerscan be used to scan rotating surfaces periodically to measure vibrationamplitude and frequency. (2) Rotor/shell stress analysis is used to computethermal stresses from steam and metal temperatures to determine fatiguedamage in thick sections of turbines, nozzles, headers, and piping. (3)Turbine-blade condition monitor uses acoustic techniques to detect bladecracks, row damage, flutter, and torsional events in turbines. (4)Surface-layer activation involves implantation of radioisotopes into metalsurface, plus collection and analysis of debris for nuclide content, tomonitor wear and solid-particle erosion; remaining surface radioactivitycan also be monitored continuously for same purpose.   Electrical-equipment condition. (1) Motor-current analyzers monitor thefrequency spectrum of electric current supplied to electric components. (2)Thermography is a method for pictorially recording emission of infraredradiation by hot spots. (3) Radiofrequency analyzers monitor generatorradio waves to detect arcing.   Water level, induction, chemistry, corrosion. (1) Water level ismonitored in comparison to reference level by various methods includingultrasound, conductivity probes, and gamma gauges. (2) Water induction andwaterhammer in steam pipes are monitored by gamma gauges, conductivityprobes, and fast-response thermocouples. (3) On-line, in-line pH monitorstrack acidity/alkalinity inside components under operating conditions;variety of specific ion, gas, particle, temperature, and pressure detectorsare used to analyze water and steam composition throughout the cycle, helpdetermine sources of impurities and corrosion and deposition in components,with computerized expert systems providing useful adjunct. (4) Corrosion istracked by monitoring H subscript 2 concentration in water and steam;corrosion-current or water-resistance monitors make use of in-line probesfor same purpose; in-line corrosion-potential probe relates corrosionpotential to type of corrosion under way.   Miscellaneous. (1) Filter malfunction is detected by monitoring leakagethrough filters by particle impact and other methods. (2) Flow ratemonitors compare fluid-flow rate to baseline rate. (3) Particle detectorsprovide qualitative or quantitaive information on flow of particles andliquid droplets in steam lines and air and gas systems. (4) Transformer oilcondition is tracked by monitoring H subscript 2 produced by oildegradation. (5) Valve-stem strain sensors measure force on valve stems.References from Fourth EPRI Incipient-Failure Detection Conference,Philadelphia, Pa, October 1990Reference(s):1 D Anderson, "Predictive Maintenance by Oil Analysis"2 R Leon, "Monitoring System for Steam Turbine Blade Faults"3 J Guillet, "EDF Studies on Predictive Maintenance of Motor-OperatedValves"Additional references4 "Monitoring and Diagnostic Center: An Overview of OperatingActivities," EPRI Report GS-7407, July 19915 "Life Extension and Assessment: Nuclear and Fossil Plant Components,"American Society of Mechanical Engineers Transactions, PVP-V138 NDE, Vol 9,June 19886 D Zwingelstein, "EdF Experience in the Maintenance and Monitoring ofNuclear Powerplants," Seventh Powerplant Dynamics, Control, and TestingSymposium, Knoxville, Tenn, May 19897 T Elliott, "Monitoring Surface Deterioration of Powerplant ComponentsOn-Line," Power, May 1990, p 718 "Aging Assessment and Monitoring Method Evaluation," ORNL Report 6193,Vol 2, April 19919 "Solid-Particle Erosion of Steam-Turbine Components," EPRI ReportGS-6535, September 198910 Y Asakura and others, "Structural Material Anomaly-Detection SystemUsing Water-Chemistry Data," Journal of Nuclear Science & Technology,September 1990, p 81511 D M Sopocy and others, "Expert Systems to Improve Plant Operability,"American Power Conference, Chicago, Ill, April 198912 D Wach, "Early Fault Detection and Diagnosis of Primary CircuitComponents in German Nuclear Powerplants," Tenth International Conferenceon Power Stations, Liege, Belgium, September 1989Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.GAS TURBINES PACE NEW CAPACITY ADDITIONSThe relentless march of gas turbines into the powerplant arena results fromcontinued advances in efficiency, ultra-low NO subscript x emissions, coalcompatibility, and unit output. The latest target: base-load power supplyBy:Steven Collins, Assistant EditorGas turbines have long been popular as prime movers for a variety ofgas-compression and power-generation applications. Since the 1950s, theyhave been used in remote oil and gas fields, on offshore drillingplatforms, and in gas-pipeline pumping stations. In these locations, wherefresh water is often scarce, premium fuel supplies cheap, or spacerequirements limited, compact gas-turbine sets have proved invaluable. Andthanks to its quick-start capabilities--as little as 10 minutes fromstartup to full load for large machines and less for smallerones--gas-turbine/generator packages also found a niche in the market forbackup- and peaking-power systems.   More-recent advances, such as increased efficiency and fuel flexibility,have enabled large gas-turbine-based combined-cycle systems to compete withconventional powerplants for new base-load generating capacity in manyareas. Gas-turbine-based systems below 100 MW have gained widespreadacceptance for industrial power and cogeneration applications (Fig 1).   Increased efficiency. Large industrial machines--100 MW and up--are nowbreaking the 35% simple-cycle efficiency mark. Natural-gas-firedcombined-cycle facilities based on these gas turbines have net efficienciestopping 50%. And a recently introduced 40-MW aeroderivative reached a newmilestone--the first commercial gas turbine with a reported simple-cycleefficiency above 40% (see box, p 64).   Efficiency of large gas turbines continues to be improved today byraising turbine-inlet temperatures (TIT). When increasing TIT, it isnecessary to increase the compressor pressure ratio, which is thecompressor-outlet pressure divided by its inlet pressure. The newest largemachines feature TITs as high as 2370F and pressure ratios up to 16:1.   To withstand these extreme temperatures, advanced gas turbines dependupon state-of-the-art materials, component designs, and manufacturingtechniques. An improved class of superalloys allows metal components tooperate at temperatures only 600 deg F below their melting point forthousands of hours--even under severe centrifugal, thermal, and vibratorystresses.   Because even superalloys begin to melt once temperatures near 2200F,internal air-cooling circuits are used to cool components in a turbine'shot gas path. They draw air from the compressor outlet or interstagelocations to cool the combustor liner, the outer shell of thecombustor-to-turbine transition piece, and the first few stages of movingblades and stationary nozzles. One manufacturer uses ceramic tiles andair-cooled heat shields to protect gas-path liners from high temperaturesand related thermal loading.   Thermal barrier coatings protect combustion liners on newhigh-temperature units. These coatings are plasma-sprayed onto the hot sideof the combustion liner in thicknesses up to 0.015 in. For each 0.001 in.of coating, there is a reported 8- to 16-deg-F drop in the liner's surfacetemperature. Finally, a manufacturing process known as directionalsolidification is used by select manufacturers to improve the low-cyclefatigue properties of cast components.   Low emissions. Several methods are used to reduce gas-turbine NOsubscript x emissions, including: (1) injecting steam or water into thecombustion zone, (2) using dry low-NO subscript x burners, or (3) includinga selective catalytic reduction (SCR) system in the exhaust train. Dryburner systems--which reduce NO subscript x production through advancedcontrol of combustion parameters--have several obvious advantages: (1)Steam and water injection reduce overall thermal efficiency, and (2)catalytic reduction entails handling ammonia and disposing of spentcatalysts that contain heavy-metal oxides.   Two manufacturers reportedly have developed dry burners which can reducegas-turbine NO subscript x emissions to below 10 ppm--at 15% excess Osubscript 2--for natural-gas-fired machines (see box, p 63). Machines usingthese advanced burners also display near-zero CO emissions and unburnedhydrocarbon levels below 10 ppm when operating at full load. However, COemissions may suffer at less than 50% load. One manufacturer estimatesthat, compared to a coal-fired plant of similar size, a combined-cyclepowerplant based on these gas turbines outputs 53% less CO subscript 2.   For units firing distillate fuels, steam or water injection has beenused to cut NO subscript x emissions to 25 ppm. In areas such as Californiaand Japan, where NO subscript x-control regulations are stringent,selective catalytic reduction (SCR) with ammonia injection has been used tofurther reduce NO subscript x levels. SO subscript 2 emissions from gasturbines burning premium fuels are negligible.   Increased unit outputs. The scale-up of gas turbines has played a majorrole in the machine's penetration into the base-load powerplant market.What may be the world's most powerful gas turbine, a 212-MW machine for50-Hz service, was chosen by Tokyo Electric Power Co to anchor a 2600-MW,combined-cycle plant--the largest facility of this type planned to date--tobe constructed in the mid-1990s. The most powerful 60-Hz machine inoperation exceeded its base-load design output of 150 MW in 1990 when itentered service at Virginia Electric & Power Co's Chesterfield station (Fig2). The unit is part of a 214-MW, combined-cycle powerplant.   Coal compatibility. Perhaps the most important advancementsunderway--upon which the future confidence of gas-turbine users mayhinge--are those being made in coal combustion technologies (Power specialreport, Combined-Cycle Powerplants, June 1990). The most promising ofthese, coal gasification (CG) and pressurized fluidized-bed combustion(PFBC), utilize gas turbines in efficient, environmentally sound,combined-cycle schemes.   Commercial-scale coal-gasification/ combined-cycle (CGCC) plants havebeen successfully demonstrated in the US. While the installed cost of thesefacilities is still significantly higher than that of a natural-gas-firedcombined-cycle plant, the economic viability of CGCCs is sure to increaseif and when the price of natural gas escalates, as many industry observersbelieve it will. Developers of CGCC plants have already found niche marketsfor their facilities--such as in areas where coal is readily available andnatural gas is not, or as part of utility repowering projects, whichincrease overall plant output and efficiency while reducing SO subscript 2emissions. Several large-scale CGCC plants are now being developedworldwide.   The world's first PFBC/combined-cycle facility is currently operating atthe Vartan district-heating facility in Stockholm, Sweden. Main componentsinclude two PFBC modules, two gas turbine/generators, two turbine-exhausteconomizers, and one steam turbine/generator. At full load, the newfacility delivers 135 MW to the electric grid and 225 MWt to the districtheating system at an overall thermal efficiency of close to 90%. The gasturbine/generators supply about 25% of the electric power output from theplant, the steam turbine/generator the balance. Parasitic power is 11 MW,including the power needed to operate the heating circuits's hot-waterpumps. Two similar units are operating-- one in Spain and one at AmericanElectric Power Service Corp's Tidd station (Power, April 1991, p 103).Figure 1: Mid-sized gas turbines, such as this 60-MW unit, are very popularfor cogeneration and independent power applicationsFigure 2: High-power machines, such as this 150-MW unit, now anchorefficient, base-load combined-cycle powerplantsCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ADVANCED BURNERS REDUCE NO SUBSCRIPT X EMISSIONSDry low-NO subscript x burners represent an area of gas turbine technologywhere significant improvements have been made recently. To illustrate: Onegas-turbine manufacturer guaranteed San Diego Gas & Electric Co (SDG&E)that NO subscript x emissions from a newly installed 100-MW gas turbinewill not exceed 9 ppm for natural-gas firing--without water/steam injectionor an SCR system. The "hybrid'' burner used on this unit can operate in twomodes--as a conventional diffusion burner or as a low-NO subscript x premixburner.   In conventional diffusion burners, fuel and air are mixed and combustedin the same space. This can lead to poor mixing and cause correspondinglyhigh thermal-NO subscript x production. With low-NO subscript x burners,premixing of fuel and air allows combustion to occur with a uniform andrelatively high degree of excess air, promoting lower flame temperaturesand reducing NO subscript x production.   The hybrid burner represents the current state-of-the-art in dry low-NOsubscript x combustion technology (Fig A). Hybrid burners operate asdiffusion burners in the 0-40% load range, because the premix-burner flamesare too unstable to support combustion at low loads. At 40% of base load,changeover to the premix burners occurs. In this mode, natural gas is mixedwith the primary air by a series of jets upstream of the burner's diagonalswirler. Flame stability and low emissions are maintained throughout theremainder of the load range by: (1) maintaining pilot flames on all burnersbetween 90 and 100% load, (2) using variable-pitch guide vanes on initialcompressor stages, and (3) using mechanical secondary-air shutters in thecombustion chambers to further reduce primary air flow at lower loads.   The hybrid arrangement allows all four of the machine's burners tooperate identically throughout the unit's load range. When operating ondistillate fuels, steam or water can be injected through ports in theburners to maintain NO subscript x levels below 50 ppm. At least two othermanufacturers have recently developed premix burners capable of holding NOsubscript x levels below 25 ppm.   The main difficulty to overcome with premix burners is achieving astable flame, especially during load changes. One design accomplishes thisby using adjacent groups of identical dual-fuel conical premix burners (FigB). In this system, the stability of premix burner flames is maintained intwo ways: First, the burner's conical design causes a stabilizingvortex-breakdown region at the center of the flame. Second, during startupand low loads, groups of the premix burners are operated in a pilot modeand act to stabilize adjacent burners.   Another type of premix burner utilizes staged-combustion techniques tomaintain flame stability and low NO subscript x levels over a machine'sentire load range (Fig C). During startup and low loads, fuel is suppliedonly to the burner's first stage, which operates in the diffusion-flamemode.   In this mode, combustor metal temperatures limit the amount of heatreleased and thus lower the firing temperature and NO subscript xproduction. As load continues to increase, a flame is ignited in the secondstage. It is initially a diffusion flame as well--in the lean/leanmode--but fuel splitting limits flame temperatures and residence times tocontrol NO subscript x production. At 75% load, all fuel is transferred tothe second stage and the first stage flame extinguishes. Then up to 80% ofthe fuel is slowly metered back to the first stage, which acts like amixing chamber, with the premix flame residing only in the second stage.Flame stability is maintained by a small diffusion-flame subpilot in thesecond stage.Figure A: Hybrid burners (above) have been used to drop NO subscript xemissions below 10 ppm.Figure B: Dual-fuel low-NO subscript x burner (figure below, left) has noseparation between premix and combustion zones, and is said to becompatible with both annular and external combustors.Figure C: Staging of fuel between two combustion regions is another methodof minimizing NO subscript x formation (below right)Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.AERODERIVATIVE UNITS FEATURE HIGH EFFICIENCY, AIRCRAFT-ENGINE PARTSCOMPATABILITYThe thermal efficiency of one recently introduced 40-MW aeroderivative gasturbine tops 40%. Approximately 80% of its components are borrowed from anaircraft engine used in modern wide-body jets. The unit's 14-stagehigh-pressure (h-p) compressor, two-stage h-p turbine, five-stagelow-pressure (l-p) turbine, and combustor are identical to those used inthe aircraft engine-- except for minor seal changes and a modification tothe turbine shaft needed for coupling to the generator. Its five-stage l-pcompressor is borrowed from an existing aeroderivative design.   A variable-inlet guide-vane system modulates air flow during startup,shutdown, and part-load operation. A variable bleed system is also added tomatch air flows between the l-p and h-p compressors during off-loadconditions. The modified rear frame area of the engine provides anl-p-rotor thrust-balance system, necessary to offset the 60,000 lb ofthrust lost with the elimination of the engine's fan.   The unit weighs over six tons and is only 14 ft long. Fornatural-gas-fired units, NO subscript x emissions are expected to be heldto 25 ppm by using steam injection and 42 ppm by injecting water. Forbase-load service, 25,000 hours of operation is expected betweenhot-section maintenance outages, and 50,000 hours between overhauls.   Another manufacturer of aeroderivative gas turbines has developed a26-MW unit with a simple-cycle thermal efficiency of over 39% (photo). Apopular combined-cycle configuration for this model includes two gasturbines driving a single generator, an HRSG, and a steamturbine/generator. For this arrangement, gross plant output is 67 MW andefficiency tops 50%.   Major advantages of this aeroderivative engine include:   -- Gas-turbine changeout requires only eight hours.   -- Starting time--cold start to power generation--is three minutes.   -- Auxiliary components are of a modular design.   -- Site required is small--105 x 130 ft for a 33-MW plant, 140 x 160 ftfor 67 MW.Photograph: Modern aeroderivative units have attained high efficiencies byincreasing operating temperature, mass flow, and compression ratiosCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.ICE MAKER ADDS LOW-COST KILOWATTS TO PEAKING UNIT   The move beyond evaporative coolers to stretch gas-turbine output(Power, July 1991, p 27) is most recently, and perhaps most vividly,illustrated by the installation of a large inlet-air chiller at LincolnElectric System's (Lincoln, Neb) Rokeby station (Figure 1). Although theproject was completed last September, only one day of testing and shakedownwas possible before the cold, according to officials from Burns &McDonnell, Kansas City, Mo, the owner's engineer for the project. But foraround $165/kW and no expected increase in operating costs, Rokeby's outputwill be increased by up to 22% during hot weather. A 4% reduction in heatrate is anticipated.   The objective at Rokeby, like several other recent projects, is toovercome a fundamental shortcoming of gas-turbine peakers--that poweroutput is inversely proportional to inlet air temperature. But the Rokebyproject is distinguished by the use of thermal energy storage (TES) insteadof mechanical, absorption, or hybrid chillers integral to the gasturbine/generator. This way, low-cost, off-peak nuclear- or coal-basedpower is used to drive the TES system, not power from the peaking unit.Rokeby's TES system is believed to be the largest for this type ofapplication in North America.Hungry for mass flow   The gas turbine/generator at Rokeby is an early-vintage MS7001B,supplied by General Electric Co, Schenectady, NY. Peak rating of themachine, 65 MW when firing distillate fuel at ISO conditions, deterioratesto 53 MW at 100F inlet air temperature. An evaporative cooler originallyincluded with the gas turbine maintained output at 57.8 MW at thistemperature. Although installed in 1975, the gas turbine has operated atotal of only 1500 hours.   Being a mass-flow machine, the gas turbine's output improves as inletair temperature decreases and density increases. Reducing inlet airtemperature to 40F increases output by 11 MW above that obtained with theevaporative cooler operating. To do this, ice is produced, stored as anice/water bath, then used to cool inlet air when the gas turbine operates.Harvesting ice   Main components of the Rokeby TES system are a refrigeration unit,ice/water storage tank, and air cooling coils. A traditional ammonia-basedcycle is employed for refrigeration. It consists of a compressor, threeevaporators, and one evaporative condenser.   System works this way: Cold water from the bottom of the storage tank ispumped to the refrigeration unit on top of the tank. The three ice-makingevaporators (Figure 2), spaced symetrically around the top of the tank,cycle between freezing and shedding. That is, ammonia refrigerant passingthrough the evaporator coils allows ice to form on the outside of thecoils, then a hot-gas bypass off the low-pressure refrigerant compressorpasses through the coils, melting the ice which subsequently drops directlyinto the storage tank (Figure 3). Ice-making capacity is around 23tons/hr.   Gas-turbine inlet air passes through the shell side of a heat exchangerwith chilled water pumped from the ice/water tank through the coils.Indirect heat transfer was selected over direct contact because it wasthought to provide superior protection of the gas turbine againstimpurities in the chilled water.   Cooling coils are spiral-wound copper tubes with aluminum fins. Designchilled-water inlet temperature is 34F, design turbine-inlet-airtemperature drop is from 101 to 40F. Maximum allowable pressure drop is0.5 in. H subscript 2 O. Water that condenses out of the turbine inlet airis collected and routed to site drainage.   An inlet air temperature of 40F is considered the lowest safetemperature for avoiding icing of the compressor. As combustion air isdrawn into the compressor, static air pressure drops because of frictionand increased velocity; a corresponding drop in temperature is experiencedas well. Thus air below 40F could eventually drop below freezing by thetime it reached the first stage of compressor blades.   Another concern was differential expansion of the compressor rotor andstator as inlet temperature decreased by 60F. To guard against this, afive-minute, air cooldown ramp will be used after the engine reaches fullspeed. In addition, the cooling system is shut down along a five-minuteramp.   The ice/water bath is stored in a cast-in-place concrete tank installedbelow grade to take advantage of the insulating effect of the soil and toprovide piping-system drainage in the off-season. Ice is distributed bygravity and floats like a iceberg until the portion below the waterlinereaches the bottom of the tank. This stabilizes the ice pile and allows itto accumulate in a cone shape. Rotating water sprays continuallyredistribute the ice as the size of the cone increases to prevent build upunder the ice-making evaporators.   Control of the TES system is based on monitoring the inlet airtemperature to the gas turbine. As it increases, a programmable logiccontroller signals two butterfly valves to open proportional to the changein air temperature. The butterfly valves regulate the flow of chilled waterto the coils. Safeguards were added to ensure that the turbine is protectedagainst minimum temperatures that could lead to ice ingestion into theturbine's compressor. Interlocks are also provided for periods of reducedair flow during startup and shutdown.Exercising the system   Rokeby's TES system operates on a weekly cycle. It produces ice for 148hours and melts ice by cooling turbine inlet air 20 hours a week. Eachweekday, ice typically is produced 20 hours and melted four hours; weekendsare dedicated to ice-making. This cycle meets the requirements of Lincoln'spower pool for peak-capacity accreditation.   Establishing a weekly cycle, instead of a daily or yearly one, involvedoptimization among refrigeration capacity, off-peak power consumption, andice-storage capacity. The weekly cycle calls for less refrigeration andpower but more storage. An added benefit of greater storage is more thermalinertia that helps assure a low water-supply temperature to the coilsthroughout the operating cycle.Machine modifications   Although not required, Lincoln engineers decided to replace theturbine's inlet guide vanes with ones capable of passing higher air flow.This increased the turbine's output by an additional 2 MW or 4% above themachine's capacity at 100F inlet air temperature. The original evaporativecooler has been removed.   Also, as part of the Rokeby retrofit, natural gas was brought to thesite and the machine outfitted for dual-fuel firing. The move allowed theplant to offset what the state authorities considered an increase in theabsolute NO subscript x emissions that would occur with the TES operatingin conjunction with a distillate-oil-fired gas turbine.   According to Byron Bakenhus, project engineer, Rokeby is now expected tobe among the lowest-cost producers of peaking power in the Mid-ContinentPower Pool. As such, operating hours for the unit should increase.Figure 1: Chilled water from underground ice/water-bath storage (right,showing three evaporators) containment is routed to the gas-turbineinlet-air heat exchanger, leftFigure 2: Ice-making evaporator, one of three, employs ammonia as arefrigerant, leftFigure 3: Ice builds up on coils, then drops into ice/water bath and formslarge pile, belowCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DEVELOPMENTS TO WATCHBy:Jason MakansiThe fortunes of coal-bed methane, like many alternative fuels, seem to riseand fall in the sea of conventional fuelprices. When trouble erupts in theoil/gas market--the most recent being the Persian Gulf War--and pricesrise, development of coal-bed methane gets attention. When prices fall,activity dissipates. In the guise of an environmental liability, however,coal-bed methane has piqued the interest of some engineers in recentmonths.   Methane has been labeled a greenhouse gas with a potential warmingeffect up to 10 times that of CO subscript 2, the most voluminousgreenhouse gas.CO subscript 2 makes up about half of the so-called atmosphericgreenhouse-gas inventory, methane around 18%. Based on these twoparameters, anyway, methane emissions should be causing more alarm than COsubscript 2 emissions.   EPA studies have estimated that more than 10% of the worldwide emissionsof methane are associated with coal mining activities. Traditionally,methane from coal mines is vented to the atmosphere to protect miners andproperty around mines from catastrophic explosions and health hazards.   Coal-bed methane exists naturally in varying quality levels--rangingfrom essentially air with trace quantities of methane to ahigh-heating-value product that rivals natural gas. And, it must becollected and distributed to potential user sites. If not of high-enoughheating value, this proposition becomes uneconomic.   At least one company, O'Brien Energy & Environmental Systems,Philadelphia, Pa, is pursuing firm business plans for coal-bed methane thatincludes cogeneration at the site or the distribution of the gas toexisting and future cogeneration and small-power sites. In addition to manylandfill-gas-powered generating systems, O'Brien owns severalnatural-gas-fired cogeneration facilities ranging up to 100 MW capacity inConnecticut, New Jersey, Florida, and California.   The firm's initial foray is a joint venture with Cosap Inc, Dallas, Tex,to develop 15,000 acres of coal-bed methane reserves in southwesternPennsylvania. An estimated 40-billion ft superscript 3 of gas is availableat this site. According to O'Brien officials, when fully developed, thisfield could supply one-third of the fuel consumed at the company's twolarge New Jersey cogeneration facilities, representing a total of nearly140 MW.   Whether by O'Brien or others, extensive development of coal-bed methaneinvolves some knotty legal and institutional roadblocks. Uncertaintiesexist about who owns the rights to methane recovered during coal miningoperations. Also, unsound recovery techniques could lead to groundwaterpollution.Water/fuel emulsions may be the answer for controlling NO subscript xemissions from oil-fired gas turbines, especially if the unit is operatedinfrequently. Tests at two sites with different machines confirm high NOsubscript x removal levels.   Process-wise, the technique is similar to conventional water injectioninto the combustor. In both, the vaporization of water reduces peak flametemperature in the combustors, adds mass flow to the turbine, but alsopenalizes system heat rate.   Emulsified residual fuel oil has been proven to control particulate andNO subscript x emissions from boilers. Nalco Fuel Tech, Naperville, Ill,and Public Service Electric & Gas Co, Newark, NJ, have extended thetechnology to gas turbines firing liquid fuels, such as distillate oil.   Initial work was conducted at PSE&G's Burlington station on anearly-1970s FT-4 gas turbine supplied by Turbo Power & Marine Systems Inc,Farmington, Conn. Firing pre-emulsified fuel containing 10-15% waterreduced NO subscript x emissions by 50% or more. Stability of the fuel wasunacceptable, however.   Further work took place at the Kearny station, also equipped withearly-1970s machines. An emulsification system--consisting of a water pump,control valve, chemical metering pump, and an in-line emulsifier--wasdesigned and installed. A proprietary surfactant/stabilizer package is usedto keep fine water droplets well-dispersed in the oil, particularly as ittravels under high temperatures and pressures. The emulsifier system feedsa single A-4 engine operating as part of a 35-MW Twin-Pak.   Results were encouraging. Immediate NO subscript x reductions wereobtained when small amounts of water were emulsified into the fuel. Whenthe water level reached 35%, close to 70% NO subscript x reduction wasmeasured. Plume opacity disappeared when the emulsion contained between 13and 17% water.   These results appeared even more favorable when compared to conventionalwater injection rates employed by another utility on a recent-model gasturbine with hybrid burners. Around 50% more NO subscript x reduction wasaccomplished using emulsions with equivalent water-addition rates.   Tests of the PSE&G gas turbine in a natural-gas/fuel-emulsion co-firingmode were also revealing. When oil comprised 15% of the total fuel inputand was emulsified with around 85% water, NO subscript x emissions werereduced by 77% over the baseline value. No problems operating the unit weredocumented as a result of using oil/water emulsions nor were any depositsnoted on turbine internals.   Long-term tests, now underway at Kearny, include 200 to 400 operatinghours on two separate machines firing oil/water emulsions followed bythorough hot-side inspections. A 1500-hr reliability test is also planned.Engineers expect to more thoroughly investigate heat-rate penalties, poweroutput boosts, and changes in CO emissions.   In Berlin, Germany, one 83.5-MW gas turbine at the Wilmersdorf station,originally equipped with water injection, was also retrofitted with awater/oil emulsion system. The plant, owned by Berlin's utility, Bewag, wasoperating in cogeneration/district-heating mode but after unification,authorities determined that peaking would be more appropriate.   According to engineers close to the project, advantages of usingemulsions instead of straight water injection are: (1) The gas turbine'scombustor is not affected, and (2) emulsions more uniformly distribute thewater in the most critical region of the flame. The gas turbine, suppliedby European Gas Turbine Co, Paris, France, has always fired distillateoil.   Of particular interest is that emulsifying agents are not added to thefuel. Only an in-line static oil/water mixer is installed downstream of theoil and deionized-water pumps. A residence time of less than 24 secondsbetween emulsifying and firing ensures the stability of the mixture.   NO subscript x emissions achieved are shown in Figure 1. As important,other operating parameters did not deteriorate, particularly noise,combustion properties, and CO emissions. Only at loads below the range ofthe gas turbine could CO emissions increase above the 100 mg/Nm superscript3 limit governing the site.   A long-term test was also successful and helped to evaluate mechanicalmodifications required of the fuel supply system and the overall controlscheme. Wilmersdorf now plans to convert all three of its machines to burnwater/fuel emulsions for NO subscript x control.Direct-contact condensers (DCC) could increase unit availability by up to3% compared to conventional shell-and-tube condensers, according to DBharathan, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colo, and PD'Errico, Stone & Webster Engineering Corp, Boston, Mass. Other benefitsinclude a slightly lower heat rate, ease of maintenance, cleanerheat-transfer surface, shorter condenser height and thus lower plantprofile, better part-load performance, and better control of dissolved Osubscript 2.   In the proposed system (Figure 2), the DCC is a vacuum vessel withinternal packing that enhances contact between steam from the turbine andcooling water. Cooling water is essentially condensate that is returned tothe DCC through a pump-around loop. Note that the DCC concept used here issimilar to the one used in dry cooling systems throughout the world. A setof parallel-plate heat exchangers transfers heat from the condensate to thecooling-water loop. The plate heat exchangers (PHE) form the barrierbetween cooling water and condensate.   Because there are far fewer joints in a PHE than in a conventionalcondenser, the potential for leakage--the number-one problem withcondensers and a significant cause of unit forced outages--is greatlydiminished. Pressure of the condensate side of the PHE is higher than forthe cooling-water side, helping to prevent in-leakage of contaminants intothe condensate. In addition, heat-transfer rates are double, and foulingfactors are at least five times lower than those for surface condensers.When cleaning is necessary, individual PHE modules can be taken out ofservice with no blip in performance.   Tradeoffs in design include the need for 30% more heat-transfer areathan a surface condenser, need for a pump-around loop which consumesauxiliary power and increases system complexity, and adequate filtrationand treatment for biofouling of the cooling water stream to preventplugging. Cooling-water passages in PHEs are much narrower than in surfacecondensers.Probabilistic modeling is a multi-functional statistical tool madepractical by the advent of high-speed computing power. In the powerplantarena, it is being used to characterize uncertainties in the performanceand cost of advanced powerplant technologies (Figure 3) and to assess thefate of toxic substances in existing and new powerplant designs.   The unique feature of probabilistic modeling is that it expressesuncertainty in a process parameter or input assumption not as a singlevalue as with more common deterministic approaches, but as a probabilitydistribution indicating the likelihood of various outcomes. Interactionsbetween uncertainties are also better accounted for. It is particularlysuited to analyzing parameters whose values are very likely to beuncertain. This includes trace quantities of pollutants at or near thelimits of detection.   The technique allows you to estimate the frequency that a particularvalue of interest might be exceeded. So, given specific uncertaintiesinherent to the system under study, the model can conclude that there is a90% probability a given trace substance will not exceed regulated limits.   In general, the application of probabilistic modeling becomes morenecessary as more parameters become important, even critical to the successof the design. For example, if the designer is worried about cost, energyefficiency, reliability, as well as the discharge of a variety of regulatedpollutants, then probabilistic modeling provides a greater degree ofinsight into how design tradeoffs affect those performance parameters.   In the case of comparing two or more plant designs or technologies,probabilistic modeling allows each design to reflect the degree ofconfidence of the designer in his input assumptions. Simultaneousinput-parameter uncertainties are propagated through an engineering modelto yield an explicit indication of the full range of uncertainties inoutput values.   To fine-tune an R&D program, probabilistic modeling allows the mostuncertain components of given design to be identified and quantified. Thisallows better placement of priorities and, subsequently, allocation ofresearch funds.   One price for this insight is computing time. To illustrate: To comparetwo integrated-gasification/combined-cycle (IGCC) plant designs, adeterministic analysis might take a half-hour or less of computer time. Aprobabilistic analysis could take between six and 12 hours. In addition,the amount of input information required for probabilistic modeling is fargreater. For more information, contact Ed Rubin or Christopher Frey,Carnegie Mellon University, Center for Energy & Environmental Studies,Pittsburgh, Pa.Figure 1: NO subscript x reductions using fuel/water emulsions aresignificant for several gas-turbine outputsFigure 2: Direct-contact condenser with parallel-plate heat exchangers andpump-around loop reportedly could boost availability of large powerplantsFigure 3: Probabilistic modeling of an IGCC design resulted in this rangeof values for thermal efficiency, capital cost, and levelized costCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COMPANY FEATURES RANGE OF PRODUCTS AT ISA SHOWAt the recent Instrument Society of America's show and conference, BaileyControls Co featured a wide range of field instrumentation and its latestdigital distributed system.-- The INFI 90 strategic process management system integratesprocess-control activities with such business factors as market conditions,economic climate, and material costs. The digital distributed system offersenhanced functionality, improved engineering tools, and environmentallyhardened packaging.-- Magnetic inductive flowmeters provide accurate flow-rate measurement ofconductive liquids and slurries. They are especially suited for continuousprocess and batch control, as well as totalization.-- Mass flowmeter offers accurate, one-step measurement of both mass flowand density from one instrument, which features a transducer unaffected bydensity, viscosity, or other process parameters.-- Smart electronic pressure transmitters are designed for differential-,gage-, absolute-, and level-pressure inputs, and interface with othercompany I&C systems and products.-- Smart temperature transmitters accept inputs from thermocouple, RTD, ormillivolt sources. They are user-configurable to provide an output linearto temperature or conforming to nonlinear input signals.-- Analog transmitters determine flow rates, fluid levels, and absolute,gage, and differential pressures. They are suitable for operation innormal, harsh, and hazardous installations.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.MONITOR, CONTROL ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION FROM CENTRAL LOCATIONElectrical distribution communications system, called Access, is availablefrom Siemens Energy & Automation Inc, Electrical Apparatus Div. The systemstarts with smart field devices, each with protective or metering functionsof their own. These smart trip units, power meters, and protective relayshave built-in communications capabilities and can send/receive informationusing RS485 local communications networks. Supervisory devices act ascollection points for information coming from these intelligent fielddevices.   At the top of the system is the Access host personal computer, which canmonitor an electrical system with more than 1000 field devices. The PCsoftware is designed for simple operation with minimal training.-- Display and monitoring unit is a supervisory device that collects,records, and displays real-time and historical power data. It has a 9-in.graphic or local display unit with basic alphanumeric display features.-- User-programmable motor control and protection device comes in threemodels to provide reliable, flexible, and affordable protection forNEMA/EEMAC-size low-voltage motors from 0.3 to 540 A.-- Overcurrent protective relay provides overcurrent, short-circuit, andground-fault protection and selective tripping for electric-powerapplications, and communicates with Access and supervisory device.-- Static trip unit monitors, evaluates, and controls the powerdistribution system, circuit by circuit. Microprocessor-based, the tripoffers overcurrent protection, comprehensive metering, and extendedprotective relaying.-- Electronic metering package combines ammeter and switch, voltmeter andswitch, kWh-demand meter, kW meter, power-factor meter, and five othermetered functions into one comprehensive digital unit.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.UPGRADE INDUSTRIAL GAS TURBINES WITH ELECTRONIC TRANSMITTERSRecently, a major manufacturer of industrial gas turbines upgraded theinstrumentation package on its line of machines. Existing mechanical relaysand switches were replaced with modern electronic devices, such as thepressure transmitters shown in the photos. The older devices monitoreddiscrete setpoints like pre-start values, plus low, high, and shutdownlevels.   At the beginning of the upgrade program, the decision was made toinstall such analog monitoring devices as sensors, transducers, andtransmitters on the turbines and link them to a programmable logiccontroller (PLC). By switching from mechanical relays to electronictransmitters, the manufacturer gained the ability to closely monitor andcontrol its equipment, as well as the convenience of replacing two, three,and sometimes four switches with one analog device.   With the electronic transmitter, all alarms, shutdowns, and pre-startcycles are controlled by the PLC. New setpoints require just a fewkeystrokes to update the software--not a hardware switch to new relays. Thepressure transmitters provide analog signals for these parameters: fuelsystem, lube-oil system, hydraulic (servo) system, turbine-compressordischarge, boost-compressor suction and discharge, boost-compressor sealsystem.   The upgrade meets user needs to monitor various functions of the turbinefor performance, safety, sequencing, and troubleshooting. Themicroprocessor-based PLC works with the new analog input/output modules toperform such functions as:-- Sequencing turbine and auxiliaries.-- Controlling turbine during startup, loading, and shutdown.-- Protecting turbine from abnormal internal or external conditions.-- Monitoring and displaying analog and status outputs.-- Responding to operator commands.   Among the options the PLC offers are condition and trend monitoring,predictive trending, comparative strip charts, and turbine and compressorperformance maps.   With analog components, savings in inventory and spare parts arepossible. To accomplish this, transmitters are calibrated for a specificrange; PLC software is changed for specific setpoints required for theapplication. There's no need to stock a wide variety of pressure switcheswith different setpoints for different applications and conditions.--AmetekInc, PMT Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime,Tensioning system permits reduced radiation exposure, shortened downtime,smaller crew sizes, and increased safety. As explained in brochure, thehydraulic system leads to savings in stud-tensioning operations of thereactor pressure vessel.--Biach Industries.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Condensate discharge system combines the best features of float andCondensate discharge system combines the best features of float andsolenoid drains in a self-regulating package. To activate the drain valve,a float triggers a solenoid switch. Condensate flows from the reservoirbottom, through a discharge pipe, to a top outlet. Thus, no air is lost,saving energy and cost.--Granzow Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Steam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everythingSteam-generator services are outlined in booklet, which covers everythingfrom diagnostic technology to replacement units. Services discussed:robotic and remote manipulator systems; rotating-sensor tube inspection;tube sleeving, plugging, and shot peening; special inspection and repairtooling.--B&W Nuclear Service Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Valve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored withValve repairs by company at Cape Fear plant operation were honored withaward for quality and cost-effectiveness. Company has rebuilt nearly 1000valves at site since 1988 with zero subsequent repairs--a 59% cost savingper valve over a new valve.--Newport News Industrial Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Scada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increasedScada system, for cooling-water treatment applications, provides increasedcooling/boiler-system reliability, manpower saving, and improvedefficiency. The system controls, monitors, logs, alarms, and communicateschemical feeds and cooling-system operation parameters.--Ashland ChemicalCo, Drew Industrial Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Data-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--linksData-acquisition system--an advanced computer monitoring process--linkscompany's mobile water treatment equipment to its 24-hr/day centraldispatch center. Vital operating data can be displayed, monitored, andarchived. Preset alarm points are announced both visually andaudibly.--Ecolochem Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ceramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. TheCeramic adhesive bonds silica gaskets to furnace brick. Thesingle-component, alumina-based adhesive can function at temperatures to3200F. Besides low thermal conductivity, high dielectric strength, andtemperature resistance, the adhesive also offers excellent moisture,oxidation, and solvent resistance.--Aremco Products Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Utility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOxUtility-boiler upgrades are featured in brochure, including those for NOxreduction, improved water circulation, pressure-part modifications,pulverizer- and fuel-system conversions, and other boilerimprovements.--Babcock & Wilcox Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Report-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspectionReport-generation service combines heat-exchanger eddy-current inspectiondata from in-house testing teams or independent vendors, user-specifiedcriteria, and the company's own software (TubeStat Services) to createcomprehensive, graphical inspection reports.--Karta Technology Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Bulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurizedBulk-material valve with inflatable seal is designed for use in pressurizedand/or abrasive applications such as ash, coal, and lime handling andconveying. Key benefits: environmentally sealed housing, pressure/vacuumand abrasive service, pressure-tight closure, wide temperaturerange.--Schutte-Meyer, a Purnell Affiliate.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Drum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use productDrum/tank samplers are a durable, safe, accurate, and easy-to-use productline for sampling virtually any kind of liquid or sludge. Common sourcesare 55-gal drums, truck and rail-tank cars, large tanks, streams, lakes,rivers, and lagoons.--Norton Performance Plastics.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.PC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steamPC-based system reduces time required to balance rotors in large steamturbine/generators from days to hours. Using personal computers forbalancing, outage time will be kept to a minimum for nearly 500 ofcompany's units worldwide.--General Electric Co, GE Research & DevelopmentCtr.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Low-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines areLow-NO subscript x combustors for company's heavy-duty gas turbines areimmediately available, with shipments by 1994 for certain units. These drylow-NOx systems meet current emissions standards; more advanced systemswill meet the 9-ppm standard.--General Electric Co, GE Power Generation.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity,Switchgear offers safety features, minimum downtime, system selectivity,ease of maintenance, and large functional capacity. Primary-component typesare the DS (not fusible) and DSL (fused) low-voltage power circuitbreakers.--Square D Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Communicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) toCommunicator interface allows uninterruptible power systems (UPS) tointerface with local-area networks (LANs) or RS232 communications in plainEnglish. Offered are UPS front-panel view, diagnostic and alarm messages,and control capability from any LAN terminal.--Sola, a unit of GeneralSignal Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Circuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruptionCircuit interrupter combines the best of switching- and vacuum-interruptiontechnologies in medium-voltage power distribution systems. A mechanismenables the interrupter to open the circuit and extinguish the arc withinthe vacuum interrupters before the isolation blades openautomatically.--Square D Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland,Expansion joints feature one-piece welded construction ofbody and gland,allowing packing to be easily added under full-line pressure. Jointsreportedly require only nominal maintenance, without the necessity of majorrepairs.--Yarway Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft,Pump features include plunger couplings, double-extended crankshaft,bolted-on valve covers, replaceable stuffing boxes, flanged fluidconnections on all cylinders, and high-technology bearings. Result issmoother discharge flow.--Cooper Industries, Gardner-Denver IndustrialMachinery Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Rotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service plusRotary control valve provides noise abatement in gas or vapor service pluscavitation control in liquid service. Metal-seated ball valve hasattenuator plates; flow is forced through holes in plates, preventingexcessive velocity and minimizing corrosion.--Neles-Jamesbury Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation toExpansion joint absorbs lateral deflection and limits angular rotation toone plane. Hinged-type, 24-in.-diameter joints are designed for emergencyshutdown delivery requirements.--Piping Technology & Products Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Check valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slamCheck valve, in sizes 2 to 24 in., features low head loss with non-slamclosing. It is available with rubber lining as well as backflowactuation.--Val-Matic Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Air compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load atAir compressors, 15 to 30 hp, operate continuously under full load atpressures to 175 psig for two-stage and 60 psig for single-stage units.Lube systems are splash or optional pressure feed with spin-on oil filterfor rigorous-duty applications.--Cooper Industries, Gardner-DenverIndustrial Machinery Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Ball valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operatingBall valves promise zero leakage in severe service applications, operatingin temperatures from cryogenic to 2100F, in pressures from vacuum to 50,000psig, and in most abrasive and corrosive environments. Valves arequarter-turn, metal-seated designs.--ValvTron, a subsidiary of YarwayCorp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Valve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuatorValve services and products include upgraded test equipment for actuatorcomponents and check-valve diagnostic system. Brochure details a variety ofvalve-related engineering software programs to assist utilities invalve-maintenance decision making and in complying with NRCrequirements.--B&W Nuclear Service Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Expansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasiveExpansion joints provide 13-in. movement, 50 psig in the abrasiveenvironment of a powerplant. They have internal guide rings to acceptlateral forces and internal packing capable of withstanding 1100Ftemperatures.--Sweco Fab Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Flue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streamsFlue-gas analyzer has zirconium electrochemical cell for use in gas streamsto 2800F without cooling or conditioning. The catalytic combustiblesdetector measures net excess oxygen and combustibles in high-particulateprocess gas. Applications: boilers, furnaces, rotary kilns,incinerators.--Ametek Inc, Thermox Instruments Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Emissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that usesEmissions monitor is a single-pass EPA-compliance system that usesstate-of-the-art glass-fiberoptics technology. In situ components do notrequire fail/safe shutters or weatherhoods. Single-pass technique leads toreliable, repeatable, and linear readings.--Datatest Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convertPressure sensors for measurements on internal-combustion engines convertpressure into an electric signal. The conversion is performed via theelastic deformation of a diaphragm made of silicon subjected to pressure onone side. A Wheatstone bridge circuit, diffused into the surface of thediaphragm, is unbalanced proportionally by the applied pressure.--KistlerInstrument Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Distributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precisionDistributed-control system (DCS) offers transducer compatibility, precisionanalog measurement, and network-based or intelligent stand-alone operation.The DCS operates in hostile environments to provide pipeline monitoring andwastewater management.--Analogic Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Company products include microprocessor-based control systems,Company products include microprocessor-based control systems,distributed-control systems, flame detectors, high-energy spark igniters,oil and gas guns, parallel air-flow burners, oil and gas burners,desuperheaters, valve assemblies, windboxes.--Forney International Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Data-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up toData-logging system is a self-contained, battery-powered package with up to16 analog/digital inputs, plug-in interface modules, and such configurableoptions as an integral modem and a rechargeable, programmable powersupply.--Logic Beach Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Thermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described inThermal imaging and temperature-measurement systems are described inbrochure, including the many applications the systems can be used for inpredictive maintenance, nondestructive testing, R&D, electronics design.and night vision.--Inframetrics Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.O subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling anyO subscript 2 analyzer is suitable for monitoring and controlling anyvariable-gas stream or atmosphere that is clean and dry. It measuresO subscript 2 from 1 ppb to 100%; in high-temperature reducing atmospheres,it indicates the amount of O subscript 2 and moisture existing in chemicalequilibrium.--Panametrics Inc.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Pressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those madePressure transducers reportedly are offered at less cost than those madeconventionally. The thin-film instruments are produced via aplasma-enhanced chemical-vapor-deposition wafer technology, plus newtechniques in laser welding and vacuum brazing.--Imo Industries Inc,Barksdale Controls Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Characterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning ofCharacterizable positioners provide sensitive and accurate positioning ofpneumatic final-control elements. They are selected for either a linear ornonliner relation to pneumatic and current input signals.--Bailey ControlsCo.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing,Digital multimeters feature large LCD numerals (0.7 in.) for easy viewing,10-A current fusing to protect user and meter, a warning beeper, safetytest leads, and increased battery life.--Beckman Industrial Corp,Instrumentation Products Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant,Level controller offers reliable operation for steam-generating plant,simple installation, resistivity electrodes as input transducer, fullthree-term controller functions, increased plant efficiency, and lowcost.--Schlumberger Industries, Industrial Transducer Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Transmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing areaTransmitter enclosure features a large window for increased viewing areaand a wide throat opening for easy instrument installation and maintenance.Enclosure meets Class I (Groups B, C, and D), Class II (Groups E, F, andG), and NEMA 3, 4, 7, and 9 specifications.--Curlee Manufacturing Co.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Software package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- toSoftware package projects long-term energy use and demand for 100- to1000-MW electric utilities. Because of a user-friendly menu system, on-linehelp screens, and similar features, even inexperienced users can apply thiseconometric, microcomputer-based package.--Burns & McDonnell EngineeringCo.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.HART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available fromHART protocol-based measurement and control instruments are available from18 HART members. As brochure describes, the protocol retains 4-20-mAprocess control signals while simultaneously providing digital process andtransmitter data over the same loop.--HART User Group.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Applications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up toApplications program allows fully functional annunciator--monitoring up to5530 control points--to be displayed on computer screen. Program canreplicate up to seven Series 90 annunciator cabinets on any DOS-basedIBM-AT or compatible computer.--Ametek Inc, Panalarm Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Stator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements ofStator ground relay combines (1) 60-Hz signals from measurements ofvoltages derived from the neutral grounding distribution transformer, and(2) high voltages of the generator. The 19-in. mechanical chassis comprisesseven plug-in cards for ease of maintenance and field replacement.--DerlanManufacturing Inc, Multilin Div.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.Software programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, andSoftware programs help companies cope with the many federal, state, andlocal regulations dealing with environmental, health, and safety issues.The programs are compatible with both Macintosh and DOS-basedcomputers.--Gaia Systems.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.XL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integratedXL-Net, a flexible software package, provides plant-wide human integratedmanufacturing via networked personal computers or terminals. Theintegrated, distributed-control-system facility dynamically links islandsof information and combines data from multiple sources onto a commonplatform for easy user access.--Johnson Yokogawa Corp.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.DETECT HOT SPOTS IN AIR HEATERS BEFORE FIRE OCCURSBy:Steven CollinsThe buildup of combustibles on air-heater elements can lead to disaster.When enough heat and excess air are available, the deposits undergospontaneous oxidation--causing the temperature to rise higher. Once it goesabove 400F, ignition can occur, creating a "hot spot." Left alone, suchareas may grow hot enough for the thin metal elements themselves toignite--an extremely dangerous situation.   Ordinarily, thermocouples are placed at the gas-outlet side of airheaters to detect fires. However, this method only detects a fire after ithas started and may not be accurate when there is little or no flue-gasflow through the heater--such as when a unit is put into the hot standbycondition--because it relies on the convective transfer of heat tothermocouples.   An infrared heat-detection system, recently developed and tested inJapan, reportedly has several advantages over the conventional method ofair-heater fire detection, including: (1) Hot spots are detected before afire starts, (2) element temperature monitoring is accurate at all times,regardless of gas flow rate, (3) location and temperature of hot spots canbe depicted graphically on control-room CRT screens, and (4) the system canbe calibrated automatically in-place using a standard heat source.   The system is a joint development of Tokyo Electric Power Co (Tepco) andMitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd, Tokyo, Japan. It was tested at Tepco's265-MW Yokosuka Unit 1, which includes a combination coal/oil-fired boilerwith a rotating regenerative air heater (figure, above).   To enhance long-term reliability, the system is located in the air-inletsection of the air heater where temperatures are relatively low and theenvironment is free of dust and corrosive elements found in the flue-gasstream. The actual infrared sensor itself is located outsideof the heater.   Here's how the system works: A track-mounted mirror travels back andforth, scanning the plane of the rotating air heater. When a hot spotoccurs, the infrared rays it emits are reflected by the mirror at a 90-degangle into the sensing unit. A local control panel converts the infraredintensity to a scaled temperature signal and measures the position of themirror on its track and the air heater in its rotational path. These dataare then transmitted to the plant's main monitoring system, which sounds analarm. Operators can view the exact position and intensity of the hotspot--represented by color spectrum--on a CRT screen. This visual imagingsystem makes it easy to monitor growth of the hot spots and theeffectiveness of preventive or extinguishing measures--such as cutting airflow, flooding with CO subscript 2, etc.   During 14 months of testing at Yokosuka, the unit is reported to haveoperated without any notable problems. In the event that dust deposits inthe area of the mirror--one consequence of co-firing coal and oil--it iseasily removed by a small air-jet system.Figure: Combination coal/oil-fired boiler with a rotating regenerative airheaterCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CUT SCRUBBER O&M COSTS BY ACID-CLEANING FILTER SCREENSBy:Steven CollinsCharles Hoop, Columbus Southern Power Co, devised a simple and inexpensivemethod for cleaning grit and particles from FGD slurry separator screens atthe Conesville (Ohio) station. In less than four hours, the FGD system's4-ft-diameter stainless steel screens are returned to "like-new" conditionby soaking them in a trough containing a muriatic acid solution (photos,preceding page).   Before the soaking method was implemented, the plant's four screensrequired replacement every two weeks at a cost of $400/screen. According toHoop, the screens have thus far required no replacement. The 28 cleaningsperformed each year require 110 hours, or about $2200 worth of labor.Replacing the screens cost $11,200/yr plus labor. Thus, the plant savesabout $9000 annually by cleaning screens rather than replacing them.Photograph: A trough containing a muriatic acid solutionCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.USE MODEL PLANE TO RECORD STACK CONDITIONSBy:Steven CollinsWhile serving as a shift foreman at a utility generating station inIllinois, C G Vernon came up with a "topflight" solution to recording windand temperature data near the outlet of the plant's stacks. Researchersneeded the data to check if emissions were being adequately dispersed andto substantiate future stack designs.   Because the stacks are several hundred feet tall, researchers firstconsidered using a helicopter. However, this alternative was deemed toorisky and expensive. Eventually, the necessary equipment was carried upabove the stacks by large balloons. These were difficult to control. Onebroke free of its anchor line and came down in a nearby lake.   The research team next considered hiring a private plane, but soon foundout that none could fly low enough or slow enough. Just when the team wasabout to abandon the project, Vernon--whose son was a model planefanatic--suggested that a remote-controlled plane be used. The researchteam quickly found a model plane large enough to carry the payload ofmonitoring instruments. Soon after, the "mini research plane" wassuccessfully maneuvered up above the stacks, collected the data, andreturned safely to ground.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.CALCULATE LOSSES CAUSED BY STEAM LEAKSBy:Steven CollinsDid you ever wonder how much energy --and money--is wasted because of steamleaks at your plant? The next time you come across one, use the followingexample to estimate losses:   Assume that a steam trap having a 1/4-in. orifice leaks 100-psig steam72 hr/week.   -- Look up energy loss per thousand hours of leakage in the tablebelow.   -- Annual energy loss (AEL)AEL = 72 x 52 x 240-million Btu divided by 1000 hr = 864-million Btu/yr  -- Annual dollar loss (ADL)ADL = 864 divided by (1.03-million Btu divided by 1000 ft superscript 3)x (0.65) x ($2 divided by 1000 ft superscript 3) = $2581Heating loss caused by steam leaks                       Loss, million-Btu/1000 hrSteam pressure,            Orifice size, in.psig                       1/8     1/4     3/820                        12.3    47.9     79.950                        30.8     120     200100                       61.6     240     400Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.COOK ZEBRA MUSSELS BY RECIRCULATING COOLING WATERBy:Steven CollinsBy recirculating condenser cooling water, engineers at a CommonwealthEdison Co fossil-fired plant were able to double the temperature in thecooling circuit. Six hours of this treatment killed approximately 75% ofthe mussels that were blocking the cooling-water filter screens. Theutility estimates that two such treatments each year can prevent zebramussels from posing any problems to operations.Copyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.FLOW MODIFIER UPS EFFICIENCY OF GAS-FIRED BOILERSBy:Steven CollinsUsers of packaged boilers and other gas-fired process vessels have reportedsignificant efficiency increases after installing an in-line device thatchanges fuel gas flow from laminar to turbulent (figure, above). These"turbulators" increase gas temperature closer to the point of combustion bycausing fuel particles to impact each other--and the walls of the supplypipe-- with greater frequency and force. More important, turbulent flowresults in rapid and complete combustion by ensuring better mixing of gasand air when the fuel reaches the burner.   One company, Leader Energy Industries Inc, Chicago, Ill, manufacturesstainless steel turbulators, which reportedly have improved the fuelefficiency of industrial heating boilers by up to 10% (photo, below). Thedevice has a more dramatic impact when installed in low-pressure gas-supplysystems--below 20 psig--because high-pressure systems inherently impartturbulent flow. However, improvements have been documented at higherpressure levels as well.   When Duncan Boiler Service Inc, Kenner, La, installed a turbulator inthe 120-psig gas supply line of an 800-hp heating boiler, the device raisedfull-load efficiency by over 3%. Improved fuel/air mixing allowed smoothercombustion and reduced the required excess O2 by 27%. As a result,NO subscript x emissions dropped from 58 ppm to 35 ppm.Figure: In-line device that changes fuel gas flow from laminar toturbulentPhotograph: Leader Energy Industries Inc's stainless steel turbulatorsCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER via NewsNetJanuary, 1992   Vol. 136, No.HOW SHOULD WE PLAN FOR REPAIRS AFTER FIRE OR STORM?By:William O'KeefeA paper mill near our plant recently had a fire on its turbine floor, withconsiderable damage done. I was hired by the management to help with therepair and return to service of the equipment. The mill management, besidescalling in manufacturers of the major components to assess damage and makerepairs, did much of the work on small equipment and piping. Although thefire was totally unexpected, starting from electrical troubles, it seemedto me that the plant lost much time at the start of rehabilitation by nothaving any idea of how to proceed. There was no coordinated effort orguidelines on major decisions. Individual tasks were assigned with no morethan a command to get back on line as fast as possible.   The effort would have been much more efficient if at least the outlineof a plan of action had been in existence beforehand. This would apply tomany other large-scale interruptions, too, such as floods or storms.   What experience have Power readers had with preparation of contingencyor disaster plans for steam and electric-power facilities? Have the readersdeveloped any criteria for evaluating damage and repair-vs-scrapdecisions?--OSR, September PowerSOLUTIONSDocumentation is the first needIn a recent fire restoration in which I was involved, proper documentationwas critical to a quick completion. Lack of available, up-to-datedocumentation could have been a problem. Unlimited quantities of repairpersonnel, equipment, and supplies will do no good until the engineeringstaff figures out what has to be done.   In our case, we had about 80% of the necessary information within oneday. While the equipment covered by the 80% was being repaired, we had timeto conduct a walkdown and to figure out the other 20% that wasundocumented. All those who are in favor of undocumented modifications oradditions based on sketches tucked away in a file cabinet, take heed--theupfront time and money saved can be lost several times over.J Dage, Detroit, MichPre-disaster photos can be vitalOne help in restoring conditions is a file of photos taken generallythroughout the plant within, say, a year before the catastrophe. Thephotography doesn't have to be studio quality, either. A shot taken from avantage point and relating the locations of components to each other and toany piping, electrical ducts, etc, will prove helpful even if drawings areavailable. There will always be add-ons that don't show on any drawing.Some of the added features may have been very expensive in time and money,and reconstituting them from memory can be costly. Guards and safetyrailing are examples of this.   Two cautions on photographing the plant:   -- Keep the photos at a distance from the plant site, so that they willsurvive.   -- Make sure that repeat photography is done at least annually, on a setdate if possible.   With new high-speed film, even a mid-price camera can get adequate shotsin most plant areas without the trouble of special lighting. Record on theback of each photo the point from which it was taken, so that the nextyear's series can at least start from what were found effective vantagepoints in the past.R J Allison, Sacramento, CalifFirst, know the inventoryOf primary importance is an equipment and inventory list which includespurchase price and date, or current price. The list should cover allcapital costs and assets in the powerplant.   To evaluate damage, an assessment program by category or discipline ofwork--such as mechanical, electrical, instruments and controls, orcivil--should include the following:   -- Scope of damage.   -- Labor and material estimate for repair.   -- Labor and material estimate for replacement.   -- Age of equipment.   -- Decision on whether system improvement or upgrade is involved.   -- Availability of replacement machinery or components.   Remember to assign a unique sequential-number system for each damageassessment. Once the plant has finished the damage assessment, categorizeas complete loss, partial loss, or no disaster-related loss. This can be apercent of replacement cost.   Accurate and prompt damage assessment is critical. It will make easierthe determination of repair vs scrap status and let cleanup work begin.Damage assessment will prove valuable even for systems or equipmentadjudged to be a total loss.   A complete schedule for the work is next. It will give organization,added cost considerations, and a target for completion of work in timelymanner.   Repair and replacement work can begin with engineering, contractors,procurement, invoices, work orders, man-hour records, and alldisaster-repair-related cost-tracking referenced to the appropriatedamage-assessment document number. In many cases, an accounting cost codesystem may be desirable for an additional method ofcost-accumulation-summary reporting. As costs accrue, up to the finalresolution, the damage assessment evaluation serves for categorizing thework.R Webster, Charlotte, NCIt's an established science nowAbout 20 years ago, "hazard, fault, and failure analysis" turned into aformal scientific method of investigating potential problems in the spaceprogram, aircraft manufacture, chemical-processing industries, and severalengineering systems. Simply stated, the method applies analyticalprocedures to any system or part of it to find the potential for damage ofphysical facilities, the downtime costs, and the lost-production charges.This method has been developed in-house by many companies and variousgovernment agencies. It is usually taught by a practitioner trained by theemployer and having experience in the field.   Applying the above-described analysis to the paper mill (considering itas a failure) would have allowed management to have established proceduresfor cleanup, repairs, replacements, and general rehabilitation methods inadvance. Obviously this was not done, as OSR observes. The early effortsafter the mill fire seem to have resembled the oldnavy axiom: "When indanger or doubt, run in circles, scream, and shout." From my experience, itis possible not only to analyze potentials for catastrophe at variouslevels, but also to find ways to reduce the happenings.   Damage evaluations and repair-vs-scrap decision criteria are on-the-spotfunctions, to be made by the best plant- engineering personnel at thescene. This includes selection of experienced plant millwright crews.B B Brown, Greencastle, PaBeware of the asbestos threatOne aspect of the rebuilding effort that doesn't draw much attention butwhich is looming larger as time goes on is the problem of asbestosinsulation. Many older plants have buildings, components, and pipinginsulated with asbestos-containing materials. Although neglect or evenencapsulation may have led to a false sense of security, when a majordisaster hits, there is likely to be considerable loose asbestos on-site,already released or to be released during repairs.   Many environmental agencies are now more aware than ever of thepossibilities of health hazards from asbestos released during naturaldisasters of the kind that OSR mentions. the disaster itself is bound toattract attention of the regulatory agencies, and inspectors are verylikely to be on the scene even before the cleanup crews arrive.   Any disaster program to restore a plant to service has got to take thisinto account. Precautions will be necessary during removal of asbestos tothe point where crews can begin work on the major items of plant andequipment. Any plant preparing plans for recovery from disaster should becognizant of what the asbestos situation is now and could be in case of adisaster.G V Arcano, Milwaukee, WisDon't rush into restorationOSR is right in thinking that planning ahead of time is crucial for majorevents in a plant. From my experience, I can add that over-hasty return toservice can be the start of a long period of trouble.   In our case, a flood accompanied by a medium-size fire left us withwater-soaked components,fire damage, and a management that wanted instantreturn to generation. We didn't realize the hidden damage from sand, silt,and water when we rushed through perfunctory cleanups and got back on lineas soon as equipment could operate within temperature and vibrationtolerances.   After about four months, however, we began to pay the price, with damageto journals, dielectric failures, gasket leaks, and accelerated corrosion.I never found out exactly what our accelerated and highly praised recoveryeffort cost us, but I am sure that the shortcuts were a disaster of theirown.R A Masniak, Ft Lauderdale, FlaYour January problemWhat's the best way to plan run time of redundant equipment?Recently, I have been faced with the question of how to handle the run timeof redundant equipment at a generating station. When planning for maximumavailability at acceptable cost, I have wondered what the recommendedprocedure is for trading-off standby equipment. Opinions on the advantagesand disadvantages of maintaining equal total-run time vs either staggeredtotal-run time or a full-time lead and standby situation seem to vary.   What experience have Power readers had with improving availability bycareful planning of run time for redundant components--such as pumps, fans,and even turbines or auxiliary drives? Once a total-run-time policy isestablished, to what lengths should we go to track total run time toequipment preventive-maintenance (PM) times or to failure? Have readers hadtrouble with excessive running of standby equipment which may not be as newor equal in quality to firstline equipment? And what is the best way tokeep records on this?--MPCCopyright 1992 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-12IA086-000616-B014-129http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey99.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001516 text/html 123855HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:12:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:38 GMTContent-length: 123667Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey99.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN ASIA via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SETBACK FOR JAPAN'S N-PROGRAMME AFTER MONJU ACCIDENT (1372 words) COMPANIES TURN UP HEAT FOR 3 GORGES FUNDING (2072 words) BLACKOUTS HAMMER INDIA'S ECONOMIC OUTPUT (1160 words) ADB NEPAL DEAL SETS OUT POWER PRIORITIES (1873 words) RUSSIAN GROUP LOI FOR TEHRI HYDROPOWER EQUIPMENT (362 words) SCHEMES FREED FROM DELHI RED TAPE DELAYS (174 words) CEPA POWER PURCHASE DEAL APPEARS `ALL SET' (337 words) PRESSURE ON FOR FURTHER DABHOL TARIFF TRADE OFF (236 words) KERALA FAST-TRACK SHORTLIST (202 words) IFC BACKS AES WITH $79M LOAN FOR MUZZAFARGARH (361 words) NEW DATES FOR SRI PRIVATISATION (184 words) WB, JAPANESE LOCK DOWN FINANCING FOR GHAZI BAROTHA (333 words) WU PROJECT GROUNDBREAKING (209 words) NEA, NPC BENEFIT FROM CASH ADVANCES (366 words) W'HOUSE SETTLEMENT STILL FACES SUPREME COURT CHALLENGE (204 words) PLN ALLOCATES $94M FOR SOUTH SULAWESI HYDRO PLANT (324 words) PGN SIGNS $1.3BN DEAL WITH BRIGHTON LTD (259 words) TENAGA HOPES FOR TARIFFS DECISION BY EARLY SPRING (378 words) TENDERS IMMINENT FOR BAKUN MEGA HYDROPOWER SCHEME (449 words) PROTESTS FORCE SHIFT OF WASTE POWER SITE (375 words) DSM TO GET $40M (236 words) OLD HYDRO SCHEME GETS NEW UNIT (595 words) SETBACK FOR MALAY POWER EXPORTS (433 words) LAMPANG LIGNITE SCHEME MAY BE BACK ON AGAIN (245 words) NEW ADB PLEDGE TO BACK CHINESE HYDRO AT TING RIVER (594 words) WEAK HK ECONOMY FORCES CLP TO TRIM OUTLAY (704 words) CHINA PIPING NATURAL GAS TO HONG KONG (164 words) MAJOR POWER SECTOR SHAKEUP (265 words) LOAN FOR LING AO (152 words) N-PROBLEMS AT JAPC, TOHOKU (87 words) SUMITOMO METAL PLANS TO MOVE INTO POWER SECTOR (176 words) DEMAND TO GROW 0.8% (294 words) JAPANESE TO BUILD THREE HYDROELECTRIC PLANTS (87 words) ENTERGY LOCKS UP CITIPOWER (115 words) WHOLESALE PRICING CLAIMED TO BE `ANTI-COMPETITIVE' (585 words) NEWS PACHYDRO SHARE PLACEMENT (76 words) SAUDIA ARABIAN BUDGET (107 words) SAUDI ELECTRIC COMPANY LOSS (69 words) PROJECT TO LINK THE GULF STATES' GRIDS (79 words) IRANIAN FUSION AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCH (90 words) BP TO DEVELOP GAS RESERVES IN THE SAHARA (304 words) BANGLADESH GAS DISCOVERY (143 words) VIETNAM OIL PRODUCTS IMPORT QUOTA (180 words) PETRONAS STAKE IN REFINERY IN VIETNAM (102 words) PHILIPPINES OIL PRICE STABILISATION FUND (164 words) INDONESIAN CILACAP REFINERY (68 words) MALAYSIAN CONTROVERSY OVER OIL DISCOVERIES (274 words) CHINA SEEKING FOREIGN CAPITAL TO FUND OILFIELD (130 words) CHINA PLANNING TO BECOME MORE ACTIVE ABROAD (105 words) KOREA COULD PLAY ROLE IN OPENING RUSSIAN GAS RESERVES (89 words) SOUTH KOREAN ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS (70 words) CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SETBACK FOR JAPAN'S N-PROGRAMME AFTER MONJU ACCIDENTJapan's nuclear power programme, the most ambitious in the world, isfacing major repercussions following a major accident at the site ofthe country's 280 MW Monju fast-breeder experimental reactor.While the accident itself was severe - involving the leakage of sodium-based coolant - and could have led to a near catastrophic series ofevents, what is more worrisome was the slow reaction of the operatorsand of other officials associated with the FBR programme.Their subsequent efforts to `cover up' many details of the accident,which involved the reactor's secondary coolant system, has led theJapanese news media, the Fukui prefectural government and others toengage in bitter criticism of the way the national government handlesits comprehensive nuclear energy policy.For example, Yasuoki Urano, director-general of the Science andTechnology Agency (STA), said he was extremely angry about falsereports given by Monju's operator.The coverup involved withholding segments of video footage showing theextensive damage to pipe structures caused by leakage of the sodiumcoolant, which itself was the result of an apparent faulty pipe weld.Located in Tsuruga, Fukui prefecture, Monju is the heart of acontroversy over Japan's use of plutonium and the government's step-by-step development scheme focusing on eventual construction and use ofcommercial fast-breeder reactors.Indeed, Japan's largest newspaper, the Yomiuri Shimbun, said in aDecember 24 editorial: "Outrage and concern over the handling of theattempted cover up are brought to light. Unless `Donen' (the operator)changes, it cannot be entrusted with nuclear development in whichsafety is most crucial."The Yomiuri Shimbun is well-known as an advocate of further developmentof nuclear power projects, unlike some other Japanese newspapers, so aneditorial on its pages is to be seen as particularly damaging to theprogramme.Because Monju is fuelled by plutonium, the leakage of about threetonnes of sodium-compound coolant on December 8 could have been muchmore severe. The daily coverage in the media in Japan of the accident'sseverity (which was only made known in bits and pieces), the falsifyingof details, and the slow response of officials to admit problems, mayin turn result in a drastic re-examination of Japan's policies vis-a-vis the use of plutonium.The country had planned to start utilising some plutonium in the formof mixed-oxide fuel (MOX) in as many as 10 BWRs and PWRs by around 2000-2002. This is viewed as an effective way to use up some plutonium, soas to prevent Japan from having an excess amount in storage - whichwould make neighbouring countries nervous.But that plan, which is overseen by the Ministry of International Tradeand Industry (MITI), could be delayed considerably because of freshconcerns over safety.There are implications too for the long-term nuclear programme. TheInstitute of Energy Economics predicts that Japan should have 75-90 GWof nuclear power by 2020 and 90 GW-110 GW by 2030. This estimate,regarded as phenomenal in most nuclear circles, stems from a recentprojection study funded by the STA.At present, Japan has 39.6 GW of nuclear capacity in 50 operatingreactors with another four under construction or near commissioning.There are already problem of where to site new reactors.  Alsotroublesome is the history of Monju with construction delays, costoverruns, postponements in starting operations due to equipmentproblems, and assorted other headaches.Last March, a problem with a steam control device was found, and inJune a software-related problem cropped up. Monju had been generatingpower since late August, and it had been scheduled to begin full powertests at the end of the year.The Nuclear Safety Commission, an independent entity affiliated withthe Science and Technology Agency, is now investigating the accidentand the series of events following the detection of the sodium compoundleak.  On the day of the accident, it took eight minutes for the headoperator of the Monju to get in contact with the "division chief" toask permission to shut down the plant, which was operating at about 40%of output.The Leakage was detected at 7:47 p.m. on December 8 and the shutdowndid not start until 8 p.m. Late last month, after this detail came tolight, Hiroshi Oishi, head of the Power Reactor and Nuclear FuelDevelopment Corp (PNC), admitted that the delay in shutting down thereactor - due to the intricate chain of command hierarchy - was,indeed, a problem. Oishi also admitted that this delay was itself amongthe contributing causes to the lag in reporting the accident to thelocal municipality.Meanwhile, the Fukui prefectural government has issued a report latelast month that prohibits Monju from being restarted.without strictguarantees that accident safeguards are fully implemented by the PNC.These safeguards focus mainly on leak detection systems and emergencyprocedures. That report came out about the same time that the STArevised a report on the accident.The STA had to get the PNC to revise the report because PNC's initialversion contained falsified data. Included in the corrections was arevised time of the first inspection of the accident site (7 a.m.,December 9) rather than the earlier stated time (10 p.m. the nightbefore). PNC dismissed four officials associated with Monju, includingone of the directors in charge of operations. "Dismissed" means theywill still be employed by PNC, though at other sites.Fukui governor Yukio Kurita went so far as to say that the citizens ofFukui feel "betrayed because of PNC's deceptions." Fukui prefecture hasa total of 15 nuclear reactors, most of which are operated by Osaka-based Kansai Electric Power Co.MITI Vice-Minister Tomio Tsutsumi said that MITI was instructing allpower utilities to enhance their training of operators and inspectionprocesses as well as speed up reporting of accidents to relevantauthorities. His comments were made in direct response to the Monjuaccident.Monju is slated to serve as the technical foundation for a `pre-commercial' or `demonstration' FBR, which would be followed bycommercial FBRs, according to the government's long-term nuclear energydevelopment plan. However, critics contend that the post-Monju plantwill be exceedingly expensive and that electric power utilities are notinterested in building and operating commercial FBRs until sometimeafter 2030. The Monju accident will definitely have an impact on thisschedule.It could also create extensive hardships for planners seeking to find aconstruction site for the post-Monju reactor. MITI's Agency of NaturalResources and Energy (ANRE) and other government groups will do theirbest to secure such a site, which requires local approval. But in thewake of the Monju accident that will be a significant challenge.Additionally, the accident will affect the outlook on the nuclear fuelreprocessing facility now under construction at Rokkasho-mura, Aomoriprefecture. The planned measures to ensure the safety of that plant,which will handle spent fuel and plutonium, will likely have to beenhanced. And that plant will be subject to greater oversight fromlocal authorities fearing the possibility of the whitewashing similarto that occurring after Monju's sodium leakage. Aomori has sentofficials to Fukui to investigate first hand the accident and thesubsequent cover up.Because the Federation of Electric Power Companies (FERC) decided inJuly 1995 to cancel the government-led project to construct a plutonium-burning advanced thermal reactor (ATR) in Aomori prefecture, mainly dueto escalating cost projections, the FBR programme itself may be subjectto greater cost-related scrutiny and other kinds of analysis. Expandingpressure on utilities to reduce costs - so as to slash rate structures- is causing power utility executives to look more closely at all areaswhere cost-cutting rationalisation can be applied.One serious after-effect of the Monju accident is that the Fukuiprefectural government has stated that it will delay making a decisionto allow Japan Atomic Power Co. to build two more reactors in theTsuruga area. And, as for the time that will be needed to repairMonju's equipment, some estimates are in the range of two years, ifextensive redesign work is required.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996COMPANIES TURN UP HEAT FOR 3 GORGES FUNDINGWestern companies are starting to turn up the heat on their developmentagencies to ensure they do not miss out on the a piece of the action inthe world's biggest hydroelectric project at Three Gorges on China'sYangtze River.The focal point is in the US where it had been understood, unofficiallyat least, that US companies could not count on any support from theExport-Import Bank in their efforts to win power equipment deals at thehigh dam project deep in central China, 1,500 km from Shanghai. Thisstemmed largely from the Clinton Administration's long dispute withChina over human rights abuses and the more pertinent issue of themassive dislocation of people affected by the construction of the17,500 MW-plus complex and the creation of a huge reservoir downriverfrom Chongqing.It is predicted that well over 1m people will be dislocated by theproject, and it is not thought that Beijing will overly concern itselfwith how smooth this exodus will be. The estimated value of the projectis now becoming stratospheric and has been put at around $24bn. Theproject, in totality,  could be completed by 2009, but is likely to befinished sometime in the second decade. First power would come on lineearly in the next century.Recent developments suggest that the Eximbank is now yielding tocongressional and private sector lobby pressure to do what it issupposed to do - back US exports. It became known recently that aNational Security Council interagency committee had concluded that USgovernment finance should not be made available to such a controversialproject.However, the caution to Exim by the administration was carefullyworded. In a letter last September from Samuel Berger, deputy assistantto the president for national security, the NSC said it would be"unwise" for the government (of which Exim is an agency) should alignitself with the scheme because of environmental and human rightsconcerns and should note the legal problems that might arise from anydecision to provide assistance. But also the government should"refrain" from publicly condemning the project. "Such a condemnationwould unduly strain bilateral relations." In conclusion, the governmentshould take a low profile on the Three Gorges project for fear ofharming other US trade and investment interests in China.The reference to  legal problems appears connected with threats by manyenvironmental agencies contemplating court action against Exim shouldit change its mind.This will pose a major challenge for Martin Kamark, a Washingtonlawyer, named last week to succeed Kenneth Brody as chairman of theinstitution. Kamarck's wife, Elaine, is a senior policy advisor to vice-president Al Gore, which suggests he will be under pressure to tow theAdministration's line rather than that of private sector interests.Nevertheless, as he prepared for his new position - he is already vice-chairman - news reports last week from the US indicated that the WhiteHouse is putting some distance between itself from its earlier adviceto Exim to stay away from Three Gorges. American companies such asCaterpillar, Rotec and Voith Hydro have applied for $500m in loans fromExim. General Electric made clear two years ago that it wouldaggressively pursue opportunities to cash in on the project'srequirements for up to 16 foreign-manufactured turbine generators forthe dam's power houses.The concerns of US industry are real enough for it is mainly the US -and until a year or so ago Canada - that has allowed itself to moraliseabout the project. No such worries as yet bedevil the British, French,German or Japanese governments, whose companies are now positioningthemselves to chase for business, either through direct negotiation orin competitive tender. China is still thought to be the biginfrastructure order-book prize in Asia, despite its  inarticulateforeign investment policies, which are still undergoing revisions.Analysts do concede, however, that the attempted use of foreign aid byother countries to support Three Gorges - at least in its early stages- will arouse similar controversy because of the strength of theinternational environmental lobby. The British government was badlyburned by the use of concessional finance to back the Malaysian PergauDam scheme; and the Japanese foot-dragged on supporting the WorldBank's now-aborted backing for the Nepal Arun III project.US companies have noted Canada's `Damascene' conversion to the theproject. When in opposition, Jean Chretien's Liberal Party condemnedthe Tory government's support for Three Gorges, but when in power, itchanged its tune - most notably in November 1993 when Chretien, nowPrime Minister, visited China. Said one observer, "He saw the future,and it was wet."Chretien has since given the Canadian Export Development Corp.,Canada's version of the US Exim Bank, the green light to provide exportcredits to back Canadian involvement in Three Gorges. Some of the majorregional utilities, full of hydropower expertise but sensitive to theresettlement issue, are on record as eschewing support for the scheme,such as BC Hydro and Ontario Hydro. Indeed, BCH's ex-chief executive,Maurice Strong, is an environmentalist and is now an adviser to theWorld Bank's new president James Wolfensohn.Significantly,  last year Monenco Agra, an engineering consultant, wona $34.5m contract to provide a computer system to co-ordinate theThree Gorges resettlement. EDC support of $12.5m has since beenmobilised; indeed, the EDC had already provided $23.5m in finance andcover to help Dominion Bridge build a cement plant in China, whoseoutput will be used on the dam.The existence of a Canadian option is seen as a benefit to those UScompanies - of which there are many - with subsidiaries in Canada.Rotec has indicated it might look to the EDC if Exim backing is notavailable.Solid opposition to the scheme still lies with the environmentalgroups. Probe International in Canada has taken some relish atlampooning Chretien's volte face on the issue. In the US, Human RightsWatch/Asia has attacked the Beijing government for its suppression ofopen debate or, indeed, any criticism of the project.It reinforced this with publication of  report detailing a devastatingaccount of two Chinese dam collapses in August 1975, which took thelives of at least 85,000 and possibly as many as 230,000, but news ofwhich was hushed up by the government. US International Rivers Networkhas added its weight to the chorus of disapproval for the scheme.Further critiques in the past few years have come in the form of twopublications, Yangtze! Yangtze! by Dai Qing; and Damming the ThreeGorges, edited by Margaret Barber and Grainne Ryder and issued byToronto-based Probe.Among the multilateral aid agencies, the lobby groups appear to havehad success in garnering fairly cohesive  support for their anti-ThreeGorges stance. The World Bank last year took the circumspect view that,as it had not been asked by China, it could not support Three Gorges.Under its new president, James Wolfensohn, who is pushing the Bank todemand greater accountability and signs of commerciality among borrowernations, this policy towards Three Gorges is now: `if asked, the answeris no.' Wolfensohn, it should be noted, is a close friend of PresidentClinton.The Bank's view is shared by the Asian Development Bank. Both the WorldBank and the Asian Development Bank (See ADB feature this issue) feelthey are putting plenty of money into China for power projects - someof them hydro - without getting involved in anything so pregnant withcontroversy.But much schizophrenia still attends the scheme.In a recent article in Foreign Affairs, the authoritative US bimonthlypublication, writer Audrey Topping noted:"Estimates of the project's cost range between $17.3bn and $30bn. Tohelp defray this, the government has been seeking $8bn in foreigninvestment. The World Bank, after overseeing a four-year, $8.7mfeasibility study conducted (in the 1980s) by the CanadianInternational Development Agency, refused to help with funding."Merrill Lynch and other potential investors have also withdrawnbecause of the financial and political risks, as well as questions ofhuman rights violations."In Hong Kong, Merrill's Robert Graves, senior vice-president formarketing and communications, last week told Power in Asia: "MerrillLynch has never been mandated to work on behalf of or for the Chinesegovernment regarding the Three Gorges Dam project, nor has any otherforeign bank as far as I know. There have been a lot of rumours in thepast that we were involved, but we never have been approached."This does not tally with the fact that in 1993 Merrill Lynch,describing itself as a leading international financial intermediary forChina, published a sponsored statement in the western media providing abalanced analysis of Three Gorges, explaining the dam's irrigation,agricultural and power generation benefits while explaining the scopeof the relocation and rehabilitation problem. Said the article:"Financing for the project, officially estimated at $10bn, will comefrom worldwide sources. Merrill Lynch has been working with the Beijinggovernment to develop the financing plan, which could include bondofferings."Equity financing could account for as much as 50% of the financing inthe early construction stages, and there is also likely to be asignificant amount of strategic partnership investment frominternational sources. . . ."Whatever Merrill's involvement in Three Gorges is, or was, the factremain that the project is now  beginning to gear up.In recent weeks, Shi Dazhen, China's Power Industry Minister, announcedplans for the creation of a nationwide power grid, which could treblecurrent capacity. This grid was being planned around Three Gorges, andis aimed at integrating regional and provincial power grids.Speaking at the annual conference of the country's power industry, Shisaid that the capacity of installed generators, which is now nearly 210GW, should rise to 300 GW by 2000 and 550 GW-600 GW by 2010, abreathtaking scenario.Even more important was the need to boost output. By 2000, he said,output will have risen to 1.4 trillion kWh, up from 1 trillion kWh in1995. A total of 170,000 km of power lines capable of handling 220 kVof power and more will have been installed by then.Three Gorges will be a centrepiece of the expansion programme. A highvoltage power transmission system will carry power generated by ThreeGorges to other parts of the country. A new company will be set up tocarry out the task.Added to this will be a nationwide power network to link the grids inthe central and eastern parts of Sichuan province, followed by otherprovinces and autonomous regions. Further, a total of 19 majorhydropower schemes and six pumped storage plants will be constructed inthe upper and middle reaches of the Yangtze and three other rivers.This all-embracing plan also calls for power grids in 35 key cities tobe rehabilitated and for coal-fired and hydropower generators to berenovated, and increased use of less toxic fuels such as liquified coalor gas.In Beijing last month, China Securities, a business publication, calledon China to issue bonds in overseas markets to meet a shortfall infunds for the project. They should then use the hard currency raised tofill part of an expected Yn50bn shortfall. The article said that Chinacould provide only Yn200bn of the estimated Yn250bn ($30bn).According to observers in Hong Kong, there are increasing signs thatChina is paying attention to international opinion. "They have to ifthey want any really helpful foreign finance, be it commercial lendingor export credits," said one banker.  In addition, officials from theThree Gorges Development Group explained that China planned to set up alife insurance company to provide policies to those being resettled.The officials said that an application had been sent to the centralbank, with an approval expected by 1996. The so-called Three GorgesLife Insurance Co, will be headquartered in Beijing with officeslocated closer to the site.* Yangtze! Yangtze!, by Dai Qing, Earthscan Publications Ltd., 120Pentonville Road, London, 295 pages. #12.95; Damming the Three Gorges,edited by Margaret Barber and Grainne Ryder, Earthscan PublicationsLtd., Probe International, Toronto, #12.95.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BLACKOUTS HAMMER INDIA'S ECONOMIC OUTPUTIndia is reeling under one of the worst onslaughts of power shortagesin living in memory. The current crisis is reaching nationalproportions and has been mounting in intensity for about three months.According to power officials, the source of the problems stems from thecountry's failure to reach its power project installation targets,inadequate rainfall hampering hydropower generation, continued coalshortages for a variety of reasons and what has been described as`inter-grid indiscipline.'  The government in the southern state ofAndhra Pradesh has recently increased power cuts to high tensionindustrial customers to between 40% and 60% of their sanctioned loadsabove 70 kVa. Restrictions on peak hour consumption for industrialconsumers and five-hour supply cuts daily for household consumers arefacets of the acute power crisis in the state.According to officials, there is a ban on power consumption for bookingor water heating in houses and on the use of neon signs at shops and onbillboards. Street lighting is even being restricted to alternatepoles.The curtailment has come just at the end of an earlier powerrestriction regime, eased briefly with the belated arrival of monsoonrains which boosted reservoir levels.The problem in AP state, however, is being greeted with widespreadscepticism, particularly by business consumers who believe thegovernment is protecting  the agricultural community at their expense.The rationale is that the rural vote is too delicate to be tamperedwith by the Telgu Desam Party, particularly in an election year.Therefore urban customers are being made to bear the lion's share ofthe power cut regime.For example, the government is maintaining a certain minimum level ofwater in Srisailam reservoir for release to the newly constructed TelguGanga canal system to provide irrigation facilities for the farmers inthe Rayalaseema region. This has resulted in the closure of theSrisailam hydropower station and the loss of 770 MW of capacity.Indeed, it is to maintain the promised daily nine hours power supplyfor irrigation pumpsets that other consumers are having to take it onthe chin. AP Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu explained to thelegislative assembly that only 4,295 MW power was available in Decemberagainst peak demand of 5,219 MW.In neighbouring Karnataka state, a 50% cut for high tension consumersand the 30% cut in supply for all low tension commercial, industrialand non-industrial consumers since late October has led to a powersupply crisis never seen before, say officials.One stop-gap is a proposal for three barge-mounted generating unitswith a total of 400 MW of capacity, which could be delivered within sixmonths of the issue of letters of intent. If the deal goes through, itwill be some kind of record in a country renowned for its bureaucracyand slow approvals system - one of the reasons for the power crisis.Karnataka's problem is that it is 65% reliant on hydropower; thisyear's monsoon has been late, leaving Linganamakki, Supta and Mani damreservoirs half empty. In Kerala state, the fast depletion of hydroreservoirs is prompting a similar requirement for belt-tightening.AP and Karnataka states are also suffering from a long strike by amajority of workers in the Singareni Colliers Co. (SCCL) coal mines,which has been going on since mid-October.The virtual halt of coal supplies from the SCCL mines in AP has hit theRamagundam power station operated by the National Thermal Power Corp(2,000 MW) and Karnataka's only coal-fired unit at Raichur. Generationdropped to just 600 MW at Ramagundam as daily coal supplies went downto 20,000 tonnes against 35,000 tonnes normally required.  The NTPC isbeing persuaded to pay in advance for the coal in order to generatebetween Rs400m-Rs450m required to meet the wage arrears of the strikingworkers of the financially-troubled SCCL.Coal problems are also hitting APSEB. The state utility has called foroffers for 500,000t of imported coal, but has delayed an actual orderplacement. The imported coal will cost about Rs2,900 per tonne, veryexpensive compared with the Rs700-Rs800 per tonne for domestic coal.Financially the board is unable to pick up the estimated Rs1.50bn($42m) bill for the imported coal. The transmission constraints standin the way of wheeling surplus power from the eastern region.The coal authorities, as in the past, hardly admit any supply shortagesby its enterprises, despite the outcry but its customers. Two 250 MWunits at Dahanu power station, operated by the private sector BSESLtd., are operating much below capacity due to low supplies fromdomestic mines controlled by government enterprises.But Coal Minister Jagdish Tyler explained to the parliament last monththat the coal companies had supplied 115.8mt of coal to the powerstations in the April-November period, achieving 99.45% of the target.The reason, then, for the low stocks at the power stations could beexcess consumption of coal by them, constraints in unloading coal fromrailway wagons at the power houses and constraints in the movement ofcoal. not to mention the perennial problem of non-delivery because ofnon-payment of bills by power generators.As for transmission problems, three major grid disturbances in thewestern region in the past few months have led to blackouts and haveprompted much doubting about whether the region is any better off thanother regions of the country. More rude shocks are expected.For example,  R. Chandramuli, Tata Electric Companies V-P, has warnedthat the Bombay metropolis is facing a virtual grid collapse on a dailybasis. Bombay is accustomed to uninterrupted power supplies butsupplies were hit on December 9.N.A. Joshi, Maharashtra State Electricity Board member/technical,thinks the state will have power shortages and breakdowns until a new500 MW unit at Chandrapur goes on line in mid-1997. With peak demand at8,300 MW and availability at 7,700 MW, the state is at presentwitnessing about 600 MW shortage.At the same time, the perpetual overdraw by the Madhya Pradesh state by200 MW-500 MW from central power stations at Korba and Vindhyachal hasdeepened the shortages in Maharashtra.This is an example of grid indiscipline, and has led to a dip in theminimum level of frequency of power resulting in tripping of powergenerating stations all over the region.Factories in Gujarat in northwest India have recorded up to 80trippings a month since the end of summer. Even continuous processindustries in the state are reeling under a 25% cut in power supply."These cuts and supply shortfall will undermine our efforts to makeGujarat the premier state in the country for industrial investment,"rues Grish Dani, the president of the Gujarat chamber of commerce, inreference to some 20% investment injection attracted by the state since1991. The current shortfall has been estimated by industrialists at1,500 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ADB NEPAL DEAL SETS OUT POWER PRIORITIESA $125m loan that the Asian Development Bank (ADB) was due to approvein 1997 for a hydro project in Kali Gandaki, Nepal, will now be broughtbefore ADB's board this year, Arun Adarkar, Director of ADB's recentlyinaugurated North American Office told Power in Asia in the course ofan interview.The decision to "accelerate" the Kali Gandaki project was taken becauseof Nepal's "new circumstances", explains Adarkar - notably, last year'scancellation of Nepal's biggest ever hydro scheme - the 210 MW Arun IIIrun-of-river scheme - when the World Bank withdrew its $175m supportfor the scheme.Adarkar, an Indian national, who was ADB secretary in Manila from 1985-1991, and a senior advisor in the Southeast Asia and Pacific Departmentof the International Monetary Fund before assuming his present post inWashington DC in May, denies that ADB's decision means ADB is taking upthe slack in power lending in Nepal, or indeed, anywhere else in Asia,because the World Bank is reducing its support for the sector, or, inthe case of Arun III, completely pulling out.The Kali Gandaki project is not "a replacement" for Arun III, and noris it in "the same geographical area", says Adarkar.Notwithstanding World Bank lending for power in South Asia isshrinking.  Between 1986 and 1990 such lending averaged $999m a year.But between 1991-1995 it had almost halved to $474m a year average.On the other hand, World Bank lending for power in East Asia and thePacific - a region that now includes six economies in transition:Cambodia, China, Laos, Mongolia, Mynamar and Vietnam - is increasing.World Bank loans for the power sector in this region averaged $662m ayear from 1986 to 1990 but they almost doubled to $1bn a year averagefrom 1991 to 1995.As for the ADB at December 31 1994 it had lent a total of $10.2bn forpower generation, distribution and transmission projects, and over $60mfor related technical assistance/advice.  ADB's borrowing countriescomprise the developing countries of South and East Asia and thePacific and some of the newly independent states of the former SovietUnion, such as Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic.Adarkar says ADB's projected lending for energy projects generally (oiland gas as well as for power) will average $4.8bn a year from January 11995 to December 31 1997, which is a big increase compared with ADB'slending in the sector during the previous three years.  Roughly two-thirds of this projected lending will be for the power sector.The ADB Director noted that the biggest borrower by far now and in theforeseeable future is China, a relatively new ADB client.  ADB loans toChina for power over the 1995-1997 period will total $1.8bn, saysAdarkar.  In second place, comes Indonesia ($787m total projected powersector lending), followed by the Phillipines ($544m).The ADB is also just beginning to do business or is renewing businesswith many other countries in the region.  For instance loans for powerprojects amounting to $100m, $35m and $25m are due to be disbursed toMongolia, Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic respectively during the1995-1997 period, while loans to Vietnam to rehabilitate its powersector are projected to total $140m during the period, ADB only renewedlending to Vietnam in 1993.Among ADB's traditional borrowers, Pakistan will continue to be animportant client, says Adarkar, with projected loans for the powersector between 1995 and 1997 of $300m.However, India which used to be a big power sector borrower in thepast, now borrows more from ADB for gas.  Total gas sector lending byADB to India was $560m in 1993, for instance.  Adarkar reckons, even ifADB, the World Bank and other development institutions pooled all theirpower sector loans for southern and eastern Asia and the Pacific, thesewould still not be nearly enough to satisfy the region's massiveestimated $45bn a year sector requirements during the 1990s.The massive investment needs reflect both specific and general factors. Specific failings are that all too often too close a relationshipexists between the functions of power utilities and government in theregion, with the result that the financial management and structuringof utilities is often not transparent; accounting is inefficient; anddue to unrealistic pricing, and tariffs not matching the real costs ofsupply, the utilities' debt servicing is now so onerous that theutilities cannot go on expanding to meet forecast demand in the 1990sin the way they did in the 1980s.Nor can the State bail the utilities out at a time when budget cutting,controlling inflation and other public investments, for instance inhealth and education, are priorities.  As a result, electricityshortages, power outages and brownouts are common across the region.Indeed, according to ADB, per capita electricity consumption in Asiandeveloping countries in now just 500 kWh compared with 6,600 kWh inOECD countries, and per capita installed capacity is 0.1 KW comparedwith 1.9 KW in the OECD.On top of this, inefficiencies in the generation, delivery and use ofelectricity causes serious losses.  Total system losses among ADBborrowing countries range from 25% to 35% compared with what ADBconsiders acceptable loss levels of 15% to 18%.Furthermore, much of theexpansion carried out in the power sector in the 1980s in the regionwas done without considering the environmental impact.The general reasons for the huge capital investment requirements atleast in East Asia are due to under-investment in the past, acuteproblem in Vietnam, Laos, Mongolia, Cambodia and the Philippines; rapidurbanisation (even if the current urban growth rate of 4% a year in theregion slows down more than 1bn people will be living in towns in thenext generation); rising global competition; and dramatically higheconomic growth.East Asia has been the fastest growing region in the world for 25years.  During the next decade the region is projected to grow at 7% -8% a year.  One consequence of this huge growth is that the demand forpower has also greatly increased, raising investment requirements.The need to promote private sector investment is vital.  The gapbetween the demand for large-scale financing in the 1990s in thesector, and what governments and development banks can provide, mayonly be bridged by private investment.So a top priority of ADB's work says Adarkar is helping countriescreate the conditions that make private investors participation in thesector appealing.The countries ADB lends to are far from homogeneous.  They includenewly industrialised, industrialising, developing and land-locked orisland economies.  Not surprisingly, different nations apply differentsets of reforms in the sector , and are more successful in some areasthan others.Consider reforms that are indispensable for attracting privateinvestment in the sector - establishing an appropriate legal andregulatory framework; putting an end to monopolistic practices byallowing competition in the generation, transmission and/ordistribution ends of the business; and laying the basis for soundmanagement in public utilities by restructuring them into autonomouscorporate entities.Such reforms have been successfully implemented in Malaysia, Indonesia,Korea, and Thailand in particular, says Adarkar.  In Thailand theMetropolitan Electricity Authority of Bangkok, and the ElectricityGenerating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) are "models" of government-owned utilities that are "efficiently managed, enjoy considerableautonomy, and have a good credit rating", he says.In many other countries in the region, pending institutional reformsand/or the privatisation of state-owned power companies, governmentshave invited the private sector to invest in independent power projectsoften under build-own-transfer (BOT) arrangements.According to these, the private sponsor finances the building andoperating of power plants while the state-owned public utilityundertakes to buy the electricity under take or pay contracts.The best example of this approach says the ADB Director, is thePhilippines.  Most electricity distribution was already privately-ownedin the Philippines when the country introduced laws allowing theprivate sector to participate in power generation as well as under BOOand BOT options.As a result, Japanese, Hong Kong, American and European investors arecurrently developing more than 6,000 MW of new generation capacity,which has relieved Manila of t he daily eight hour brownouts it used toendure.  Multilateral institutions estimate by 1998 as much as 80% ofnational generating capacity could be in private hands in thePhilippines compared to none in 1991.  Meanwhile establishing soundmanagement in public utilities - essential if the utilities are toattract private investment - may start with small reforms like sellinga minority of the utilities' stock to the public, (so that they becomemore independent from the government), or farming out tasks likemaintenance, and the billing of customers, to the private sector.Eventually, public utilities need to be allowed to issue bonds andshares on capital markets to raise long-term finance."But most important of all", emphasises the ADB Director," the publicutilities should be allowed to introduce appropriate pricing policiesso that the prices or tariffs they charge reflect the real costs ofsupply".  Inappropriate pricing policies for electricity supplies is "amajor problem" among ADB borrowers, Adarkar adds.  "In India, Pakistanand China, pricing distortions are the  biggest.  Thailand is anexception".As for subsidies to the power sector, ADB is pushing borrowers to phasethem out, and to minimise any cross-subsidisation that may exist, ofrural/agricultural consumers by urban/industrial consumers.A second priority is to make the system work more efficiently byreducing supply side losses, and encouraging governments to introducedemand-side management programmes.  The latter is expedient, saysAdarkar.  Studies in the US and Europe conclusively show that it costsfar less to reduce demand by a KW of electricity than it does to add aKW of generation.The third power sector priority is making sure the system does notdamage the environment.  For example, ADB has not ever been involved inthe financing of nuclear power plants.  However when it comes to havinga preference for run-of-river over dam-cum reservoir projects, or forhydro projects over retrofitting of thermal plants to improve theefficiency of power delivery and reduce pollution, Adarkar says," forthe Bank these options are not contrasting"."We may do both", he adds.  "It might be necessary in order to expandcapacity to invest in a hydro project.  But at the same time and in thesame country we might help finance retrofitting of a thermal scheme".All projects financed by ADB are assessed for their environmentalimpact and may be redesigned or even discarded if the environmentalimpact is found to be too adverse, or cannot be mitigated.  It alsoactively encourages borrowers to use clean coal technologies (wheneconomically viable).Coal is the primary source of energy in countries that are ADB'sbiggest borrowers (eg: China).  And the Bank also provides technicalassistance to countries to help them evaluate the economicpossibilities of developing solar, mini hydro and wind energy optionsto meet the demand for electricity in remote/rural areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996RUSSIAN GROUP LOI FOR TEHRI HYDROPOWER EQUIPMENTA letter of intent (LOI) has been issued to the Ukrainian-RussianEnergomach consortium for the supply of electro-mechanical equipmentfor the phase one segment of the 1,000 MW hydropower project in UttarPradesh.The deal has an estimated value of Rs3bn ($85.7m), but has been inlimbo for a long time as the Tehri Hydro Development Corp (THDC)insisted on a performance guarantee from an international bank whichthe consortium could not arrange. The corporation now has agreed toaccept the guarantee from the Russian government, and the guaranteeterms are now being drafted.The consortium includes Russian companies Energomach, Leningrad MetalWorks and Hydro Project Institute, as well as the Ukrainian groups ofTurbatom and Usal Electrotyzamash. The Tehri dam project was to befunded earlier by the former Soviet Union.The 4 x 250 MW first phase Tehri project is now scheduled forcompletion in 2000 if the THDC does not get entangled in any morerehabilitation and resettlement (R&R) problems, which have causeddelays.Time overruns have increased the per-megawatt cost to Rs33m from a mereRs330,000 as originally planned in the 1970s. The THDC had announced inlate November a new R&R package for those being uprooted from old Tehritown by the construction of the dam.The big increase in compensation for loss of agriculture lands,financial help in house construction at resettlement sites and cashincentives for an early shift from the building site by locals are someof the main features of the project package - and also a reason why thecost has escalated so precipitately from the 1970s.Environmental lobbyists opposing the project have been pressing peopleto hang on to their lands. The THDC authorities hope all residents ofthe town will have shifted to resettlement sites before June, when thewaters brought in by the monsoon rains are impounded by the dam.A 4 x 250 MW pumped storage plant at Tehri and a 4 x 100 MW hydropowerplant, with a 103 metre high concrete dam at Koteshwar, 22 kmdownstream of Tehri, have been planned for the second stage of theproject.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SCHEMES FREED FROM DELHI RED TAPE DELAYSPower projects with a value of up to Rs4bn ($114m) have been set freefrom the time-consuming scrutiny of the Central Electricity Authorityin a move to speed up approvals and hasten construction of smallerpower schemes.A government notification has specified that only projects allottedthrough competitive bidding below this threshold level will be sparedthe rigours of CEA techno-economic scrutiny. All other projects willcontinue to be governed by the existing guidelines, which provide anexemption from the CEA clearance only if the capital expenditure isless than Rs1bn ($28.5m).The four-fold increase in the exemption limit is targeted at taking theedge off the official scrutiny process, which is a source of ire tonearly all project sponsors. Few projects have been cleared by the CEAin the past five years.The Power Minister feels that competitive bidding cane take care of thecost and other factors which the CEA usually examines; therefore theprojects selected through open tender system need not be submitted forthe CEA scrutiny.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CEPA POWER PURCHASE DEAL APPEARS `ALL SET'A project proposal in which CEPA of Hong Kong, part of Gordon Wu'sHopewell Holdings empire, would secure agreement to build coal-firedpower stations in India, has moved forward with what are described as`preliminary agreements' for a power purchase agreement.CEPA is seeking to set up 10,560 MW of thermal capacity in the country,probably using a series of 660 MW off-the-shelf base load power units.The deal, when finalised, would be a record-breaker for India (and forWu), given that it would be the largest private sector scheme of itskind for Asia's second most populous country after China. Negotiationsfor the project began in 1993.Under the agreement, which involves both the central government andvarious state authorities, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryanastates are committed to lift 1,300 MW, 1,200 MW, 800 MW and 700 MWrespectively from the 6 x 660 MW first phase of the 16-unit scheme. Theunits would be installed at Hirma in Orissa State.The first unit will be commissioned within 36 months of the financialclosure, and one unit is to be added at each subsequent three-monthinterval. Power from the first two units will be wheeled to Gujarat.A significant aspect of the preliminary deals is that the stategovernments will establish "an appropriate payment guarantee structure"for power purchases from the Hirma project. CEPA also wants to tap intoWorld Bank guarantees, but this will be no easy task given the Bank'sincreasing requirements for a more transparently commercial approach topower generation by the heavily subsidised and money-losing state powerboards.World Bank financing, or support by other national aid agencies ormultilaterals, will be important for CEPA which, like other privatepower sponsors, recognises the need to create a multinational`cocktail' of financing arrangements to make infrastructure projects inhigh risk developing countries work.Another signatory to the preliminary agreements is Power Grid Corp ofIndia, which will develop the transmission system necessary to wheelthe power.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PRESSURE ON FOR FURTHER DABHOL TARIFF TRADE OFFLast-minute jockeying between Enron and its partners in the Dabholproject consortium and the Maharashtra government was taking place asPower in Asia went to press, suggesting that Enron Development Corp. ofthe US may yield further concessions for lower tariffs for India'sfirst private sector LNG power project.The talks have been under way for months between the two warringparties to revive the two-phase, $2.5bn power project at Dabhol, whichwas ordered by the new state government to be suspended last summerafter construction was under way and financial close had been arrangedwith the state's previous government.Enron in Houston was tight-lipped Friday, saying only that "we arewaiting for Saturday" -  by which time a special cabinet meeting of theMaharashtra state government will have taken place to consider thelatest Enron/government position.If there is much more delay, arbitration proceedings against the statebrought by Enron and its partners Bechtel and GE Capital, will be gotunder way in London. They are scheduled for January 15.One aspect of the latest speculative offer is a marginal reduction byEnron in the tariff, at which the 2,015 MW project will sellelectricity to the state power board, to Rs1.89 levelised tariff agreedearlier in return for which the power board will lift power at morethan the 90% plant load factor mentioned in the original power purchaseagreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996KERALA FAST-TRACK SHORTLISTNine project developers have been selected for small, fast-trackprojects as part of the emergency plan of Kerala state to overcome a400 MW power shortage which is hurting the economy. The projects wouldrange in size between 15 MW and 30 MW.Proposals for the projects, to go up in the next year, were called bythe state-owned Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB) and the KeralaState Industrial Development Corp. (KSIDC).The developers with project locations in brackets selected by the KSIDCinclude the following:* Lok Housing with EDL of Australia (Bekaal, Malappuram and Chavara).* IPCO-AGVL (Balusseir, Walayar and Kanjikode).* BSES (Kakkanad and Technopark).* Kings International Squa Marine Exports/Steag (Koothuparamba).* Dalmia Bros. (Kanidkode).These power stations are to come near industrial clusters sufferingfrom chronic power shortages. The developers have quoted tariff levelsof between Rs2.09 and 2.13/kWh.The power sales tariff quoted by proposed sponsors picked up by theKSEB varies from Rs2.10 to Rs2.63. Its choice of developers includes:* Euro Capital (Vizhinjam, Kuttikatur, Mudakkayam, Nilambur andPerinthalmanna).* ABG (Kasargod and Kanhangad).* Balaji Industries (Kodungaloor).* Contake Abadi (Veli).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IFC BACKS AES WITH $79M LOAN FOR MUZZAFARGARHThe International Finance Corp (IFC) has signed an investment agreementwith AES Pak Generation (Private) Co. (AESPG) to provide a $79.5mfinance and equity package to help finance the $350m power plantplanned for Muzzafargarh in southern Punjab.The IFC said the amount will be split into $39m equity and theremaining will be raised through a syndicated loan.The AESPG is the second IFC-financed tie-up with AES in Pakistan. Theproject calls for construction of a 360 MW oil-fired power complex,which will be equipped with a flue gas desulphurisation facility, thefirst such plant of this type in the country.Additional financing will come from a variety of sources, withcommercial funding coming from ING, Dresdner Bank, Natwest  and KoreaMerchant Banking Corp. In addition, the Japanese Export-Import Bankwill provide a loan of $148m.Singapore-based AES Transport, a subsidiary of AES Corp of the US, willbe turnkey contractor for the project. AES will have an equity stake of$85m, according to Shahzad Qasim, director of AESPG.He said that AES expects to start generating 720 MW from both itsPakistan operations by December 1997 - the other unit is underconstruction at Lal Pir in Punjab and it reached financial closeearlier this year.WAPDA, the state power utility, will lift the electricity under a 30-year agreement, while another government, Pakistan State Oil (PSO),will supply fuel oil under a 30-year agreement.Vijay Chaudhry, IFC power division manager, said the agreement bringsto $280m the corporation's investments in the private power sector.* The privatisation commission has appointed the IFC as financialadviser to the privatisation of the Faisalabad Electric AreaElectricity Board. The IFC will help lay out a framework for theseparation of the FAEB from WAPDA so that it can operate as a privatelyowned and regulated power distribution company.The regulatory framework will establish rules for the rate-settingmechanism, FAEB's interaction with WAPDA, the National Electric PowerRegulatory Authority (NEPRA) and private power generators. The successof unbundling FAEB from WAPDA should provide a guideline for theprivatisation of seven other distribution boards.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEW DATES FOR SRI PRIVATISATIONThe Sri Lanka government has set new dates for starting to privatisethe power sector by calling for a strategic partner for LankaElectricity Co, Officials said."We have extended the date for submitting expressions of interest toJanuary 16, 1996 from December 1, 1995," an official of the PublicEnterprise Reform Commission, which oversees privatisations, said.  Thenew agenda is the result of requests made by power operators, askingfor more time, the official said.The commission first advertised locally and overseas in late October,asking for power operators interested in taking a 51% in LECO, toexpress interest by December 1."We got over 10 expressions of interest and a host of requests onDecember 1, asking for more time," the official said.  According to thenew timeframe, the short-list of operators pre-qualified to bid will bemade available not later than January 23, the official added.LECO, the second largest power distributor in Sri Lanka, handles nearly20% of electricity generated in the country.  The balance isdistributed by Ceylon Electricity Board, the state-owned monopoly powergenerator.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WB, JAPANESE LOCK DOWN FINANCING FOR GHAZI BAROTHAThe World Bank and the Japanese government have announced theirrespective contributions towards the Ghazi Barotha dam. The Bankannounced just before Christmas that it would provide a $350m loantowards the cost of the $2.25bn scheme. The Bank's financing willaccount for 15.6% of the project's requirements.The Bank's commitment to the scheme shows that it is still backinglarge hydropower projects - this was in doubt because of its withdrawalfrom the Arun III hydropower scheme in Nepal earlier this year (See ADBfeature).The  scheme will involve works near the village of Ghazi, a 52 km longpower channel, a power complex near Barotha village to generate about6,600 GWh of energy annually, transmission facilities and environmentalmanagement and resettlement plans. The forecast of Pakistan'sunconstrained commercial energy demand calls for an annual increase ofabout 6.7% up to 2008.According to Zoubeida Ladhibi-Belk, power engineer at the Bank's SouthAsia Department, the project will reduce the high cost of electricityand will boost access to power in the country's rural areas.The Bank has been careful to ensure that all environmental pitfallsassociated with such projects have been taken into account beforecommitting itself to backing the scheme.According to the Bank, a total of 22,360 people will be affected by theproject, mostly only to a limited extent. Of these, some 900 living in110 housing units will need to be resettled. An integrated regionaldevelopment plan has been developed to provide health and educationprogrammes.Meanwhile, Japan's OECF said it will provide $350m towards the scheme.It will provide the funds in two phases. The first will consist of$200m and will be offered during the current financial year, while thesecond tranche of $150m will be released after the utilisation of fundsfor the first phase. The decision to provide funding in two phasesfollowed detailed OECF analysis. A Japanese delegation declared itself"satisfied: that the project was economically viable.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WU PROJECT GROUNDBREAKINGPrime Minister Bhutto will perform the ground-breaking ceremony at thesite of the 5,280 MW coal-fired power plant earmarked for Keti Banderin Sind province. The project is being undertaken by ConsolidatedElectric Power Asia, part of Gordon Wu's Hopewell Holdings of HongKong.The move is a strategic breakthrough, not only because of itsceremonial value but because it further confirms the momentum that hasgathered behind what promises to be Pakistan's largest thermal powerproject, proposed by the entrepreneurial Wu in 1993.The invitation to the groundbreaking was made by Agha Tariq Khan, theSind Mineral Development Minister.The project's cost, including all the associated infrastructure,including a coal terminal to handle imported coal and roads to handledomestic coal at the project's later phases, is put at $8bn. Initiallythis will be much less as the project will be built in a series ofsingle 600 MW units.The plants would ultimately require 30mt-35mt of coal annually.Officials close to the government said CEPA had already provided $5m tothe Sind government to carry out a feasibility study of Ket Bander,where eight units will eventually be installed, providing financing canbe raised for a private power scheme of such a scale.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEA, NPC BENEFIT FROM CASH ADVANCESThe National Electrification Administration and the National PowerCorp. are among the biggest recipients of cash advances from thegovernment, which an inter-agency committee wants to stop to lessenmoney claims on the Treasury.Of the Ps44.4bn ($1.8bn) of such advances as of last October, Ps5.6bnwent to the NEA and Ps4.50bn to NPC.One way in which NPC's dependency on government handouts will bereduced will be signposted this year when NPC starts offeringhydropower projects to the private sector, to be built on a BOT basis.The offers will apply to projects planned for completion between 2000and 2005. This is something of an experiment as the government's andNPC's privatisation programme has revolved around thermal powerprojects, not the more capital-intensive hydropower schemes.Excluded in the bidding are the construction of two hydros with acombined capacity of 300 MW in Kalayaan in Laguna, south of Manila, andthe rehabilitation of the 350 MW hydro scheme in Caliraya-Botocan-Kalayaan, also in Laguna.Contracts in both are already in the final stages of negotiations withArgentina's Industrias Metalurgicas Pescamera Sociedad Anonima. NPC istrying to persuade the Board of Investments to grant tax exemptions andother fiscal perquisites to hydro schemes.To lure private investments, NPC itself is thinking of shouldering thecosts of putting up access roads and transmission lines as well as inobtaining rights of way to and from each project.Among those to be the subject of bidding are the 29 MW Timbaban schemein Visayas in the Central Philippines; and the 32 MW Villasiga unit inAntique, a 150 MW complex in Bulanog-Batang in Bukidnon in Mindanao;the 300 MW Pulangi project in Bukidnon and the 224 MW Agus III in Lanaodel Sur.* The Board of Investments has approved tax breaks for two geothermalpower projects to be built by PNOC-Energy Development Corp. One is aPS6.04bn geothermal steam field and a 120 MW power plant in Mount Laboin Camarines, south of Manila. The other project is a PS2.5bngeothermal steam field and power plant in Negros in the centralPhilippines. It has a capacity of 40 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996W'HOUSE SETTLEMENT STILL FACES SUPREME COURT CHALLENGEThe infamous saga of the Westinghouse-built Bataan nuclear powerstation dispute may be 99% over but there remains a niggling 1% that isstill to be resolved before the case can truly be said to be settled.The legality of the recent out-of-court settlement of the disputebetween Manila and the US company (over bribe allegations stemming fromthe 1976 contract award by the Marcos government to Westinghouse) isstill under challenge in the Supreme Court.Some senators insist the settlement has to be ratified by them, but theNational Power Corp. has formally lifted the ban on power equipmentmanufactured or licenced by Westinghouse.The lifting of the ban was jointly agreed by the two sides. It pavesthe way for a second bidding at a still-unspecified date for a BOTcontract covering a gas-fired project in Ilijan in Batangas.The first bidding for what was then a 1,200 MW gas-fired power contractwent to Hong Kong's CEPA in venture with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries(MHI).The bid award was cancelled because of allegations that MHI was usingWestinghouse technology in its turbine equipment. Another bidder, AESTranspower Corp., was also cited as a user of the offending technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PLN ALLOCATES $94M FOR SOUTH SULAWESI HYDRO PLANTState-owned electricity company PT PLN plans to spend $94m on theconstruction of a 74.8 MW hydro-electric power plant near Palu, CentralSulawesi.Construction of the plant is due to commence in 1999 and to becompleted in 2003, the official Indonesian news agency Antara reportedin late December.  To be known as Palu-3, the plant will use water fromLake Lindu, located 40km south of Palu at an altitude of 960m above sealevel.  The lake has a surface area of 35.4 square kilometres, with anormal debit of 16.5 cubic metres.Palu-3 will be Central Sulawesi's largest hydro-power plant to date.Evidently anxious to avoid the civil unrest that has accompaniedprevious dam projects, PLN abandoned an earlier plan for Palu-3, whichwould have seen the lake's water level rise by 2m, submerging 274.5haof cultivated land and 164 houses.The head of PLN's Palu office was quoted as saying that the projectwould not take any land from the local population nor damage theenvironment in any way, notwithstanding is location with the Lore-Kalamanta National Park.A 983m pipeline with a diameter of 2.6m will channel the lake's watersto 373m drop at which the turbines will be located.The primary recipient of the electricity generated will be a cementplant in the town of Donggala, which lies in the hills to the west ofPalu.  The cement plant will require at least 90 MW.  The difference isto be made up by electricity from a diesel-powered plant in Silae, WestPalu.The Silae plant currently has a capacity of 32.7 MW, which is scheduledto be raised by 100 MW in the course of this year.PLN's cost estimate for the project does not include a 46.5 km 150 kVatransmission line linking the power station with Palu.Central Sulawesi's electricity demand is projected to reach 148.2 MW by2003.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PGN SIGNS $1.3BN DEAL WITH BRIGHTON LTDState-owned gas company PT Gas Negara has signed a $1.3bn contract withBrighton Ltd for the supply of gas to the latter's planned 600 MWcombined cycle power plant on Batam Island in Riau province.Under the contract, Gas Negara will supply 60,000 standard cubic feetper day to the Brighton plant for a period of 20 years.  The gas is tobe delivered through the Asmera-Duri-Batam pipeline, currently beingtendered.The pipeline project is to be funded jointly by the Asian DevelopmentBank, the Japan Export-Import Bank, the European Development Bank andGas Negara.Construction of the Brighton plant is due to commence in 1998.  It isscheduled to begin commercial operations in 1999, with an initialcapacity of 150 MW.  To that stage, the project is said to involve aninvestment of $100m.  The plant's capacity is to be expanded later to600 MW, at an estimated additional investment of $500m.Brighton, which is 55% owned by President Suharto's second son BambangTrihatmojo, is registered in Western Samoa.  The Batam power station isbeing constructed together with Indonesian company PT Kresna Tara,which is also 55% owned by Mr Trihatmojo.Other partners in the project are Johanes Kotjo, Bambang Riyadi Soegamaand Wisma Suhardono.Located 20 km south of Singapore, Batam Island is growing rapidly as anexport-oriented industrial zone.  As of June 1995 investment on Batamhad reached $5.3bn.  Exports from the island between January and June1995 were worth $1.055bn, as compared with $1.339bn for the whole of1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TENAGA HOPES FOR TARIFFS DECISION BY EARLY SPRINGTenaga Nasional, the state-owned power utility, said it is optimisticthat the government will decide on its proposed restructuring of powertariffs by the first quarter.Ani bin Arope, the executive chairman, said the utility had submitted a"rebalancing proposal" on tariff rates but declined to give details.The move, first announced months ago, follows a government decisionearlier to turn thumbs down to a request for tariff hikes. The moveraised questions about Tenaga's freedom to implement tariff formulaswhich affect its earnings and profits.Ani said the new proposal takes into consideration the ration of powerconsumer groups. "Domestic users now accounts for 40% of our customersand the manufacturing sector 60%. It was the other way roundpreviously, he said.The government had earlier suggested to Tenaga that it raise theminimum rate charged for residential users under its tariffrestructuring proposal. Tariff hikes are important as Tenaga has signedcontracts to buy power from Malaysia's five private power producers;without higher rates the state group will have to absorb the costsinstead of being able to pass them on the consumers.Ani said Tenaga spent up to M$1bn for buying power last year and theamount would rise to an estimated M$1bn in 1996. Tenaga reported apretax profit of M$1.64bn for the year-ended August 31, down 17% fromM$1.98bn the year before. This year's result, while nothing to writehome about, should be "no worse" than that recorded in 1995.In the last financial year, Ani said Tenaga spent some M$3.4bn oninfrastructure. "We will spend M$4bn a year up to 2000 oninfrastructure." He said the country's power demand was growing at 12%-15% a year.Ani said Tenaga had signed an agreement to take a 20% stake in a $200mpower project in Pakistan. It was also in final negotiations for itsproposed 25% equity stake in a power project in Karnataka, India.Tenaga also was considering an offer to take up a 15% stake in theM$15bn Bakun hydropower project in Sarawak, a scheme, because of itsdeforestation implications, which promises to be one of the mostcontroversial power schemes in Asia, and which has raised a chorus ofinternational disapproval and opprobrium.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TENDERS IMMINENT FOR BAKUN MEGA HYDROPOWER SCHEMEThe Bakun Hydroelectric Corp. (BHC), the brainchild of Ting Pek Khiing,the Sarawak timber baron, says it will issue its first tenders for theM$15bn ($5.9bn) Bakun hydropower dam this month. The project will havea capacity of more than 2,000 MW, including a 650 km subseatransmission line from Sarawak to the Malaysia peninsula.The company says it has already awarded a M$247m ($97m) contract toDong Ah Construction of South Korea to divert a river at the dam sitekeep in the Borneo rainforests. Lahmeyer of Germany has been awardedthe engineering consultancy contract. Sixteen companies are claimed tobe positioning themselves to bid for the main engineering andconstruction contracts.The company says that construction will start in May, pending approvalof an Environmental Impact Assessment from a pro-dam Sarawak stategovernment, which will be a stakeholder in the project. The key playeris Ting's Ekran Bhd, which owns a controlling stake in BHC. It saidthat a rights (new shares for old) and bond issue were still underpreparation and were not yet ready for shareholder approval.The project has been roundly criticised by virtually everyenvironmental group looking into it because of the damaging effects ofthe massive deforestation, the impracticality of the scheme being sofar from major population centres and the dislocation of localtribespeople. It is estimated that the dislocation could affect 10,000people.Nevertheless, the scheme is going ahead, not least because of thesupport of the government, which, through Tenaga Nasional, the state-owned utility, will be a part shareholder, as will the national pensionfund. Ting and Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad are also close friends.Ekran spokesman Sunny Khoo said recently that the company hoped toraise M$400m from the sale of 8m cu. m of logs. Last August, thecompany sold the rights to 3m cu. m of timber to a company calledUltimate Strategies Bhd for M$405m. Khoo said at the time that if thecompany could not get the price it wanted for the timber "then we willlog it ourselves." The sam site, and the timber on it, covers 80,000hectares.But according to a Kuala Lumpur-based foreign broker, "It is difficultto see exactly who will want to put their money into Bakun. Localinvestors who enjoy a gamble might be interested but then they wanttheir money back fast. The payback from Bakun could stretch well intothe next century."Nevertheless, the government deems the project essential because ofanticipated electricity shortfalls in the next century. The governmentrecently stated it would not review or reschedule mega projects itconsidered critical for continued economic development.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PROTESTS FORCE SHIFT OF WASTE POWER SITEThe cabinet has decided to relocate the controversial waste-to-energypower plant in the northern province of Chiang Mal in a move to end theyear-long protest by locals.The decision was made on December 26 as protest against the garbage-lignite fired power house seemed to peak as some 300 villagers fromHang Dong district, where the 20 MW facility was to be built, staged arally at Government House in Bangkok.The decision is a defeat for the Government, and the ProvincialElectricity Authority (PEA), who failed to convince the local people,after a public relations stint, that the project was environmentallyfriendly.Speaking after the Cabinet meeting, Technology and Environment MinisterYingphan Manasikarn insisted the cabinet's resolution does not mean thescrapping of the project, sponsored by PEA.He said the cabinet has taken a view that the project should remainbecause it would help solve Chiang Mai city's mounting garbage problemswhile contributing to the provision of electric power.  It would berelocated to other districts in the province provided that localsagree, Yingphan said.Deputy Interior Minister Kiatchai Chalchawarat, who oversees PEA saidcertain areas in San Sai and San Pa Tong districts of Chiang Mai may bealternative sites for the facility.At one point four months ago, Kiatchai, who was sent to brief some5,000 residents about the project at Hang Dong, narrowly escaped anattack by a mob of villagers angered by the government's refusal toscrap the scheme.Villagers feared that their backyard would be turned into a dumpingsite of garbage and the combustion of rubbish and the lignite wouldcreate adverse environmental impact to their neighbourhood.For the time being, it is not known the extent of effect the Cabinet'sresolution has on the $57.2m contract PEA awarded last March toKvaerner EnviroPower AB of Sweden to build the plant (PiA 173, Apr 3).Yingphan only said that PEA would need to negotiate with Swedishoffshoot of Norwegian Kvaerner industrial group about the new operatingenvironment.The scheme was earlier set to come on line on December 5, 1996.  Butopposition has delayed construction for nearly a year, making itimpossible to achieve that date.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DSM TO GET $40MThailand will earmark 1bn baht ($40m) budget for its demand sidemanagement (DSM) project in 1996 as part of the continuation of itsenergy conservation programme.  According to Sithiporn Ratanopas, EGATDSM director, 300m baht will go towards advertisement to promote publicawareness on energy conservation.  The advertising effort will focus onpromoting energy-efficient electrical appliance like refrigerators, air-conditioners, ballasts and compact fluorescent bulbs.  The remaining700m baht fund will for efficiency testing of air conditioners andrefrigerators, and developing a thermal storage and efficient motorprogrammes.EGAT is attempting to replace 20m typical ballasts in hotels and largebuildings nationwide with those which can save up to 40% of electricityconsumption.  EGAT will also use an energy saving label campaign with7,00-27,000-BTU air conditioners in 1996.  The degree of energy-savingcapacity indication will vary from one to five.  In 1996, EGAT willbegin to import 20 watt compact fluorescent tubes, which will replaceconventional 100 watt bulb.   They will be sold 20% below import price. The volume of import will be 1.6m units, worth 306m baht.The power authority has spend 87m baht to promote "slim" fluorescentand energy-saving label campaigns in 1995.  The success of the twocampaign is a booster for EGAT to go further with its energyconservation campaign in 1996.  Sithiporn said the DSM project wouldhelp reduce Thailand's power consumption by 10%, or 100bn units peryear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996OLD HYDRO SCHEME GETS NEW UNITEGAT marked the completion of a 2.71 baht *$108.4m) scheme that furthermaximises the hydro benefits derived from Thailand's firsthydroelectric dam.The opening of the Lower Mae Ping project, an extension of the 31-year-old Bhumibol dam in the northwestern province of Tak, was officiated byHRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on December 28.An additional turbine generating unit, the eighth of Bhumibol and of apumped storage type, will beef up Bhumibol's combined installedgenerating capacity by 32% to 720.8 MW, starting this month to augmentpeak power supplies.The Lower Mae Ping dam was built across the Mae Ping river some 5 kmdownstream of the Bhumibol dam in the province's Sam Ngao district.  Itis 200 metres wide and eight metres high.  Construction began in June1991, but the cost inflated from 2.35bn baht to 2.71bn baht.The secondary dam helps to hold back the stream flowed through Bhumiboland the pumps divert part of the water back to the main dam by a pumpwhich will be operated during the off-peak period.EGAT director Somboon Manenava said the Lower Mae Ping dam could helpsto conserve about 450m cubic metres of water annually which would otherbe drained out from the system.  The project is capable of pumping back3.5m cubic metres of water each day back to the main Bhumibol dam forirrigation and power generation.Lower Mae Ping turbine generator was supplied by a consortium ofKvaerner Energy AS and ABB Power Generation Ltd.  The civil works wereundertaken by Vianini Lavori SpA.Meanwhile, as additional sites for developing new hydro have either runout or have been restricted by environmentalists' opposition, the Thaipower authority is turing to pumped storage to maximise benefits fromexisting dams.EGAT is now assessing he economic proposition of installing pumpedstorage systems at the Khirithan dam in Chanthaburi, the Chulabhorn damin the northeastern province of Chaiyaphum and Ta Tung Na dam in thewestern province Kanchanaburi.EGAT g-m Preecha Chungwatana said these possible pumped storage sitesare in various stages of study.  That of the Khirithan seems to be inthe most advanced phase with reports are mostly completed and a publicrelation campaign is being exercised to win approval from villagers.It is too early to say how EGAT would proceed with possible pumpedstorage projects nor to detail how much more electrical power they canrender, according to the EGAT chief.  The current installed generatingcapacity of Khirithan is 12.70 MW, 40 MW at Chulabhorn 40 MW and 38 MWat Ta Tung Na.EGAT has already completed two pumped storage projects, one at the SriNakarin dam in Kanchanaburi with installed capacity of 720 MW and morerecently at Bhumibol.A third pumped storage scheme now under construction is the LamTakhong, rated 1,000 MW, in Nakhon Ratchasima, some 200 km northeast ofBangkok.  The initial phase of the scheme with is slated to come online in stages beginning in the year 2000 (PiA 191, Dec 11).According to Preecha said the pumped storage hydroelectric projects areviewed generally as the best method to fully utilise the country'slimited hydro resources both for the purpose of power generation andirrigation.  EGAT has no firm plan to start any new dam projects.  Asat the end of November EGAT was operating 53 hydro generation unitswith a combined installed capacity of 2,690 MW, representing about 18%of EGAT's total installed capacity of 14,595 MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SETBACK FOR MALAY POWER EXPORTSMalaysia's bid to export electricity to Thailand has initially met withrejection from its potential Thai buyer, and the prospects forestablishing an agreement now seem remote.Preecha Chungwatana, EGAT's g-m said the basic power tariff and supplyterms offered by Tenaga Technology Perlis (TTG), part of Malaysia'sTenaga Nasional Bhd, are unacceptable.TTG proposed a base tariff of 6 cents/kWh at the delivery point on theThailand-Malaysia border as well as requiring EGAT to take delivery ofthe entire proposed load of 300 MW on a "fully despatchable" basis, ona firm and full continuous basis for the entire life of the long-termsupply contract.The EGAT chief said the proposed price is simply too high as it exceedsthe rate on which EGAT pays for electricity purchased from othersources such as Laos or for power generated from EGAT's own powerplants in Thailand.  The current base price of power EGAT buys fromLaos is around 4 cents/kWh.Furthermore, EGAT is only prepared to take the full proposed loadduring Thailand's peak afternoon/early evening power demand with aprovision to guarantee a minimum offtake of 50% - 60% of the totalproposed capacity at any time of the day.EGAT's reaction to the terms proposed by TTG could spell doom of thelarge natural gas-fired combined-cycle plant being planned by Tenaga innorthern Malaysian peninsula state of Perils near the Thai border.EGAT has already made its stance known to TTG and asked the Malaysianoutfit to sweeten its proposal and come up with a new offer later.  Butthe EGAT chief expressed doubts if TTG could reduce the offered powertariff further because the cost of power generation in Malaysia ishigh.According to Preecha, Malaysia initially wanted to sell its indigenousnatural gas to Thailand, but later opted to sell electricity generatedfrom its natural gas as this energy form provides greaterprofitability.  (PiA 178, June 12).The EGAT chief noted that Thailand, especially its southern region, maynot need to rely on the proposed power sales from Malaysia in the shortterm because of EGAT's surplus generating capacity in the region.  EGATpresently has a combined installed generating capacity of about 1,200MW in the region while demand is about 1,000 MW, therefore, he added.Meanwhile, Laos has continued to make new offers to sell electricityfrom several of its hydro electric power stations to EGAT.  Lately,Laos and groups of international companies have presented details ofNam Thuen I and Nam Ngum projects to EGAT officials, said Preecha.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996LAMPANG LIGNITE SCHEME MAY BE BACK ON AGAINEGAT is eyeing opportunities to revive a plan to build a huge powerhouse using indigenous lignite reserves in the northern province ofLampang.EGAT Chief Preecha Chungwatana pointed to the possibilities of revivingthe 2,400 MW project, now on the "indefinite" waiting list after beingshelved in 1924.  The process of reviving this multi-billion-dollarscheme could start as soon as EGAT succeeded in convincing authoritiesand the public that the lignite-fired power plant was indeedenvironmentally acceptable.EGAT's existing lignite-fuelled Mae Moh power station in this province,700 km north of Bangkok, has been in the centre of public criticism andprotests for causing pollution to its neighbourhood due to its emissionof sulphur dioxide and dust for several years.Over the past two years, EGAT has started to equip sulphur dioxidecontrol systems to six of the newer generating units at the plant.For the time being, there seems to be a good chance of proving that thelignite-fired power station can be environmentally friendly, given thatthe desulphurising systems installed in some generating units at MaeMoh have worked well in effectively curbing sulphur dioxide emission.The revival of the Lampang project is basically aimed at serving twopurposes.  First, to utilise the remaining lignite reserves at Mae Moh,estimated at some 600mt in the "mineable" reserve category.  Secondly,the additional generating capacity would enable EGAT to respond to thecountry's fast-growing electricity demand in the future.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NEW ADB PLEDGE TO BACK CHINESE HYDRO AT TING RIVERA total of 600 MW of peak power generating capacity, capable ofgenerating an average of 1,520 GWh of electricity a year, will be addedonto a major hydro scheme planned for the Ting River, in the MianhuatanValley in Fujiian Province, China, with the help of a $170m loan fromthe Asian Development Bank (ADB).The project, costing a total $721m, all of which - apart from the ADBloan - will be financed by Chinese loans and funds, is going to involvethe construction of: a 111-metre high, 302-metre long, roller-compacted-concrete gravity dam and gated spillway; an underground power stationwith four 150 MW turbine generator units and related tunnels; a shiphoist to enable barges of up to 500t capacity to pass safely over thecurrents at the dam site; and two single-circuit, and one double-circuit 220 kV transmission lines, with a total length of 360 km andsubstation facilities, connecting the new power station to the Fujiiangrid.According to Arun Adarkar, the ADB's US chief direct beneficiaries ofthe project will be industrial, residential and agricultural consumerswho now endure power shortages during peak hours, as a consequence ofthe province's rapid economic growth.  The latter averaged 13.8% a yearfrom 1985-1994.During the same period electricity generation in the province increasedalmost fourfold.  However this expansion failed to keep pace withdemand, and the Fujiian Province's Electric Power Bureau estimatedsupply shortages in 1994 of over 1,100 GWh, or 7.2% of annual sales.ADB reckons this may be an under-estimate.Meanwhile, indirect beneficiaries will be residents, and industrial andagricultural enterprises situated downstream on the Ting River.  Thesestand to gain because a reservoir is going to be created at the hydrosite, 64 square metres in size with a flow regulating storage capacityof 1,122m cubic metres.  However at the dam site itself an estimated36,000 people out of 41,000 living in the area will be displaced byflooding, and will have to be re-located.The project will help develop hydropower, a renewable resource, andreduce Fujiian's reliance on coal, which causes pollution and is mainlyimported.  At the end of 1994 the installed capacity of the FujiianPower Grid was 5,261 MW; 3,261 MW of this was provided by hydro plants(62%), and 2,000 MW by thermal plants (38%).  Only about 30% ofFujiian's hydro potential has been developed so far.As well as the $170m loan, ADB is providing $300,000 in technicalassistance to implement institutional reforms.  The underlying aim ofthese is to separate the management of the Fujiian Province's ElectricPower Bureau from the management of the Fujiian Province's government.In addition the technical assistance will be used to overhaul thestructure and levels of the Province's electricity tariffs.  ADBsources say this is an area where a lot of work has to be done asChina's electricity pricing system in general is still extremelydistorted and often relies on subsidies.The Mianhuatan Valley project will be the biggest of five-cascade hydroschemes on the Ting River.  The other four are: a 140 MW Qingxi plantin Guangdong Province, which has been commissioned; a 40 MW Jinshanproject which is under construction; and a 51 MW Huilong project and a30 MW Shang Hang project which will be constructed after 2000.The project confirms ADB's commitment to China.  Though a relativelynew borrower of the Bank, China is now the Bank's "biggest borrower"for power projects, ahead of all of ADB's other clients.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WEAK HK ECONOMY FORCES CLP TO TRIM OUTLAYChina Light and Power has revised down its capital expenditure forecastfor 1992-1999 from HK$54bn to HK$52bn.It is the second time within two years that CLP has had to revise downits capital expenditure.  In 1994 the company trimmed capitalexpenditure from HK$60bn to HK$54bn.The reason for the current revision is the same as that given two yearsago, a drop in consumer demand for electricity, according to thecompany.  The announcement was made recently at CLP's annual generalmeeting in Hong Kong.The fall in demand has meant that CLP has had to delay thecommissioning of the last four units of the Black Point Power stationuntil 2002.The first four units of the 2,500 MW power station will start beingphased in this year.CLP chairman Sir Sidney Gordon told the AGM that because of the drop indemand the company had decide not to take part in the Daya Bay twonuclear power plant at Ling Ao in Guangdong province.  Sir Sidney CLPhas had to react to the economic changes now taking place in Hong Kong.He said that over the past 12 months Hong Kong had experienced anunemployment rate of 3.6%, the highest in nine years; a slowing growthof gross domestic product to 4.8% and flat retail sales."From our information some 30 factories either relocated to China orshut down during the first six months of 1995, due to high operatingcosts in Hong Kong, especially wages and rental costs," Sir Sidneysaid, "and the trend is likely to continue.""All these point to the urgent need for Hong Kong to lower its coststructure in order to make it an affordable place in which to conductmanufacturing and commercial business," he said."Our core business in Hong Kong, a barometer of the local economy, isshowing signs of change.  Sales to the manufacturing sector, forinstance, which used to form the backbone of our business andcontributing more than a third of our total sales, has dropped to halfthat figure and is likely to go down even further over the next fewyears."He said that annual growth in overall sales is expected to hoverbetween 3% and 5.5% in line with GDP forecasts.Sir Sidney said CLP acknowledged there was a problem, and the company'ssenior management had spent the last 18 months carrying out acomprehensive review of the company's position.  The result has been a`macro-strategic plan' and a detailed' change plan.'"The plans will focus on improving the utilisation of assets andresources, streamlining procedures and setting and achieving aperformance target benchmarked to world's best practices," he said."At the same time we are leveraging our core skills in the engineeringand finance streams to develop new businesses in China and other partsof Asia."In essence the strategic plans calls for the company's management totake active steps to ensure the continued success of the core businessin Hong Kong and to explore investment opportunities elsewhere."Sir Sidney said that due to the slowing down in local demand thecompany had decided to reduce the size or defer the commissioning datesof various power generating and transmission projects which shouldresult in large savings.The delaying in commissioning of the last four units of the gas-firedBlack Point is part of the cost-saving exercise.Sir Sidney said CLP intended to stretch the transmission anddistribution system by making it "work harder".  In doing so, headmitted that there would be an "element of risk which, whilstmanageable for a short period, should not be either overlooked orforgotten.""In addition, management has imposed stringent control on manpower andother operational expenses which we believe will bring aboutsignificant savings by the end of the decade," he said.On tariff increases, Sir Sidney said that "over the next few yearstariff increases will be below the prevailing inflation rate.  This isno small commitment in view of the fact that in the past 10 years ourbasic tariff has lagged behind inflation by nearly 80%," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA PIPING NATURAL GAS TO HONG KONGChina has begun piping natural gas to Hong Kong under a 20-year termcontract to feed the territory's power industry starting January 1,officials from state-owned China National Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC)said.  The gas is sourced from the Yacheng 13-1 field, located in theSouth China Sea.  The field has an annual production of about 3.4bncubic metres of gas.  A total of 2.9m will be piped to Hong Kong via a790 km pipeline, completed in June last year.  The remaining 0.5bn ofgas will be supplied to China's Hainan power station and chemicalplants via another 91 km pipeline.  Yacheng 13-1 development project is51% owned by CNOOC, 14.3% by Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Corpand 34.7% by Arco China.  The term supply into Hong Kong was signedwith Castle Peak Power Corp, a 50-50 joint venture between China Lightand Power and Exxon.  The piped gas will be used to feed the CLPs BlackPoint Power station in Hong Kong.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MAJOR POWER SECTOR SHAKEUPThe Chinese government is to establish a National Power Corp tosupervise the supply of electricity throughout the country.According to a report in the China Daily recently, the Ministry ofPower Industry is to be dissolved within the next few months and itsfunctions transferred to the corporation.Power Industry Minister, Shi Dazhen made the announcement at a recentconference in Beijing on China's power industry.Although details are not clear, it is understood that the governmentwants to separate the functions of enterprise from that of government.According to the China Daily report the supervision of the industrywill be handled by the State Planning Commission and the State Economicand Trade Commission while the China Electricity Council will act in anadvisory capacity between government, industry and enterprises.  TheNational Power Corp will be the first step in the restructuringprocess.According to the report the National Power Corp will be the umbrella,or parent, with regional companies as its subsidiaries.  Regionalcompanies will be responsible for provincial power companies who inturn will be responsible for local power plants.Science research and design institutes and colleges will become partsof the National Power Corp and relations between them will beestablished on the basis of property ownership.Shi said China had installed power generators with a capacity of 75,000MW over the past five years, including hydropower machines with 13,000MW capacity.  Production of electricity has increased on an averagegrowth of 9.8% in the last five years, compared with 8.8% during 1986-1990.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996LOAN FOR LING AOBritain's ECGD has announced support for a contract won by GEC Alsthomin connection with the Ling Ao Nuclear Power Station being built inGuangdong Province.ECGD is providing a repayment guarantee for a #351.5m loan by asyndicate of banks led by West Merchant Bank as arranger, agent bankand principal lender.  The loan is being extended to the StateDevelopment Bank of China to help finance the project.GEC Alsthom has been awarded the contract by Ling Ao Nuclear Power Co.The contractor, which has its UK headquarters in Manchester will beresponsible for the design and supply of 2 x 1,000 MW steam turbinegenerator units and balance of plant for the conventional island of thestation.GEC Alsthom also supplied similar equipment for China's first nuclearpower station at Daya Bay, which was also supported by ECGD.  Fullcommissioning is planned for the year 2003.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996N-PROBLEMS AT JAPC, TOHOKUJapan Atomic Power Co (JAPC) and Tohoku Electric Power Co haveencountered problems that required the shutting down of reactors latelast month.  JAPC's Tokai reactor was shut down following a seawaterleakage; Tohoku Electric's Onagawa-2 BWR in Miyagi was shut down due toa water leak.The 825 MW Onagawa reactor is new and started commercial operationslast summer. Although the problems were minor, the closures were caught(See Feature) in the wake of publicity connected with the shutdown ofthe Monju prototype FBR .Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SUMITOMO METAL PLANS TO MOVE INTO POWER SECTORSumitomo Metal Industries, based in Osaka, intends to enter theelectric power wholesaling business by selling excess power that itgenerates at its steel mills in Ibaraki, Osaka and Kansai prefectures.The Kachima facility, Ibaraki, would sell power to Tepco, while theother two facilities would sell to Kansai Electric if the companysubmits successful bids to supply power.Other steelmakers that are interested in the business are KawasakiSteel, Nippon Steel and Kobe Steel. Energy-related companiesconsidering moves to enter the power wholesale sector include TomenCorp., Japan Energy Corp. and Nippon Oil Co.Moreover, Mitsubishi Materials Corp. is the first Japanese nonferrousmetal company to announce a plan to venture into the business. It hopesto construct a coal-burning plant as large as 100 MW to sell power toNagoya-based Chubu Electric. Another option for Mitsubishi Materials isto construct a coal burning facility that would supply Kyushu Electric,which is headquartered in Fukuoka. In either case, the facility wouldbe constructed at an existing nonferrous metal or cement factory site.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DEMAND TO GROW 0.8%Japan's electricity demand for this fiscal year ending March 31 isexpected to grow by a mere 0.8% from the previous year to 723.79bnkilowatt hours, an industry research institute said.  Demand from largeindustrial users is low in 1995/96, as a sluggishness domestic economyhas forced them to cut production because of growing inventories, theResearch Institute of Electric Power Industry said in a report.Electricity demand in fiscal 1996/97 is forecast to rise by 1.9% to737.41bn kWh.  An anticipated slight economic recovery in 1996/97 isexpected to drive up demand from large industrial users, the reportsaid.If Japan goes through an exceptionally hot summer in 1996/97, as in1994/95, electricity demand will surge by 4.4% from the previous year,it said.  In electricity demand soared 7.4% from a year earlier.Power generation in November rose 3.9% year-on-year to 65bn kWh, theFederation of Electric Power Companies reported.The federation said the increase in November electricity generation wasdue to lower temperatures compared with a year earlier, which pushed upheating demand.Of the total electricity generation in November, nuclear powergeneration by Japan's nine major electric power companies gained 13.8%from the same period last year to 21.6bn kWh.Hydropower generation surged 20.5% year-on-year to 3.5bn kWh.  The jumpreflects extremely low hydropower generation last November because ofwater shortages.Thermal power generation fell 4.7% due to the increase in nuclear powergeneration, to 32.3bn kWh.Japan's power utilities burnt 1.30m kilolitres (kl) of heavy fuel oilfor electricity during November, 1.47m kl of crude oil, 2.33m kl ofliquefied natural gas and 47,669 kl of naphtha, the federation said.The companies consumed a total of 1.85mt of coal in November.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996JAPANESE TO BUILD THREE HYDROELECTRIC PLANTSA Japanese government council has approved plans to start buildingthree hydroelectric plants and one thermal power plant during the yearending next March.  The projects approved by the Electric PowerDevelopment Coordination Council include a hydroelectric power plant inGifu Prefecture to be built by Chubu Electric Power Co. and a thermalplant by Hokuriku Electric Power Co. in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture,Kyodo quoted council officials as saying.  The officials were quoted assaying the new projects have a total annual output capacity of 2,000MW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ENTERGY LOCKS UP CITIPOWEREntergy Corp. of the US has completed its takeover for Citipower, thelast of five power distributors sold off by the Victoria government.The deal had been expected. Entergy had been named as the preferredbuyer and will pay a total of A$1.75bn, which includes a capitalpayment of A$1.58bn and franchise fees with a present value of A$173m.Despite the apparent `sell out' to foreign interests - all fivedistributors were sold to US companies - the deal is regarded as asuccess for Victoria state. It has raised A$9bn, more than domesticanalysts had predicted. A total of $1.3bn of the Citipower sale will gotowards paying off the state's debts.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WHOLESALE PRICING CLAIMED TO BE `ANTI-COMPETITIVE'Major power users who make up 30% of New Zealand demand believe interimwholesale pricing arrangements are "highly anti-competitive." They saythere are better ways to provide a learning environment until fullwholesale competition comes in later in 1996.Competition watchdog, the Commerce Commission, on the other hand hasformed a preliminary view that the benefits to the public from theinterim rules will outweigh any lessening of competition. However, itwill not issue a final opinion until after public hearings on January18-19.The rules govern the relationship between Electricity Corp. of NewZealand (ECNZ), and Contact Energy, the new state-owned power firmbeing created by splitting ECNZ. The market will be run by EMCO, theElectricity Market Company, at present a joint venture of ECNZ,TransPower (which operates the grid) and the Electricity SupplyAssociation of New Zealand. Contact is expected to buy part of ECNZ'sEMCO stake.In a submission put to the Commission before it issued its preliminaryview, the Major Electricity Users Group (MEUG) says it is particularlyconcerned that the anti-competitive aspects of the interim arrangementswill carry over into the final rules for the wholesale electricitymarket. This group argues that the interim supply agreement and theasset sale and purchase agreement between ECNZ and Contact preserveECNZ's existing level of dominance in the market.MEUG disagrees that six months of trial is necessary. As there is nocertainty that these rates will flow through to become the final rules,it suggests the market could invest time and skills in managing theinterim, only to find that experience had become redundant. It suggestspaper trials should be looked at as an alternative.A different view has been put by the country's largest company,Fletcher Challenge, which is both a user and a utilities investor. Itsees the proposed rules As a "practical method of moving forward" on aninterim basis. Like others, however, it insists they should only beinterim. It wants a "drop dead" clause before the date at which theelectricity from an independent power plant is due to be dispatchedbecause the rules provide no incentive for third party generation.The Commerce Commission is considering the bridging pricing rules toapply to two interim phases. The first runs to April 6 from the date ofsettlement (probably February 1) at the sale of generating plant by theECNZ to Contact Energy. The major change during this period will be thedevelopment of competition between Contact and ECNZ to run whichever isthe marginal power station.In the second phase to end-September, the notified change in ECNZ'senergy supply contracts will be set on a day-ahead rather than a week-ahead basis, the charge will be calculated using actual rather thanforecast demand and the actual price paid by power purchasers will becalculated from the marginal cost of the last station used to meetactual demand.Arrangements for full competition after that have not yet beenfinalised. Key features are expected to be that rather than ECNZforming contracts with its customers, generators and purchasers willcontract with a pool; purchasers will be for electricity; that day-ahead price will reflect the market clearing price based on bids to buyand offers to sell; that the cap on the price of electricity in forceup to end-September will disappear; and that generators and purchaserswill be able to contract outside the pool and to trade their position.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PACHYDRO SHARE PLACEMENTPacific Hydro Ltd., the power generator, will place A$10m worth ofshares and convertible notes with the Development Australia Fund. Thiswill replace an A$10m placement that had been scheduled to go toInfratil Australia Ltd, but which did not proceed because the partiescould not agree terms sought by Infratil. Pacific Hydro said it willplace A$7m in shares issued at 70 cents each and A$3m of convertiblenotes, also issued at 70 cents each.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SAUDIA ARABIAN BUDGETSaudia Arabia, the world's largest oil producer and exporter, hasannounced its 1996 budget, which leaves expenditure unchanged from lastyear at 150bn riyals ($40bn) but a slightly higher deficit of 18.5bnriyals. The 1995 deficit has been estimated at 15bn riyals, but finalfigures have not been announced. For the electricity sector, thisyear's revenues and expenditures was put at 610.5m riyals. The sectoris involved in several multi-billion dollar power generation projectsinvolving high power equipment imports. Saudi produces 8m b/d, of which7m b/d are exported. It is understood that Saudi planners willcalculate oil revenue for this year $14/bbl, unchanged from last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SAUDI ELECTRIC COMPANY LOSSThe Saudi Consolidated Electric Company-Central says its net loss inthe six months ending November rose 12% compared with a year earlier.Figures released by the company show a 301.3m riyal loss ($80.3m) inthe first half of the current islamic year, up from 268.3m riyals forthe same period last year. Total income rose to 1.16 bn riyals from1.14bn and costs grew to 1.46bn riyals from 1.41bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PROJECT TO LINK THE GULF STATES' GRIDSThe UAE next month will issue a tender for a 475m dirham ($128m)project to link the Gulf states' electricity grids, reports al-Khaleejdaily newspaper. It said the Electricity Ministry was studying a finalreport on the project, which will raise grid capacity from 33 kV to 132kV in an effort to meet the country's power needs over the next 20years. Foreign and local companies have won contracts for major UAEelectricity contracts throughout the seven emirates.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IRANIAN FUSION AND ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCHThe Iranian government says it is pressing ahead with fusion and otheralternative energy research, despite US pressures against the country.President Rafsanjani said that work was going ahead despite efforts bythe US and others "that do not want . . . Iran to reach its worthyplace in the use of new energies. . . . " Work was continuing on theBushehr nuclear power plant, to be rebuilt by Russia under a $800mdeal. The US has imposed a trade and investment ban against Iran sinceJune.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BP TO DEVELOP GAS RESERVES IN THE SAHARABP has struck a $3.5bn gas deal with Sonatrach and the Algeriangovernment to develop reserves deep in the Sahara. The deal will boostBP's worldwide gas production by 30%. The site of the development isnear In Salah, deep in central Algeria and far distant from the civilwar. The joint venture will give BP access to the European gas market.The venture will sell some 10bn cu. m of gas per year into southernEurope via the Transmed pipeline into Italy and the under-constructionpipeline between Morocco and Spain. Sonatrach already exports 30bn cu.m of gas, mainly via Italy.John Browne, BP Exploration Director, said the deal was the first ofits type signed with Sonatrach, the sole gas producer in Algeria, forthe last 30 years. Under the deal BP will take 30% of the net afterexpenses of the gas to be sold. Under a typical production-sharingcontract, the foreign oil company is likely to earn 15% of the net.BP's favourable terms stems from Algeria's prolonged civil strife Andthe high political risk.Other companies are gathering round too. Exxon is starting talks on asimilar gas development deal. Ammar Makhloufi, the Energy Minister,said the government would like to see two or three major projectsemerge in the In Salah area. Algeria is said to be anxious for US andBritish involvement in the sector, now dominated by French and Italiancompanies.  Other companies, such as Total and Repsol of France weresaid to be in `negociation avancee' to develop a field, known as TFT(Tin Fouye Tabankort), close to the Libyan border and several hundredkilometres from the BP field., according to Al-Hayat newspaper. Thisfield is said to contain commercial quantities of natural gas (144bncu. m); LPG (15.6m tonnes) and condensates (16.6mt).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BANGLADESH GAS DISCOVERYPetroBangla's subsidiary Bapex has made a `very significant' gasdiscovery in the southern islands on the tip of the Bay of Bengal, thefirst gas fiend in the area. The site is at Bhola, and the field willincrease the country's known reserves by 10%. Reserves at present are10,000bn standard cubic feet, says Khandaker Mosharraf Hossain, theEnergy Minister. The field will be Bangladesh's 18th commercial fieldAs part of its liberalisation, the government in 1993 offered severalof the country's 23 blocks for production-sharing. Domestic demand isexpected to rise eight-fold by 2020 to 5.5m cu. f/d. Among explorationgroups are Occidental, Cairns Energy and Holland Sea Search and RexwoodOkland of the US.  Some 43% of the country's gas is used for the powersector, 88% of which are gas-fired; 34% is used as feedstock to thefertiliser industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996VIETNAM OIL PRODUCTS IMPORT QUOTAVietnam's Ministry of Trade has set the oil products import quota for1996 at 4.7mt, up from 4.5mt in 1995. The quota for crude andcondensates with a low paraffin content was set at 200,000t. Theministry has allocated imports for diesel at 2.3mt, up from 1.04mt lastyear; gasoline at 960,000t, up from 680,000t, fuel oil at 890,000t,kerosene at 300,000t and aviation fuel at 250,000t. Vietnam's mainimporter is Petrolimex, which was given a 3.1mt quota for oil products,up from 2.8mt in 1995. Petrolimex's diesel quota was set at 1.47mt,gasoline at 700,000t, fuel oil at 680,000t, kerosene at 150,000t andjet fuel at 100,000t.Last December, Petrolimex signed an annual term contract with KuwaitPetroleum Corp to lift 500,000t of 1% sulphur diesel and 80,000t of jetfuel starting this month. Petrolimex's remaining requirements will bemet through quarterly tender invitations and spot purchases. Thebalance of imports will be handled by other companies, such as Petex,Vietnam Airline Petroleum Co., and a new oil marketing firm,PetroVietnam Oil Processing, Distribution and Marketing Co. (PVPDC).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PETRONAS STAKE IN REFINERY IN VIETNAMPetronas of Malaysia will take a 30% stake in a $1.2bn oil refineryunder construction in central coastal Vietnam, says company prexyHassan Marican. The acquisition will be made in partnership with Conocoof the US and South Korea's LG Group. The refinery will have a capacityof 130,000 b/d and is located at Dung Quat Bay, 130 km south of Danang.The three would replace Total, which withdrew from the project lastyear. It had sought to build the refinery at Vung Tau in the south,where most exploration is being done. Hassan declined to disclosefinancial details of the deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PHILIPPINES OIL PRICE STABILISATION FUNDPNOC plans to inject Ps8.6bn in the depleted oil price stabilisationfund, says Energy Secretary Francisco Viray. He said Ps5bn will bereleased for the oil fund soon, but state-owned PNOC will have to findother sources for the remaining balance of Ps3.6bn. The fund was set upby the government in the 1980s to protect consumers from wild swings inworld oil prices and forex problems. Oil companies give money to thefund if world oil prices are soft and if the peso is strong versus thedollar, then draw against it if the opposite occurs.With the rise in crude prices and a weakening of the peso, the fund hasbeen dwindling and a deficit of Ps7.6bn was reached by year-end. Toshore it up, the country's three main oil groups, Petron Corp,Pilipinas Shell Petroleum; and Caltex Philippines have asked thegovernment to hike the price of oil products, which it did so last weekby three centavos per litre.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996INDONESIAN CILACAP REFINERYThe giant Cilacap refinery will operate at 200,000 b/d, or about 70% ofits 300,000 b/d capacity until May 1996, says Pertamina. Full capacitywill be restored by May. The refinery has been hampered by limitedstorage space following the destruction by fire of seven kerosene andnaphtha tanks last October. Construction work to replace the storagetanks was under way and would be completed by early 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MALAYSIAN CONTROVERSY OVER OIL DISCOVERIESMalaysia is embroiled in controversy as to whether it is preventingforeign companies from bringing new oil discoveries into commercialproduction. Petronas chairman Azizan Zainul Abidin denies that this isso. "They (foreign oil majors) paid the risk money for exploration andif they make a discovery and that discovery is commercial, there is noway we can stop that." Petronas president Hassan Marican added that itwas not possible for Petronas to turn away development plans once acontractor declares commerciality. But there is much grousing abroad,with foreign oil company managers saying Petronas stalls the process bybureaucratic foot dragging over approvals for budgets and fielddevelopment plans, including types of platforms, pipelines and othertechnical issues. "Technically they are right, you can declare a fieldcommercial," said one manager. "And once you do that the clock startsticking on the lease."Over the past decade, foreign oil groups have found 2.4bn bbl of oiland equivalent gas in Malaysia, 20% of Malaysia's remaining recoverablereserves,but none has been put into production, says Wood Mackenzie.The 2.4bn bbl of new petroleum finds were discovered by 16 companies.But since Malaysia offered its first production-sharing contracts toforeign groups in the 1970s, only Shell and Esso, the original twocontractors, are in production. Of the 16, ten have closed theiroffices in Malaysia. Under a standard production-sharing contract,Petronas is entitled to 85% of all the oil produced, once the foreignpartner recovers costs. The terms are considered among the mostunfavourable to foreign partners. But analysts point out thatproduction costs are cheap, which is what makes the market reasonablyattractive.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA SEEKING FOREIGN CAPITAL TO FUND OILFIELDChina's first joint venture investment bank, the China InternationalCapital Corp., is seeking Yn6bn ($750m) in foreign capital to fund thefurther development of a large oilfield in Jilin province. The bank isa venture between Morgan Stanley, China's Bank of Construction, andsmaller shareholders including Singapore Investment Corp. Cal Jinyongtold the Financial Times that the bank was sole financial adviser tothe Jilin development. Funds would be raised  in the next five years tolift production at the field, where reserves are estimated at 170mtonnes.  Planned output would be 2mt; CICC might take a small stake inthe venture, but wants large oil companies as equity partners. Morganshas a 35% stake in CICC, the Bank of Construction 42.5% and the balanceis spread among the others.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CHINA PLANNING TO BECOME MORE ACTIVE ABROADChina is planning to become more active abroad in oil exploration inorder to counterbalance its own weak productivity in this sector, saysChina News. It plans to produce 10mt of crude by 2000 and 20mt a decadelater. It is looking at the Middle East and Russia, mainly centralAsia, says Zhou Yongkang, vice-president of China National PetroleumCorp. Meanwhile geologists have discovered natural gas reservesestimated at 10cu. m in Taicang in Jiangsu province., Initial surveyand exploration has shown the field is only 50 metres underground withgas of a high quality suitable for industrial and household use. Nodetails were given.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996KOREA COULD PLAY ROLE IN OPENING RUSSIAN GAS RESERVESING Barings Bank says that Korea, rather than Japan, could play apivotal role in opening up Russian far eastern gas reserves. It is anatural LNG market and lifts large amounts of LNG from the Middle Eastand South East Asia. Far Eastern reserves would be virtually in its ownback garden and would give it greater diversity of supply. According tothe report, Seoul wants to boost relations with Russia and China andwould welcome a natural gas pipeline, which would be a symbol ofregional co-operation.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN ASIA via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SOUTH KOREAN ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDSSouth Korea has toughened environmental standards by lowering thesulphur content in diesel fuel, effective January. Local oil refinersnow have to sell diesel with less than 0.1% sulphur compared with theprevious 0.2%. The content will be further lowered to a maximum of0.05% in 1998, said the Energy Minister. It also said it will graduallyreduce the sulphur content in kerosene, currently set at a maximum of0.08%.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-13IA086-000616-B014-173http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001545 text/html 111539HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:13:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:01 GMTContent-length: 111351Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey06.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN EUROPE via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CLO CONCEDES ALL TO ENEL (917 words) COMMISSION STRENGTHENS IEM RESOLVE (1210 words) WIJERS PROPOSES DRIVE TO PRIVATISE (1242 words) TAXING TIMES FOR NORWAY (677 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW FOOTING THE NUCLEAR BILL (1232 words) AUSTRIAN ENERGY TAXES (202 words) OKA TO BE PARTIALLY PRIVATISED (262 words) REGULATION OF ELECTRICITY TARIFFS (207 words) RESULTS FROM THE FEDERAL VERBUND (317 words) VERBUND PARTICIPATION IN RETAIL MARKETS (239 words) SALE OF SHARES IN VIW CHALLENGED (105 words) AUSTRIAN UTILITIES TO ESTABLISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (126 words) SLUMP IN POWER CONSUMPTION IN BELGIUM (613 words) DANISH CHP REPORT (539 words) NEWS EIB LOAN FOR HEAT/POWER PLANT IN DENMARK (58 words) ELECTRICITY INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND GREECE (142 words) ENERGY TAXES (165 words) CGT CALLS FOR FRESH ACTION (227 words) FRENCH WINDPOWER PILOT PROGRAMME (163 words) LA MANCHE NUCLEAR WASTE DUMP (125 words) FUEL CONSUMPTION IN ITALIAN POWER STATIONS (225 words) ENEL RAISES INTERNATIONAL PROFILE (367 words) ABB ANNOUNCES CONTRACT IN ITALY (70 words) EDF WITH EDISON PURCHASE 75% OF ISE (199 words) DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY IN THE NETHERLANDS (292 words) PNEM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH WINDFARMERS (172 words) NORWEGIAN-SWEDISH POWER BOURSE (337 words) PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICIDADE DE PORTUGAL (339 words) HEAVY RAIN FILLS PORTUGAL'S HYDRO-ELECTRIC DAMS (248 words) SPAIN'S 1996 ELECTRICITY TARIFFS FROZEN (472 words) ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN SPAIN (172 words) BASQUE PLANS TO ACHIEVE ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENCY (518 words) ENHER COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF HIDRUNA (95 words) THIRD WIND FARM AT TARIFA (208 words) SPAIN'S NEW CONNECTION WITH PORTUGAL (79 words) SPAIN'S NUCLEAR MORATORIUM DEBT (200 words) ENDESA AND SEVILLANA PULLING OUT OF CERSA (258 words) ENDESA TO BUILD SPAIN'S BIGGEST DESALINATION PLANT (84 words) IBERDROLA TO PURCHASE STAKE IN EUSKALTEL (57 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW AUTOPRODUCTION IN SWITZERLAND (613 words) SWISS REGIONAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO FREEZE TARIFFS (188 words) RESULTS FROM CKW GROUP (321 words) TURKEY NEEDS 183 POWER STATIONS TO MEET PROJECTED DEMAND (595 words) MISSION ENERGY ACQUIRES FIRST HYDRO (268 words) LITTLECHILD PUBLISHES MODIFICATIONS TO LICENCES (446 words) NATIONAL POWER TO CUT 400 JOBS (257 words) CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CLO CONCEDES ALL TO ENELItaly's industry minister Alberto Clo gave a year-end present to thestate electricity corporation. By putting his signature to thecontroversial concession which licenses ENEL to operate, Clo has notonly taken the corporation a further step down the path to an initialpublic offering of its shares, but also appears to have ensured thatprivatisation will not significantly effect the comfortable status quo.Clo's decision to sign the concession has not won universal approval,however. Indeed some wonder whether a hidden agenda lies behind themove of a non-elected minister in a technocrat government that seems tobe rapidly approaching the end of its time.The haste with which Clo has despatched ENEL's operating concessionfrom his desk has not been well received by the anti-trust authority.The competition watchdog's firmly held view is that Clo has put thecart way ahead of the horse. How Italy's electricity sector should bereorganised should have been settled before drafting and signing theconcession. But a new structure for the electricity industry requiresparliamentary approval and the industry minister, who may not be muchlonger in that job, was not prepared to wait for the politicians tohave their say.UNAPACE, the autoproducers' association chaired by Giuseppe Gatti, theformer energy director general at the ministry of industry who wasreplaced last February shortly after Clo became minister, was whollyopposed to the minister's precipitate action. In a note sent to theminister in the week before Christmas, the association wrote,"UNAPACE's fundamental position is that this concession should not besigned, but that attention should be directed towards the necessarylegislative reforms".According to the autoproducers, the concession that Clo has given toENEL introduces incurable contradictions with possible new structuresfor the Italian electricity industry. The present system will remain astraitjacket in which ENEL will continue to operate "not only inmonopoly conditions, but substantially as a government offshoot, with apublic-type role incompatible with real privatisation".In its note, UNAPACE raised various objections to Clo's concession forENEL and suggested that:* the exchange and transmission of electricity produced by othercompanies must be made possible to all operators on equitable and non-discriminatory conditions, on the basis of prices approved andregulated by the regulatory authority;* cogeneration should be encouraged as well as renewable sources;* sub-concessions of ENEL's activities should not be limited to wholly-owned ENEL subsidiaries or to companies owned jointly by ENEL andpublic local utilities;* the planning of plant capacity needed to satisfy nationalrequirements should be entrusted to a government body or the regulatoryauthority, not to ENEL;* competitive bidding for new generating plant should apply only forcapacity aimed at supplying the tied, mass market, while simpleauthorisation should apply to capacity needed for supplying large,'qualified' customers, distributors and consortia.UNAPACE expressed particular concern over ownership and control ofItaly's grid. The autoproducers' association considers that, regardlessof EU decisions or recommendations, a separate grid company should beestablished in order to ensure that the costs of transmission andrelated activities should be made transparent and to reduce thepossibility of cross-subsidies between production and distribution."This company should be made completely autonomous and independent ofevery other operator in production and distribution, particularlyENEL", stated UNAPACE.The association's note to Clo expressed concern that control ofactivities so important to the system's functioning by a privatecompany could heavily condition access. This would "risk prejudicing toa substantial extent the effect of liberalising sales to large'qualified' consumers". UNAPACE told the minister that an alternativeto an independent grid company would be one in which independentproducers and distributors, public utilities and ENEL would have equitystakes. "However, none should have a controlling interest in thecompany."On the question of grid access tariffs, UNAPACE said that these shouldbe detailed by type of service and directly correlated to relevantcosts. To guarantee transparency, the regulatory authority should beresponsible for tariff setting.Clearly, while the operating concession may have brought some seasonalgood cheer to ENEL, Clo's signature on the document has disappointedUNAPACE, and runs contrary to the ideas of Italy's competitionregulator.The anti-trust authority gave its opinion in December, though this hasnot yet been published, because, it says, it would be improper to makeknown its opinion before the concession has appeared in the officialgazette. This is expected in mid-January. The anti-trust authority is,however, unlikely to let go of an issue on which it has on severaloccasions taken a stand wholly divergent from the line Clo hasfollowed. Italy's competition watchdog is, however, able to bark ratherthan bite.* The year has opened with speculation about who will be appointed tothe chairmanship of the regulatory authority for the electricityindustry. Among the names that have been mentioned is that of industryminister himself, Alberto Clo.If the technocrat government headed by Lamberto Dini is replaced orreshuffled, Clo could be looking for a job. Being able to show a CVthat contains placing the law establishing the regulatory authority onthe statute book and the drafting and signing of ENEL's operatingconcession might make him seem the right man for regulator. And, havingbeen regarded by some as ENEL's man at the ministry, he could then beknown as its man at the authority.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996COMMISSION STRENGTHENS IEM RESOLVEIn an unprecedented move at the end of 1995, the European Commissionput forward its first white paper on energy. Basing its document onthree broad objectives - overall competitiveness, supply security andenvironmental protection - the Commission said it will use all the lawsat its disposal to liberalise the EU's internal market for electricityand gas. But it warned that new constitutional powers may be necessaryto reach that goal.Unveiling the document, Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutis said: "Ifwe are to achieve all these objectives, the Commission must raise thequestion of whether a modification of the Treaty of Rome is necessary,as Community action I believe is now limited by the absence of clearprovisions."He said a sound and sustainable energy policy "is critical for ourfuture economic development. This white paper will be our blueprint foraction into the 21st century."The 40-page document lays down a programme for the next three years,covering everything from vehicle emissions to promotion ofcogeneration. It also singles out completion of the EU's internal powermarket and achievement of a level playing field for economic operatorsin the sector as fundamental objectives.For example, the paper says the EU needs a set of coherent criteria inorder to apply the Treaty's competition rules more effectively in caseswhere public service supply obligations are involved. It also insiststhat all forms of energy, including fossil and nuclear fuels, shouldhave a fair chance to compete, meaning more transparency in theirpricing and taxation is necessary."Energy prices, especially electricity prices, should not be used asparafiscal instruments to support specific forms of energy, since thiswill create distortions of competition unless such measures reflectexternal factors", says the paper. However, it makes allowances forsupport measures in favour of renewables. The Community's range ofinstruments that govern the reporting of fuel prices "will be furtherdeveloped with a view to including taxation transparency," it observes.At the same time, the Commission wants a more transparent businessenvironment for investments in the EU's energy sector and says it willuse the "appropriate tools" such as energy-impact analysis to assessnational regulatory measures in the environmental, social and taxfields.Of particular concern, it said, is a need to ensure that procurementprocedures for infrastructure projects "respect key criteria in termsof transparency and objectivity." Brussels said it will push forestablishment of a new "Energy Consultative Committee" under itsauspices (consisting of representatives from industry and labourunions) to ensure "as much transparency as possible on the developmentof Community initiatives" in energy policy.Creation of the EU's internal energy market and a multiplicity ofplayers within it is necessary, says the white paper, for furtherdiversification of the Union's domestic fuel base, particularly forelectricity production: "Electricity producers should be able to choosethe most appropriate and cost-effective fuel within a competitiveframework as long as it does not undermine diversification "Thus, according to the white paper, it is difficult to justify acontinued application of the EU's Directive 75/404, which forbids useof fuel oil under certain conditions for electricity production.Overturning the directive, it says, "would give electricity producersincreased flexibility, [while] an adjustment of indirect taxation toensure equality of opportunity between substitutable fuels would favourfuture flexibility in power generation".In the same vein, the Commission will wage battle against the trend toencourage intensive energy use across the union. "The evidence suggeststhat there remains a substantial potential for improvement," observesBrussels in its paper. It said EU bodies will have to "mobilise alltheir instruments" to support energy efficiency. The Commission plansto issue a communication later this year analysing how fiscal tools canbe used to promote energy efficiency and renewables.The Commission will also issue proposals in 1996 to ensure that energyefficiency is incorporated as an industrial requirement when Europeantechnical standards are drawn up for energy-consuming equipment. Itwants the EU's technical standardisation bodies located in Brussels -CEN and CENELEC - to create an energy working group to ensure thattheir draft technical standards promote energy efficiency, renewableenergies and energy transportation. This could run into problemshowever: such an approach will have to reconcile efficiency objectiveswith trade freedom and sufficient flexibility for industrialinnovation.Tipping its hat to the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission saysless direct intervention in the energy market will be the rule of theday. But it argues that more efficient monitoring tools will be neededto analyse the sector and ensure that its structural and technicalchanges do not conflict with the EU's energy policy goals.A reinforced monitoring capability is needed, says the paper, to:* ensure the proper functioning of the internal energy market;* verify that new production capacity enjoys freedom of establishment,especially for independent electricity producers;* enforce fair competitive conditions for independent electricityproducers;* confirm that different network-access systems yield comparable marketopening and market access in member states;* establish cooperation on interconnected systems between nationalregulatory authorities in both the gas and electricity sectors.The paper notes that the instruments currently at the Commission'sdisposal for ensuring transparency of investments, prices and energyimports and exports "are unsatisfactory because the administrativeburden is not offset by an operational usefulness."Such ineffectiveness, it said, is linked to delays in the publicationof data and poor coordination between member states. To correct thesituation, Brussels is proposing to provide national administrationswith a new energy data bank as well as an information network thatprocesses data more quickly. At the same time, it will lobby for a more"complete, reliable and harmonised statistical system" at Communitylevel in the field of energy.How national capitals will react to such a broad range of initiativesis still unclear. Most have fought tooth-and-nail against anyintrusion, direct or otherwise, by the Commission on the territory oftaxation. While Brussels can justifiably argue in favour of moretransparency in energy prices, it will probably meet resistance to"improved monitoring tools" that peek too much into national taxationregimes and decisions.Moreover, its call for yet more consultative committees and workinggroups may fall on unresponsive ears, considering that the Belgiancapital is already groaning under the weight of endless suchcommittees.Perhaps in anticipation of the opposition that its energy policy paperis sure to spark, the Commission ends its document with a bow to theneed for a proper division of work between EU and national authorities- subsidiarity - but hedges its position nevertheless. The white paperplaces energy policy "within the existing institutional framework" ofthe EU. But it concludes saying the Commission will make proposals "onthe question of whether a modification of the Treaty in the 1996intergovernmental conference is necessary" via a report to be releasedin the coming months.Do not expect any bold move, though. The Commission made a stab atinscribing energy policy in the Rome Treaty during the previousintergovernmental conference in Maastricht, and got a resolute slap onthe wrist.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WIJERS PROPOSES DRIVE TO PRIVATISEThe publication at the end of December of the Dutch government's long-awaited energy policy document confirmed many of the details leakedthrough the month (PiE 212/18). The main thrust of the Energie Nota isthat the government is to privatise 35% of the electricity market and40% of the natural gas market "in the very near future". Within fiveyears, two-thirds of the country's energy market will be privatised.The energy infrastructure, however, will remain in public ownership tosafeguard supply and optimal central production.The policy paper was formally presented by economic affairs ministerHans Wijers at the end of last month.The other two goals highlighted in the document - which sets out thegovernment's vision for the energy sector for the coming 25 years - areto increase energy efficiency by one-third by 2020 and boost the shareof electricity production from renewable sources from the current 1% to10%.The aim, said Wijers, is to stabilise CO2 emissions rather than strivefor a reduction. The minister said that although this was a departurefrom existing policy (and contradicts statements by the environmentminister) it is more realistic approach.He said it was meaningless for the Netherlands to impose stricter normsunless these were adopted by the EU as a whole. And he added that thestabilisation of emissions in itself calls for considerable effortparticularly as the country's economy is expected to grow at a rate of2%/yr in the next 25 years. Unless measures outlined in his policydocument are implemented, energy consumption and CO2 emissions couldactually rise, he warned.The government's plans concerning privatisation were, to a largeextent, unveiled in advance of the energy policy paper. The documentnow outlines the timetable as follows: in the immediate future,consumers who use more than 10 GWh of electricity or 10 MMcm of gaswill be free to choose their supplier.They will be followed within five years by users of 50 MWh ofelectricity or 170 Mcm gas. In fact, companies in this category will beable to apply for so-called "non-binding" status before the legislationis in place although they will have to give a period of notice to theirexisting supplier.Users falling under the specified volumes will remain tied to onesupplier with regulated tariffs. It remains to be seen when thiscategory of smaller (non-domestic) consumer will enjoy the same freedomof choice as other commercial users, says Wijers.The electricity market will also be open to new distributors, bothDutch and foreign. But the grid will, says Wijers, remain in the handsof the current owners (the central electricity generating board SEP).This is the best way to safeguard supplies and ensure optimal centralproduction, insists the minister. But he adds that an appeal procedurewill be available for electricity suppliers who feel they are unfairlyhandled. This "natural monopoly" will also have an independentwatchdog.Wijers claims that his proposals will place the Netherlands at theforefront of energy market liberalisation in Europe, along with Britainand the Scandinavian countries.ConcessionsAccording to major users, however, the plans fail to meet conditionsfor increased competition in the market. Vereniging Krachtwerktuigen,the association of large-scale users, which account for 80% ofcommercial consumption, has urged economic affairs minister Hans Wijersto focus more on opening up distribution to provide a counterweight tohis proposals to concentrate production.Wijers' estimate that the reforms will deliver a cost saving of Dfl 500-600m ($312-375m) is fine, but electricity users can only be sure theyare getting the lowest possible price when there are sufficientalternative sources of power, a spokesman for the association said.He said there are too few guarantees that new suppliers would haveaccess to the national grid under the same conditions as the centralelectricity board producers and distributors.Wijers' plan for an independent watchdog to ensure that every producerwill be treated equally is too vague and open-ended, the associationsays, adding that free trade outside the sector will be obstructed byestablished players.Distributors could charge such high fees that it becomes impossible forindependent producers to make money from supplying customers via thenational grid.While acknowledging the need for a powerful producer to enable theDutch energy sector to compete in a liberalised European market, theassociation doubts that the plans will stimulate competition fromabroad and from independent producers as envisaged by Wijers. The onlyway to achieve this is to give the electricity sector a fullyindependent legal and economic status, it concluded.The proposals contained in the policy document also indicate asignificant concession on the part of the minister on two points. Thefirst concerns his plans to merge the four existing producers (UNA,EPZ, EPON, EZH) to create a single electricity production company withdistributors as shareholders. Wijers said this was necessary becauseconflict between regional and national interests has led to overcapacity and operational inefficiencies.The merger proposal caused an uproar (PiE 213/1) and the wording in thepolicy document now calls for "one large-scale production company"which leaves the option open for one or more breakaway productioncompanies to operate.This could be the case in the south where the regional producer EPZ andthree local distributors PNEM, NUON and Deltan are already involved ina far-reaching co-operation agreement. They have calculated that theformation of a national electricity giant would result in extra costsof Dfl 265m ($164.4m) for consumers in one province (Noord Brabant)alone. Larger users would have to pay 25% more for electricity whilesmaller customers would see a rise of 13%, they claim.In the east, distributor NUON also prefers regional integration andopposes the idea of "its" producer EPON being swallowed up by a"bureaucratic monopoly".Nevertheless, the move towards the integration of the production sectorwill, says the policy document, have priority and energy director-general Dessens has since said the outline of the new company will becompleted this year. A merger of all four producers would create aconcern with an annual turnover of Dfl 6bn.Wijers has warned that reluctant shareholders may be forced to co-operate with the government's merger plans, although he would prefer toreach agreements with the parties involved.Wijers argues that a large production company would benefit fromeconomies of scale, ensure more compatibility in terms of supply anddemand and - perhaps most importantly - would put the Netherlands in abetter position to compete with foreign producers once the EUliberalises the electricity sector.The second concession relates to the shareholding of the new productioncompany and is aimed specifically at appeasing Amsterdam city council.The council is currently a shareholder (33%) in its regional productioncompany UNA but would have to sell its stake to a distributor under theoriginal proposals, something which it objects strongly to. Now Wijershas said local authorities can also be direct shareholders in thenational producer.Wijers' policy paper allocates Dfl 6m a year for a wide package ofenergy efficiency measures for electricity generated by fossil-firedplants. These include more long-term agreements with industrial sectorsand stricter standards for new buildings. Investment is needed because"simple solutions will be exhausted by 2000" said the minister.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TAXING TIMES FOR NORWAYThe minority Labour government's plan to change the way generatingutilities are taxed is facing mounting hostility from some of theaffected interests.The keenest criticism is being voiced by the so-called "hydro powerkommunes", local authorities which derive much of their tax revenuesfrom hydro plants located within their borders. LVK, the nationalassociation of hydro power kommunes, called an extraordinary meeting onJanuary 10 to discuss the proposals, which it claims will underminelocal authority taxation rights and hit the country's sparselypopulated rural districts. A day earlier the opposition Centre(Farmers') Party, which traditionally stands up for rural areas, held aseminar on the tax reform. One of its conclusions was that the measurewas an "attack" on these areas. Media reports predict that LVK willmobilise "massive opposition" to its approval by the Storting(parliament).The draft bill containing the proposed changes was tabled by thefinance ministry on December 15 (PiE 214/21). Initial reactions to it -by all concerned - were moderate. This was mainly because the ministryforecast, in the text of the bill, that the hydro power kommunes wouldactually see their revenues from the sector rise under the new regime.Since then, however, LVK has been doing its own sums to see howspecific local authorities would be affected. It claims that thesecontradict the official figures.In a letter to the ministry, LVK director Arvid Lillehauge says that"... so far [our calculations] indicate that it is impossible to reachthe result indicated by the draft bill. On the contrary ourcalculations show a fall in local authority tax revenues of suchmagnitude that it does not accord ... with the intentions of the bill".Lillehauge's request for the background material on which the officialcalculations were based has been refused by the ministry, which saysthat this material was collected on the understanding that detailswould remain confidential.The main changes proposed by the draft bill are:* abolition of wealth tax on publicly-owned power utilities (privatecompanies - including privately owned power plants - have been exemptedfrom paying wealth tax since the general tax reform of 1992. Treatingpublicly and privately-owned power companies in the same way, theministry points out, will have the advantage of eliminating anincentive to privatise publicly-owned power undertakings for taxreasons.)* a switch from assessment on the basis of estimated value toassessment on the basis of [annual] accounts, where publicly-ownedpower utilities are concerned. That means, says the ministry, that thelatter will pay tax on profit, like other enterprises, and not tax onthe basis of estimated value as at present.* abolition of tax exemption for power utilities in the kommunes whichown them. This will effect, inter alia, local authority-owneddistributing activity, which, recalls the ministry, is "to a greatextent ... exempt from tax at present".* introduction of a 30% tax on the "ground rent" arising from powerproduction, with the central government and the counties receiving,respectively, 95% and 5% of the take from this tax. Ground rent isdefined by the ministry as "the return on a natural resource over andabove a normal return... it is proposed to protect the normal return bycalculating an annual free income, which may be deducted from theground rent income".* abolition of the present state production tax, which will be replacedby the tax on the ground rent.* the fixing of a minimum level for income tax [payable] to localauthorities (tax on hydro power income). "Hydro power income", says theministry, "is to be calculated separately for each individual powerplant for both publicly and privately [owned plants] as a proportion ofan estimated gross income. The aim of hydro power income is to ensure aminimum level of stability in the income tax [take] of the hydro powerkommunes. It is proposed that hydro power income should be set at 35%of the estimated gross income."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FOOTING THE NUCLEAR BILLCity lore has it that if the price is right you can sell anything.Apply this to the UK's viable nuclear industry stripped of its Magnoxpark, and the right price is obtained by prudently discounting a numberof factors - liabilities first, political and regulatory instabilitynext, perhaps public antipathy last. You are left with a business worthconsiderably less than its newest, most prized asset, Sizewell B, whichcost #2.5bn.Crudely put, this is the message coming from analysts, unions andacademics studying the government's plans to privatise Nuclear Electricand Scottish Nuclear's merged AGR/PWR business as British Energy.Public enthusiasm for the proposal, never high, has been diminished bya perceived volte face by the government on its pledge to abolish theNuclear Levy on privatisation. The government's position is far fromstable; defections to opposing parties and a shrinking majority may yetforce it to take a more circumspect line on potentially divisive policydecisions. Nevertheless, privatisation of nuclear and the railwaysremain on the agenda.With this as background, the Commons Trade and Industry SelectCommittee investigating the nuclear proposal (PiE 213/4) is due toreport its findings on February 1. Among the most significantcontributions to the committee is a report* commissioned by Friends ofthe Earth and the anti-nuclear local authority grouping COLA. Itsuggests the government will be tempted to retain the #3bn ($4.658bn)cost of reprocessing spent AGR fuel presently residing in the coolingponds of Sellafield to ensure the AGR/PWR business fetches somethinglike the #2.6bn value it has placed on it.The report's authors, Gordon MacKerron of the Science Policy ResearchUnit (SPRU) at Sussex University and Mike Sadnicki, a consultant, statethat such a scheme, while superficially attractive, is unsatisfactoryand possibly illegal under European Commission state aid rules.Provisions in BE assetsThe argument that the reprocessing costs constitute a historical legacyand have nothing to do with the operation of a new company isfallacious, the report says; "There are provisions in the accounts ofNE and SN of some #3.5bn to cover these liabilities for reprocessingAGR fuel irradiated to 1995, and these provisions have in principlebeen invested in the assets which British Energy will acquire. In otherwords the assets contain the provisions for paying for the inheritedspent fuel. To exempt BE from the need to pay for them would be toallow the company to enjoy the future incomes from the assets whileescaping a major liability which those assets are designed to pay for."Exemption would result in the total public sector fund necessary toassure payment of all liabilities growing from #7.8bn (the report'sestimated figure for a Magnox decom fund) to #10.35bn. This possibilitycomes on top of regulator Stephen Littlechild's disclosure on December19 that, despite perceived government promises to the contrary, theNuclear Levy will continue after privatisation in order to recoveraround #450m of revenue arrears.The announcement caused outcry from the Labour party, which branded thegovernment's promise of an 8% reduction in electricity bills "anextravagance the government clearly can't afford to pay for".Littlechild said the government had stated the levy would cease onprivatisation "subject to the recovery of outstanding arrears". TheLevy will remain at 10% on English and Welsh electricity bills fromApril 1 1996 until privatisation, when a reduction in the rate isanticipated. Energy minister Tim Eggar said power bills should fall by6% by autumn 1996.#809 million o.n.o.So what value does the report put on BE's worth with all liabilitiesfactored in? MacKerron and Sadnicki's conventional base case using a 2%discount rate on liabilities (the rate which the industry itself hasapplied in the past) and a 13% discount rate on operational costsvalues the company at -#2.6bn. Using a 13% discount rate on liabilitiesand present costs - nearer the rate private investors are likely to usewhen evaluating costs - the sale value is #809m.The above cases have of necessity been partly based on statisticalassumptions given the shortage of operational data in the publicdomain. BE itself is unable to comment in detail under the FinancialServices Act but was quoted as saying it would rather be judged on itstrack record; indeed the report acknowledges the improvement in AGRperformance and Sizewell B's consistent operation at full power.Neither is the report anti-privatisation per se; it concludes that ifit works well, the electricity market would be completed, someliabilities would be transferred to the private sector and some cashraised for the taxpayer. Analysts welcomed the attempt to detail theindustry's value but observers conceded there is as yet not enough coredata for the prudent investor.If the approximations are at all accurate, the maximisation of the salevalue for nuclear power will almost certainly not correspond to thedivision between Magnox and AGRs/PWR, the report continues. Assuming aprice of 2.5p/kWh, Heysham 2's estimated cash cost of 2.07p/kWh makesit eminently privatisable. AGRs at Dungeness B and Hunterston B(2.79p/kWh estimate) are not. "Quite probably a combination of Heysham1 and 2, Torness, Sizewell B (and possibly Wylfa among the Magnox)could all make money in the private sector, whereas Dungeness B,Hartlepool, Hinkley Power B and Hunterston B might not", the reportsays.Add in the report's estimated 0.29p/kWh contribution to the independenttrust fund covering AGR decommissioning (PiE 213/5), and British Energyis left with even fewer viable power stations. Of course, MacKerron andSadnicki could be wildly off the mark. After all, the report was partlypaid for by anti-nuclear pressure groups, as BE points out. SPRU,however, has been near the mark in the past on the viability of new PWRbuild and the desirability of a segregated decom fund.* UK Nuclear Privatisation and Public Sector Liabilities, GordonMacKerron and Mike Sadnicki, supported by the Economic and SocialResearch Council, FoE and the COLA. SPRU, Mantell Building, Falmer,Brighton East Sussex, BN1 9RF. tel: +44 (0) 1273 686758.Net present estimated value of AGRs and PWR (#m)                                       NE AGR   SN AGR   PWR   TotalCase A - reprocessing discounted at 2%Income present value                    6036     2742    1438  10216Operational cost present value          3287     1523     738   5549Net operational present value           2749     1218     700   4667Net liability present value             4653     2319     303   7275Privatisation price                    -1904    -1101     397  -2608Case B - reprocessing discounted at 13%Income present value                    6036     2742    1438  10216Operational cost present value          3287     1523     738   5549Net operational present value           2749     1218     700   4667Net liability present value             2458     1096     303   3858Privatisation price                      290      122     397    809Source: SPRU, generated from authors' modelsAGR load factors (%)                   Average for                          Assumed for                   1989/90-94/95                        1996 onwardsDungeness B        40 (worse than this in 94/95)        50Hartlepool         64 (fairly consistent since 92/93)   65Heysham 1          69 (worse in calendar 1995 to date)  70Heysham 2          66 (well over 80% in last 3 years)   75Hinkley Point B    77 (generally consistent performer)  75Hunterston B       73 (generally consistent performer)  75Torness            62 (improving after weak start)      75Average            64.7                                 69.6(weighted by capacity)Total annual AGR electricity generated with assumed load factorsfrom 1996: 50.76 TWhSource: SPRUBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUSTRIAN ENERGY TAXESThe sudden change in finance ministers will delay but not derail plansto introduce an energy (CO2) tax on electricity, gas and coal.Regardless of the government's make up after the mid-Decemberelections, both the social democrats and conservative Volksparteifavour extending the energy levy beyond motor fuels, taxed since lastMay.No one pretends any longer than the resultant funds would be applied toCO2 reduction as originally intended; rather, the income would helpovercome a drastic budget deficit. Arguments have been flying over theamount of tax to be levied (PiE 210/10) and this will be an ongoingdebate between the two parties as they attempt to reform the coalitionwhich came undone over budget issues last October. The conservativescan be counted upon to hold back social democratic moves for a tax atthe higher end of the proposed scale, to avoid making Austria lessattractive for industry.Coalition negotiations come first, but the energy tax could be a partof the ultimate package. Nevertheless, given that formation of a newgovernment is not expected until the end of at least February,introduction of the tax on electricity probably will not occur beforemid-year at the earliest.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OKA TO BE PARTIALLY PRIVATISEDOberosterreich Kraftwerke AG (OKA) will be partially privatised thisyear, according to the Upper Austrian provincial governor. Currentlythe utility - which supplies the industrial centres of Linz and Steyras well as substantial agricultural areas with its own as well asVerbund power - is wholly-owned by the province and, in addition, has a36% holding in the Salzburg regional utility Salzburger AG furEnergiewirtschaft (SAFE; PiE 192/12).No date or procedure has been set for OKA privatisation, but anyarrangement is likely to include a condition which would avoidshareholding by a German electricity utility: earlier moves topartially privatise the Salzburg regional and municipal utilitiesstumbled when a German purchase was feared. German utilities such asBayernwerk have made no secret of their interest in obtainingtransmission right-of-way across Austria, which would enable cheaperelectricity exchange between Germany and Italy.Meanwhile, OKA has set major rationalisation and investment programmesfor the short-term future. Following a study by consultant AT Kearney,OKA will reduce personnel from 2,410 to 2,000 through attrition.Administration will be cut sharply, departments reduced from 60 to 38and, local offices from 75 to 40. Savings in personnel costs over thenext six years are estimated in the "three figure millions", accordingto management, with a Sch800m ($79.1m) cost reduction by 2001.Growth, meanwhile, is expected from new business areas. The utilitywill invest some Sch1.5bn in 1996, Sch1.1bn in plant and equipment, theremainder in participation investments. The current major plantinvestment is in the disputed Lambach generating facility (PiE 213/12).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996REGULATION OF ELECTRICITY TARIFFSThe time-consuming procedures for altering electricity tariffs havebeen simplified as of the start of this year. The new arrangement (PiE211/12) allows utilities to institute tariff changes followingnotification of the ministry for the economy. Detailed figuressupporting the change must be publicised and the adjustment justified.The new regulation puts a cap on the amount of any increase and stillallows intervention by interest groups in Austria's "socialpartnership" (labour, industry, agriculture) if the adjustments arejudged unwarranted. A 12% "deduction" from the gross increase isrequired on the grounds that this amount must be achieved by theutilities themselves through rationalisation. No increase may exceedhalf of the then-current inflation rate.For the arrangement to apply, individual utilities must agree to abideby the new regulations. All nine of the country's regional utilitiesplus the major municipal utilities have subscribed to the rulesgoverning the new procedure, but the responses of about 180 smallprivately-owned electricity suppliers remains open.The new arrangement has been criticised by the country's greens,amongst others, who say the procedure gives utilities no moreinitiative to introduce real cost-cutting or efficiencies, nor does itsubject tariff increases to the same scrutiny as did the previoussystem.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996RESULTS FROM THE FEDERAL VERBUNDHigh water flows through hydro plants and a 3% increase in electricityconsumption have assured a good year in 1995 for the federal Verbund.The authority nevertheless has noted the impact of two majorcogeneration plants which have come on-line, measurably trimmingindustrial electricity usage.On the financial side, the Verbund last year experienced unbudgetedcosts of some Sch400m-500m ($39.6m-49.4m) when its long-term borrowingsin Swiss francs had to be revalued to reflect exchange ratedifferences. About a fifth of Verbund bonds or Sch10bn are denominatedin francs. Notwithstanding, the Verbund will again pay its (49%)private shareholders a 16% dividend based on the nominal Sch100 shareface value: this amounts to a 2.6% return relative to the year-endmarket price of Sch606 per share. The government as 51% shareholderwill receive an 8% dividend on its stake, or half the privateshareholders' return.No detailed export-import figures have been released, but the Verbundnotes an export surplus in its electricity trading for 1995. Highersales to Germany, Slovenia, Croatia and Hungary have been registered,although in part these have been achieved at below-cost prices in orderto reduce untenable coal stockpiles (PiE 214/14). Exports to EasternEurope made a profit of Sch500m last year, according to management.Faced with a surplus of electricity as well as generating capacity, theVerbund has succeeded in cancelling import contracts with the Ukraine,postponing for another year an exchange contract with Russia andsuspending for five years a 500 GWh contract with Bayernwerk which wasto have come into effect last October. Verbund director JohannesSereinig estimates that these moves will save the federal authoritysome Sch300-350m annually. At the same time, however, the Verbund hasbeen unsuccessful in negotiating changes to its 20-year 1,200 GWhsupply contract with Hungary (PiE 213/12) and has begun importingunwanted and expensive electricity under the terms of the 1986 deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996VERBUND PARTICIPATION IN RETAIL MARKETSRegional utilities which have opposed federal Verbund participation intheir retail markets will not be comforted by recent statements byVerbund director Hans Haider."Our direction heads toward heavier participation in the regionalutilities", Haider stated, underlining that the Verbund will "seek tosecure the market" rather than allow intrusion by powerful Germanutilities."Were Bayernwerk last year to have acquired a holding in Kelag[regional utility], we'd also now have them in [the generating utility]Drauwerke", Haider argues. Kelag has a 49% holding in Drauwerke;intervention by the Verbund last year pre-empted a bid by Bayernwerkfor a controlling holding in Kelag (PiE 185/11).Next on the Verbund shopping list is STEWEAG, the regional utilitysharing supply to Styria, which could be partially privatised onceownership in the provincially-owned concern is transferred to a holdinggroup. The Verbund already controls STEG, the other utility serving theprovince, which it acquired in 1992 from Swiss owners (PiE 138/9) inthe face of strong protest from STEWEAG and other regional utilities.While the Verbund sees greater involvement in Styria as bringingconsiderable potential for efficiency, other regional utilities fearthat the federal organisation is seeking to ensure its future at theirexpense while protecting itself against divestiture under EU rules ofits import-export and transmission grid monopolies. Haider hasjustified wider Verbund shareholding in regional utilities on groundsthat this assures Austrian control over energy polices.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SALE OF SHARES IN VIW CHALLENGEDThe sale of shares in Vorarlberger Illwerke (VIW) by the federalgovernment to the province of Vorarlberg has been challenged by Swissminority (4.5%) shareholder Finelectra. The Swiss concern asserts thatthe deal between Vorarlberg and the Ministry of Finance for transfer ofuser rights to VIW's high-voltage transmission lines (PiE 207/11) isillegal as it was not put to shareholders.Vorarlberg officials have registered surprise at the suit since talkswere held with Finelectra shortly before conclusion of the purchasedeal. Details of the Swiss charge are not known, but the challenge hasbeen dismissed by Vorarlberg's provincial governor as having nosignificance.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUSTRIAN UTILITIES TO ESTABLISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKAustrian electricity utilities have pledged to band together toestablish a ground-based telecommunications network. The decisionfollows the failure of either of the consortia in which they had aninterest (PiE 213/12) to win the single mobile telecoms license award.Both Energieversorgung Niederosterreich (EVN) and the federal Verbundhad been reasonably certain that consortia in which they wereparticipants would gain the mobile telephone license. Both lost, withthe franchise going instead to a group supported mainly by the GermanDeTe Mobil concern, Siemens Austria and the Austrian bank BAWAG.The electricity utilities now plan to concentrate on development oftheir fixed-based facilities with transmission via glass fibre cablessuspended from their high-voltage distribution pylons, in anticipationof the anticipated telecoms liberalisation in 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SLUMP IN POWER CONSUMPTION IN BELGIUMPreliminary figures released by the Belgian federation of electricityproducers and distributors (FEB) show a slump in power consumption inBelgium in 1995 from September, reflecting the wider cooling inEurope's economy. Net power consumption in the country grew by anestimated 2.9% last year compared to growth of 4.9% in 1994, said FEB.In volume terms, net consumption in 1995 was 69,821 GWh versus 67,822GWh in 1994.Most of the slowdown was attributed to plunging demand from industry.Though demand for energy from the sector remained strong during thefirst half of the year (5.4%), it tapered off sharply after the summer,leading to growth in industrial consumption for the year as a whole of3.7%, or slightly less than in 1994. Demand from Belgium's domesticsector grew by a moderate 2.0% last year, while its tertiary (services)sector saw consumption grow by 2.4%.Net production rose by 3%, from 68,563 GWh in 1994 to 70,605 GWh lastyear, according to FEB. As usual, Belgium's private sector accountedfor the overwhelming share of production: 64,943 GWh or nearly 92% ofthe total. Public utilities accounted for 4.2%, while the balance of3.8% came from auto-producers.Nuclear energy was the largest fuel source, generating 39,063 GWh lastyear or 55.3% of total power production. This was followed by solidfuels (22.9%), natural gas and gas derivatives (17.8%), liquid fuels(1.5%), hydro-power (1.8%) and recovered steam (0.7%).Belgium's fuel mix for electricity produced in 1995 saw the greatestchanges in the natural gas and liquid fuel categories. Use of naturalgas and derivatives last year to produce electricity, for example, shotup by 19.4% compared to 1994. Indeed, according to the country's gasfederation, sales of natural gas to Belgium's power sector ballooned by20.9% from 70,151 TJ in 1994 to 84,800 TJ last year.Though its absolute share is minuscule, power derived from recoveredsteam rose 18.9% compared to 1994 (523 GWh vs 440 GWh). Nuclear energysaw its share in total production rise slightly by 1.4%, reversing thetrend of recent years. Liquid fuels and wind power fell sharply (22.6%and 11.1%, respectively).Separately, FEB said the sector imported a total of 9,416 GWh fromFrance, Luxembourg and Holland last year and exported a total of 5,307GWh, leaving a net balance of imported power of 4,109 GWh. Belgium hada net balance of imports of 3,983 GWh in 1994.One gas-fired co-generation unit of 51 MW was put into service at Ham,near Ghent, in 1995 while a scattering of small steam-power units wentinto service at Brugges (0.44 MW), Bressoux (3 0.9 MW units), Deurne(0.76 MW), Harelbeke (0.165 MW) Middelkerke (0.165 MW) and at Wanze(0.23 MW and 0.31 MW). As part of Belgium's current ten year (1988-1998) plan, two 350 MW gas-fired co-generation stations will be putinto service at Ghent and Brugges in 1997.The country's next equipment plan for the 1995-2005 period, which wasgiven final government approval on December 20, places even greateraccent on natural gas-fired stations. It also calls for a reduction inthe growth of demand for electricity of 0.9% for the coming year andlower tariffs, starting in the second trimester of 1996.FEB said Belgium's electricity grid expanded modestly in mostcategories: 0.5 km for 220 kV lines, 3.3 km for 150 kV lines and 15.8km for 70 kV lines, including 13.8 km of cable. Total capitalinvestments in production, transport and distribution activities wasBfr 35.6bn($1.205bn) or nearly 17% more than in 1994 (Bfr 30.5bn).Electricity prices during the year rose with inflation, or byapproximately 1.5%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DANISH CHP REPORTElsam's recent report to the Danish Energy Council - IntegratedResource Planning - struck a far from sanguine note. It claims Denmarkis heading towards a major imbalance between electricity production andconsumption. Elsam reckons that 40% of the power produced by windturbines and CHP units in 1998 will be superfluous to local consumerrequirements. The company predicts that Danish electricity oversupplywill reach a massive 1,000 GW in four year's time.Elsam lays the blame with what it calls a "too rapid and uncontrolleddevelopment of CHP" in Denmark. After a heated and very public argumentbetween the Danish energy minister, Svend Auken, and Elsam in the weeksleading up to Christmas, Elsam agreed to accept power from 64 new smalldecentralised CHP units. When completed, they will have a combinedcapacity of 1,225 MW, or about one-fourth of Elsam's entire capacity atpresent.The Danish Energy Council (controlled by the energy ministry) believesthere is scope for 1,500 MW of CHP-produced electricity in the region.Elsam insists there is no need to build a single new CHP unit before2003 at the earliest, and says that state operating support for CHP -Dkr 0.10/kWh ($0.018) and 30% capital construction grants - hasencouraged far too many investors.Politicians and Elsam have been at odds about the small decentralisedpower plants since parliament first decided to promote them vigorouslytowards the end of the 1980s. The decision was made on the basis ofseveral reports which suggested that CHP and biofuel formed the mosteco-friendly solution to Denmark's electricity needs. However, theiropponents now claim that a major disadvantage with CHP is that there isno central dispatch system co-ordinating them. Electricity productionby CHP is dictated by the need for heat and this means they produce atfull capacity in the winter months while the larger centrally-placedpower plants are forced to cut back on production.One result of the CHP argument is the resumption of the debate onconnecting Denmark's two separate East and West grids. In 1992parliament urged Elsam and its Eastern Denmark counterpart, Elkraft, towork towards establishing a cable to join their grids. As yet, however,the plan has come to nothing. New calculations on the economicviability of the plan show that income derived from inter-regionalelectricity sales would only meet the ordinary operating costs of a newcable.Income would thus be insufficient to pay the estimated Dkr90m interestassociated with the capital costs of the project. However, energyminister Svend Auken has requested the Energy Council to undertake anadditional assessment of the project. He accepts that the capital costswould be high, but "it would be a once-off investment which would giveus a great advantage in the coming European energy market", heconcluded. On a more up-beat note, the Elsam reports says it expects toachieve its targeted CO2 emission reduction five years earlier than thegovernment had anticipated.According to the government's energy policy law Energy 2000, Danishpower producers must cut total CO2 emissions to a maximum of 24m tonsper annum by 2005. Elsam claims western Denmark's targeted 14m tons canbe achieved as early as 2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EIB LOAN FOR HEAT/POWER PLANT IN DENMARKThe European Investment Bank is lending Ecu43.9m ($57.4m) for theconstruction of a gas-fired combined heat/power plant in Silkeborg inDenmark in order to replace ageing coal-fired capacity. The funds go tothe mixed public/private company of Silkeborg Kraftwarmevaerk, apartnership set up between Silkeborg's municipal authority and theDanish power company, Midtkraf, to run the new plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ELECTRICITY INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND GREECEThe European Commission is setting aside more than Ecu 75m ($98.1m) toimprove electricity interconnections between Italy and Greece. Thegrant, approved on January 11, will be financed from the EU's RegionalFunds and forms part of the "INTERREG II" programme.The lion's share of the money - Ecu55.772m - goes to Greece, with thebalance of Ecu20m for Italy. It will be used to strengthen powerdistribution links between the two countries, notably between the 400kW electricity supply networks that link Arachthos in Greece toGalatina in Italy.Two AC to DC conversion stations will be built, along with a line tocarry direct current to connect the two stations. The money will alsofund the installation of a 160 km underwater cable to carry 600 MWbetween Oporto Badisco in Italy and the Greek town of Aetos.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENERGY TAXESThe Commission approved on December 20 a set of Dutch fiscal measuresdesigned to encourage energy savings and a reduction of CO2 emissions.The centrepiece of the legislation is an energy tax on small-scaleenergy consumers.The tax will be levied on consumption of the first 50,000 kWh ofelectricity and the first 170,000 cubic metres of natural gas. Onlysmall-scale energy consumers - mainly households and small businesses -are subject to the tax.The revenues will be channelled back to taxpayers via a reduction indirect taxes on capital and labour income, thus constituting a "taxneutral" mechanism. Large-scale electricity users are exempt from thetax, as other measures apply to them. Similarly, Holland's"horticulture under glass" - ie, its sizeable agricultural and flower-growing sector - is exempt from the tax on gas consumption in order tomaintain its competitive footing internationally.The Dutch government says its will amend its legislation if a common,EU-wide CO2/energy tax is introduced.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CGT CALLS FOR FRESH ACTIONThe French CGT (Confederation Generale du Travail) trade union calledon its members at Electricite de France (EdF)-Gaz de France (GdF) toundertake fresh action on January 9 and 11. The latest protests wereaimed at the decision to hold back salary increases this year to 0.7%.The government has issued instructions to all state-owned firms, aswell as official bodies to hold salaries back in line with an officialtarget of 2% for inflation. All that EdF-GdF has so far promised itsworkforce is an end of year bonus which will increase pay by 0.7% from1995 levels.Earlier this year, the CGT was trying to relaunch general protestsaimed at preserving "public service" and the state employees' slightlyprivileged pension systems, which were interrupted by a truce overChristmas. This met with very little support. According to managementfigures, no more than 1% or 2% of the utilities' employees backed them;the four other main unions - FO, CFDT, CGC, and CFTC - did not supportthe protests. They were content with the pension guarantees that theyhad obtained, and with the delay that had been imposed on liberalisingEurope's power supply system.* EdF is to pay the state a dividend of Ffr1.5bn for 1995, while Gaz deFrance is to pay Ffr970m, according to figures published in theofficial journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FRENCH WINDPOWER PILOT PROGRAMMEA working group on renewable energy sources has proposed that theFrench government buy between 250 MW-500 MW of wind turbine generatorsto connect to the grid.  The proposal is being considered by thegovernment.Director of energy and raw materials at the industry ministry, ClaudeMandil, noted that ADEME (Agence de l'Environnement et de la Maitrisede l'Energie), as well as the turbine manufacturers wanted to install500 MW by 2005, while Electricite de France would prefer 250 MW with afirst tranche of 50 MW.He added that wind turbines had made considerable technical progress inrecent years and were becoming increasingly competitive.A committee of experts would supervise the proposed pilot programme.Tenders would be carried out in stages, allowing the project managersto benefit from experience in the preceding rounds. Operators wouldprobably be asked to tender on the basis of the electricity purchaseprice that EdF would have to offer to make their proposal viable.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996LA MANCHE NUCLEAR WASTE DUMPFrance's environment ministry has confirmed that an independentscientific commission is being set up to supervise the La Manchenuclear waste dump near La Hague.Activity at the centre has been in abeyance since November 30, when theappeal court in Caen ruled that it must be stopped. The court was facedwith a plea by ecological groups arguing that the site was notfunctioning properly. The court is due to rule on January 31 whether onwork at the centre can resume.ANDRA, the nuclear waste agency which manages the site, stoppedstocking additional materials in 1994, and had almost finished coveringthe site - with a view to monitoring it for 300 years - when the courtorder to stop intervened.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FUEL CONSUMPTION IN ITALIAN POWER STATIONSFigures for fuel consumption in Italian power stations in the firstnine months of last year show increased gross thermal production, 8.9%higher at 143,203 GWh than in the comparable 1994 period, compensatingfor the 12.0% fall in hydro production to 31,920 GWh.While gross production from coal increased sharply by 30.7% to 17,444GWh, it, nevertheless, only provided 12.2% of total gross thermalproduction. Fuel oil continued to dominate the Italian scene. Althoughgross production from fuel oil increased by a modest 2.3%, from 83,341GWh in the first nine months of 1994 to 85,265 GWh in the same periodlast year, it accounted for 59.5% of gross thermal production.Natural gas maintained its clear second place, recording an advance of15.8% in gross production to 33,917 GWh, equivalent to 23.7% of totalgross thermal production. Other fuels used in Italy's thermal powerplant provided gross production of 6,577 GWh during January toSeptember last year, an increase of 19.2% on 1994 and equivalent to4.6% of the total.In terms of consumption, Italy's thermal power plants burnt 18.38mt offuel oil between January and September last year (up 2.8% on the sameperiod of 1994), 8.27 Bcm of natural gas (plus 19.1%) and 5.95mt ofimported coal (plus 28.8%). The statistics show that there was noconsumption of indigenous coal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENEL RAISES INTERNATIONAL PROFILEState corporation ENEL raised its international profile over Christmasby providing 300 kW illumination modules for lighting the holy placesin Bethlehem.Following an approach from the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO),ENEL decided that equipment from its 'Luce per l'Arte' programme shouldbe made available to light up the Basilica of the Nativity, the grottoand the walls of Bethlehem's square. The illumination project ran fromChristmas Eve until January 8, the date of the Islamic new year. In theseason of goodwill, ENEL hopes that its Bethlehem illumination projectwill help to bring some business to its international project workload.The corporation has had discussions with the PLO about electrificationwork in the former Israeli occupied territories, and will try to usethe presence of its 'Luce per l'Arte' modules in Bethlehem as a leverto keep the door open for a successful Palestinian crusade by itsengineering division.The marketing possibilities of other 'Luce per l'Arte' initiativesundertaken by ENEL over Christmas and the new year are less obvious.Since the autumn, the Vittorio Emanuele monument in the capital'sPiazza Venezia has been floodlit by ENEL's modules, and at the otherend of the Via del Corso, the Piazza del Popolo was speciallyilluminated for New Year's eve festivities. At the beginning December,a tailor-made 35 kW fixed but programmable lighting system comprising259 lamps was switched on in the Basilica of Santa Maria in Trastevere.Thanks to ENEL's intervention, visitors are now better able toappreciate the basilica's XIIIth century mosaics and XVIIth centuryceiling.Earlier this week, the buildings in the Campidoglio capitoline hillarea of the capital and the nearby Roman fori were illuminated by ENELfor ceremonies inaugurating the start of Italy's European Unionpresidency. Perhaps ENEL, whose privatisation plans have earntcriticism from the Brussels competition authorities, wanted to cock asnook at the Commission's chairman Jacques Santer and his commissionercolleagues who were in Rome. Or, by bringing a sparkle to the capital,the state electricity corporation may have been offering thanks toLamberto Dini's government which has allowed ENEL to avoid theprivatisation upheavals that would have been likely under a lesscomplaisant government.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ABB ANNOUNCES CONTRACT IN ITALYABB in Baden has announced a Sfr100m ($86.95m) contract to supply thegas and steam turbines, heat recovery boiler, control technology andall engineering for a turnkey 260 MW gas/steam cogeneration plant wortha total of Sfr536m. The plant will be built in Falconara near Ancona,Italy, for the Italian distribution company Api Energia, a jointventure owned by ABB and Anonima Petroli Italiana. Work is due to startimmediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EDF WITH EDISON PURCHASE 75% OF ISEContinuing its international acquisitions, Electricite de France (EdF)has completed the purchase of 75% of the Italian electricity producerIlva Servizi Energie (ISE), in partnership with Edison. The two firmspaid L370bn ($233m) for their stake, which will be held through a jointcompany called Finel, in which Edison has 60% and EdF 40%. The deal wasagreed conditionally at the beginning of 1995, but the conditions werenot met until towards the end of last year.EdF commented that this was an important step in developingcollaborations with other power generators in countries which wanted toencourage independent electricity producers.ISE already has capacity of some 600 MW, including a thermal powerstation at Taranto (in Puglia), two at Piombino (in Tuscany), and ahydro power plant at Terni (in Umbria). In addition, ISE is building a500 MW thermal power station at Taranto, which will be fired with gasesfrom the blast furnaces of the local steelworks.  It will use combinedcycles to generate both electricity, which will be sold to ENEL, andsteam, which will be used by the steelworks. The project is due to comeinto operation in the second half of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY IN THE NETHERLANDSDemand for electricity in the Netherlands peaked at an all time high of11,160 MW on December 20 last year, but overall demand of 70 TWh wasdown 0.4% or 300 GWh on 1994, according to provisional figures fromSEP, the Dutch central electricity generating board.SEP said the 1995 peak was 3.3% higher than the previous year's figureand the first time demand passed the 11 GW mark.SEP supplied 90% of the power provided through the national grid, withthe remaining 10% coming from combined heat/power plants owned byindustry and energy distributors.SEP generators produced 2% less electricity last year, reflecting arise in power imports, which accounted for 17% of SEP's output comparedto 15% in 1994. At the same time, SEP exports increased four-fold to320 GWh in 1995 from 75 GWh in 1994.The steady advance in the share of power generated from coal continuedlast year, climbing to 45% from 42% in 1994 and 37% in 1993, SEP said.The share of natural gas declined further, to 49% from 525 in 1994 and57% in 1993. Nuclear power accounted for 6% of production, the same asin previous years.SEP's total production capacity fell to 14,44 MW last year, 590 MW downon 1994. Heat supplies from power stations expanded by 1% to 13,997 TJin 1995 from 13,773 TJ a year earlier.SEP said the fuel component in the national basic tariff (LBT) had beenfixed at DFl 0.052 ($0.032) per kWh for daytime production and DFl0.044 for night-time production for the first quarter of this year. Thenight-time tariff is DFl 0.001 lower than in the last quarter of 1995,while the daytime rate is unchanged.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PNEM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH WINDFARMERSSouthern Dutch energy distributor PNEM has signed a ten-year agreementwith Windfarmers BV in Moerdijk for the supply of electricity for itsGreen Power scheme under which customers can opt to buy electricitygenerated from renewable sources (PiE 201/15). Windfarmers will buildfour wind turbines, each with a capacity of 1 MW, which will deliver atotal of around 6 GWh of power annually, starting in March next year.PNEM was the first company to introduce the Green Power programme inthe Netherlands and has won 2,500 clients since the scheme was launchedin June. The company hopes to increase this to 10,000 by the end ofnext year.Customers currently pay Dfl 0.085 ($0.053) more per kWh forelectricity, but this will drop to around Dfl 0.05 when the new eco taxis introduced on January 1 according to the government's proposals.* PNEM has announced a Dfl 0.0024 price rise for its conventionalelectricity to Dfl 0.1912 (up Dfl0.0047 to Dfl 0.2382 for peak periodsie 07.00-21.00).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NORWEGIAN-SWEDISH POWER BOURSEThe difference between Norwegian and Swedish power prices has beenshrinking since the Norwegian-Swedish power bourse began functioning onJanuary 1 - creating what is claimed to be the world's firstinternational power bourse (PiE 212/20).From that day, Swedish traders have been able to buy and sell on themarket - operated by Statnett Marked and located at Lysaker, on theoutskirts of Oslo - regardless of whether their companies have thephysical infrastructure needed to import and export electricity betweenthe two countries. Previously, this was a condition of their beingallowed to do business there.On January 2, the first working day of the year, 20 Swedish playerstraded on the market, according to Hans Randen, a director of StatnettMarked. This compared to only nine before the new year. January 1,moreover, saw the abolition of border tariffs charged on powerexchanges between the two countries. Power exchanges between Norway andFinland and Norway and Denmark are still subject to these tariffs;apart from this, however, Finnish and Danish traders can operate on thebourse under the same terms as the Swedes and Norwegians. "We expectthat most of the trade will take place in the day market, and that thiswill lead to increased liquidity", Randen told the Oslo business dailyDagens Naeringsliv.He predicted that by the end of the year there would be some 40-50Swedish players dealing on the joint bourse, in addition to theapproximately 100 Norwegians already using it. According to Per Hjorth,managing director of Statnett Marked, the latter include around 40generating utilities, 40 distributing utilities, eight to tenindustrial companies and ten brokers.Power volumes traded via Statnett Marked rose to some 38 TWh in 1995,from 28 TWh in 1994. Average annual output capacity in Norway is 112TWh."I believe we shall reach 50 TWh this year, and much of the volumegrowth will of course be due to the new joint market with Sweden", saidRanden.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PRIVATISATION OF ELECTRICIDADE DE PORTUGALOfficials of Portugal's new Socialist government have indicated changesin the way Electricidade de Portugal (EdP) is to be privatised. Butapparent contradictions in their announcements remain to be clarified.Economics Minister Daniel Bessa told a Lisbon newspaper the first stepin privatising the group would involve finding major institutionalinvestors willing to buy up to 50% of an initial offer.Secretary of State for Energy Jose Penedos was quoted as saying thegovernment plans a gradual privatisation of the group as a whole,rather than in parts, and intends to disperse the capital widely. Hesaid this would help stimulate capital markets and make the purchase ofshares more accessible to Portuguese investors.The previous centre-right government had planned to privatise up to 49%of Companhia Portuguesa de Producao Electrica (CPPE), the productionarm of the EdP group, and subsequently sell up to 49% of the country'sfour regional distribution companies. Penedos said the limit wouldremain at 49%. More details are expected when the government presentsits overall privatisation programme, due towards the end of January.The new government also plans to change the regulatory system for thepower sector approved in mid-1995, making the regulatory body set upfor the industry responsible for energy issues as a whole, not just forthe electricity sector. Penedos said the scope for governmentintervention in the regulation of the energy sector would also bereduced but gave no further details. In particular, the new governmentwants the regulatory body to cover natural gas, due to be introduced inPortugal by 1997.Meanwhile, EdP has announced price cuts for industrial and commercialusers of 5%-8% in nominal terms in 1996. Taking account of expectedinflation, this represents a reduction in real terms of 8.5%-11.5%,says EDP. Prices are to be 5% lower during peak hours and 8% lower atother times. Prices for domestic consumers will be held flat in nominalterms in 1996. EdP also forecasts its 1995 profits will double from1994's Es30.5bn ($203.9m).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996HEAVY RAIN FILLS PORTUGAL'S HYDRO-ELECTRIC DAMSWeeks of heavy rain after five years of drought have filled Portugal'shydro-electric dams to the extent that production has had to be haltedat several plants. All five hydro units on the Douro river in thenorth, the country's most important source of hydro power, were shutdown in mid-January because the dams were too full to produce therequired fall of water to drive the turbines that produce energy.However, annual production was expected to be above average in 1996after current high water levels subsided.More than half of Portugal's 64 dams were reported full and some weredischarging water to reduce excess capacity. All but four of the 24hydroelectric dams belonging to Rede Electrica Nacional, the state-owned national power grid operator, were full.Three people died in accidents as parts of Lisbon and other regionswere flooded in the second week of January. The Tagus river overflowedits banks in the area of Santarem 80 kms north of Lisbon. Portugueseauthorities were monitoring the river upstream in Spain, concerned thatthe heavy rains could force Spanish reservoirs to discharge water,aggravating Portugal's difficulties.Officials said Portugal's five years of drought were over but theability to meet irrigation requirements fully next spring would dependon rainfall in January and February. Rainfall in the southern Alentejoregion over the past two months was more than in the previous fouryears and risks of flooding continued in several regions of Portugal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S 1996 ELECTRICITY TARIFFS FROZENSpain's 1996 electricity tariffs have been frozen for the first timesince 1973. The utilities' association Unesa said the tariff freeze was"the electricity sector's contribution to the stability of the economyand the general price index," although Unesa chairman Martin Gonzalezdel Valle said that the tariff had fallen 10.7% in real terms since theStable Legal Framework (MLE) was first approved in 1984.The MLE allows the utilities to factor certain costs - such as assetcosts, some overheads and hydroelectric generation costs - into theirtariff rates.The December 28 decree which set the 1996 tariff also modified the MLEin order to cut the utilities' income by Pta29.2bn ($241.3m), or 1.42%of the tariff, but this will be made up by making other adjustmentsaccording to interest and exchange rates.The industry ministry's MLE modifications are broadly in line withthose proposed in November by the regulatory body, the NationalElectricity Commission (CSEN), which wants to see more competition inthe sector.The tariff increase has been below inflation for the past five years -in 1995 it rose an average of 1.48% on inflation an estimated 3.5%.this year's inflation forecast is also 3.5%. Unesa said on January 5that between 1959 and 1995 the average price of electricity had fallenby 39% in comparison with the consumer price index rise over the same35 year period.Days earlier, European commissioner for competition Karel van Miert hadtold the European Parliament's Foreign Economic Relations Commissionthat Spain's electricity tariffs were the highest in the EU.The industry ministry has also bowed to consumer groups' pressure andagreed to a new electricity bill which for the first time will containinformation on the client's consumption over the past 12 months, theaverage cost per day in that period, as well as the percentage paidfrom the bill for domestic coal subsidies, and to subsidise theutilities' nuclear moratorium debt.The latter two, being fixed rates, penalise higher consumption. The1996 percentages, based on the estimated 1995 tariff turnover of Pta2trillion and a forecast 1996 growth of 3.65% are the same as in 1995 -3.54% or Pta72.6bn in nuclear moratorium debt, and 4.86% or Pta99.8bnin coal subsidies.Unesa said the new invoice model is designed to separate the directproduction costs - supply, generation and maintenance - from theexternal and political costs such as the nuclear debt and subsidies.Announcing the MLE changes, industry minister Juan Manuel Eguiagaraysaid the electricity sector would not have to make investments in newgeneration until at least 2000. But he said some fuel oil-fired powerstations would be converted to gas. "By February we shall authorise theconversion to gas of fuel-oil stations with a capacity of 1,400 MW."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN SPAINIndustry association Unesa's provisional figures show that electricityconsumption increased by 3.8% in 1995. High-tension industrialconsumption grew by almost 6%, consumption in services and commerce wasup by 2%, while domestic demand fell by 1.5%.Total consumption last year was 149,834 GWh, while generation was up2.6% at 168,686 GWh. The fourth year of the century's worst droughtmeant that hydroelectric generation fell by 16.8% at 23,968 GWh,although it shot up in the last two weeks of the year as Spainexperienced almost constant rain from November. Unesa estimates thatthe drought resulted in hydro generation at 30% lower than in normalconditions, costing the utilities more than Pta50bn ($413.2m) in lostproduction.Thermal generation rose by 11.1% over 1994 to reach 89,276 GWh, whichUnesa said was an all-time high, while nuclear generation was up by0.2% at 55,442 GWh. Spain increased its imports from France by 250%,and total imports stood at 7,623 GWh, while exports were 3,145 GWh.Together, imports and exports rose by 143.6%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BASQUE PLANS TO ACHIEVE ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENCYThe Basque regional government in northern Spain has warned that it is"very seriously" studying plans to develop an independent gas-firedelectricity system if the industry ministry in Madrid continues toblock its plan to achieve energy self-sufficiency.In an interview with the financial daily Expansion, Basque industryminister Javier Retegi reminded Madrid that the existence ofindependent operators outside the integrated electricity system isenshrined in the government's own year-old Electricity Sector Law(Losen), even though certain regulatory norms have not been fullydeveloped.Retegi's comments are bound to increase tension between the Basquecapital Vitoria and Madrid, which opposes much of the Basque projectsuch as the conversion of the unfinished Lemoniz nuclear power stationinto a combined cycle plant on the grounds that Spain does notcurrently need new energy sources.Euskadi (Basque Country) retorts that it wants self-sufficiency becauseit feels that it is at the end of the 'energy line' in the far north,and it wants to diversify its sources of primary energy, mainly gas. Itis no secret that the Basque nationalists who control the regionalgovernment want energy autonomy as well as political autonomy.Ironically, the development of independent operations outside theintegrated system is very much in line with the government's plans tointroduce greater liberalisation and competition in the sector. Theproblem is that the Basque energy plan is in contrast with the industryministry's national plans.Under the Basque government's Estrategia Energetica de Euskadi, or Plan3E, the Basque Country would generate 42% of its own electricity by2000. At the moment, it 'imports' 85% of this energy from outside theregion. Retegi claims that 10% of electricity is lost in transport."Our goal of electricity self-sufficiency is quite reasonable", hesays. "We are already negotiating with various foreign companies whospecialise in gas, electricity and independent systems, such as Enronand Mitsubishi."Basque energy independence would be based on four gas-fired electricitygeneration stations, only one of which is currently on-line. This isthe 360 MW Santurtzi fuel-oil plant which would be converted tocombined cycle operation.The uncompleted Lemoniz nuclear plant would be converted into a 300 MWcombined cycle plant. Construction was halted in 1982 after ETAseparatist gunmen killed two engineers at the plant, two years beforeSpain's nuclear construction moratorium came into effect.A further two gas-fired generators are to be built - Zabalgarbi, two 90MW units, and Zergarbi, with a single 90 MW unit.Retegi said natural gas consumption would rise from the current 15% to29% of total primary energy use by 2000, which would mean building aregasification plant in Bilbao port and connection to the French gasnetwork. "the interconnection between gas and electricity obliges us todevelop a global energy scenario", he says."If we had a good understanding with central Administration to achievegreater self-sufficiency, to use Lemoniz and to guarantee [alternative]gas supplies, everything would be in order and it would not benecessary to seek alternatives to the integrated system", concludedRetegi.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENHER COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF HIDRUNAEnher, the Catalan affiliate of Endesa, has completed the 100%acquisition of Hidruna with the purchase of 30% from Iberdrola, 15months ahead of schedule. The Grupo Enher, which with Hidruna includesTermicos del Besos, is now complete and in 1995 had a combined turnoverin excess of Pta200bn ($1.7bn).Iberdrola agreed to sell Hidruna to Endesa through Enher in a 1993asset-swap, but the remaining 30% was to have been acquired in twostages by March 1997. The Pta21.7bn deal was brought forward because ofthe healthy situation of both Enher and Hidruna.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996THIRD WIND FARM AT TARIFAA third wind farm has been commissioned at Spain's wind power capitalof Tarifa in the far south. The Pta1bn ($8.3m) farm was built by PlantaEolica Europea (Peesa), a group led by Danish company Nordtank (44%),Danish engineering firm Elsam Project (44%), and Spain's Sevillana deElectricidad (12%). The farm's 12 x 500 kW air turbines have a combinedinstalled capacity of 6 MW.Sevillana is active in all three wind farms, which have a combinedcapacity of 66 MW. It holds 23% of Sociedad Eolica de Andalucia, and 9%of kW Tarifa.Spain could be the world's second wind power producer by 2000,according to energy secretary general Alberta Lafuente who waspresenting the four-year Pta16bn energy research Plan Estela, whichwill investigate all areas of energy generation.The industry ministry announced that the capacity of all renewableenergies had increased by 80% in the past five years in Spain andstands at 407 MW. Including hydro generation, renewable energiesaccounted for 5% of the national total. Oil accounts for 54%, coal for19%, nuclear power 15%, and gas 7%. Although wind power has increasedtenfold since 1990, it still accounts for only 0.2% of renewable energyand 0.01% of all energy generated.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S NEW CONNECTION WITH PORTUGALSpain's high tension grid Red Electrica de Espana (REE) has switched ona new connection with Portugal to increase the exchange capacitybetween the neighbouring countries to 2,500 MW. REE invested more thanPta4.5bn ($37.2m) in the northwest region of Galicia above Portugal toincrease the capacity of the Trives substation and build two new linesas well as the new Cartelle substation.The grid is to invest another Pta4bn to build the Meson-Cartelle linebefore the summer.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SPAIN'S NUCLEAR MORATORIUM DEBTThe government has finally approved a Royal Decree that will solve theproblem of the Pta729bn ($6.02bn) nuclear moratorium debt. The debt hasbeen borne by three utilities since construction was frozen in 1984 onfive nuclear power stations in Spain, one year after the ElectricitySector Law (Losen) incorporated the means to clear the debt.Losen enshrined the right of Iberdrola (Pta540bn), Sevillana deElectricidad (Pta178bn) and Union Fenosa (Pta11bn) to receivecompensation for their investments in the plants either through a 3.54%share of the tariff, with the debt paid off within 25 years, or theright to pass on to investors the chance to gain the compensation inthe form of securities.The decree ensures that the State gives a triple guarantee to theutilities or, in their place, the investors. First, a minimum annualcompensation is guaranteed via the utilities' turnover; second, thestate will make up any difference remaining after 25 years; and third,the state guarantees to cover the interests incurred by the debts.* Union Fenosa has reduced its financial debt by Pta30.7bn toPta507.4bn. Some 19.3% of this is in foreign reserves, lower than theaverage for the sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENDESA AND SEVILLANA PULLING OUT OF CERSAPublic utility Endesa and its associate Sevillana de Electricidad havemade a joint announcement with Gas Natural that they are pulling out ofSpain's third largest telephone paging company, Compania Europea deRadiobusqueda (Cersa), in which each holds a 9% stake.Endesa and Sevillana have also broken ranks with Spain's largestprivate utility Iberdrola by leaving the telecommunications holdingcompany Secomtel that they formed in the late 1980s. Iberdrola, whichholds 16% of Cersa signalled its intention to stay in thetelecommunications sector by announcing plans to purchase 40-50% of theInternet connection company Servicom.The three utilities have operated in telephone paging since 1992through the consortium Servicio de Radiotelefonia Movil (SRM), whichholds 96% of Cersa. Secomtel's shares will be divided between SRM andanother mobile telephone company, Teletrunk.The main reasons for the break-up are the different strategies beingundertaken by Endesa - which has joined forces with Banco Santander andBanco Central Hispano - and Iberdrola, which appears to be movingtoward an alliance with semi-public telecommunications giantTelefonica.Endesa and Sevillana are also moving out of SRM/Cersa for economicreasons. The late arrival of the paging service in Spain meant thatthree large operators with important investors emerged in 1992 just asthe more successful mobile telephone sector was taking off.This meant that Cersa, with 25,000 clients, lost Pta420m ($3.5m) lastyear. A leading contender to purchase the 27% of SRM shares on offer isSistelcom-Telemensaje, a consortium which includes two other utilities,Union Fenosa and Fecsa.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENDESA TO BUILD SPAIN'S BIGGEST DESALINATION PLANTPublic utility Endesa is heading a consortium that is to build Spain'sbiggest desalination plant on the southern Costa del Sol at Marbella.The Pta7bn plant will be able to desalinate 60,000 cm of seawater a dayand it is scheduled to begin operating this summer.The consortium consists of Endesa with 25%, its affiliate Sevillana deElectricidad (25%), Aguas de Barcelona (10%), and construction companyLain (40%). The project is part of Endesa's diversification plans, andwill not serve for cogeneration purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IBERDROLA TO PURCHASE STAKE IN EUSKALTELIberdrola is to purchase a 10% stake in the Basque telecommunicationsand cable television company Euskaltel before the end of the year.Euskaltel is currently owned 40% by the Basque regional government,with the rest in the hands of the three Basque savings banks.Iberdrola, based in the Basque city of Bilbao, is Spain's second-biggest utility.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AUTOPRODUCTION IN SWITZERLANDAutoproducers in Switzerland will continue to benefit from federaltariff recommendations until end-1998. These have been in force sincemid-1993, have now been extended until the end of 1998. As Switzerlandhas few industrial autoproducers, the scheme mainly benefits smallhydro producers and gas-fired CHP plant in buildings.According to an Evaluation Report just published, 80% of small hydroplant (less than 300 kW) surveyed have seen the prices paid for theirenergy rise and profitability improve since the recommendations tookeffect. The federal recommendations are applied "almost entirely" byelectricity companies in eight cantons, but are followed only partly innine cantons, and entirely ignored in the principal hydro-producingcantons of Graubunden, Ticino and Valais.Here the difference between the production cost of about Sfr0.04/kWh($0.035/kWh) and the Sfr0.16/kWh recommended for autoproducers is justtoo great. The authors of the report claim that a promotion ofdecentralised energy production is a national objective, which does notjustify forcing the three "hydro cantons" to accept conditions whichwould result in unfair local tariff increases.The five remaining cantons (Geneva, Neuchatel, St Gallen, Schwyz andAargau) provided no information to the evaluators.The report noted that participating cantons have asked for the creationof a national fund to finance the extra cost of the scheme todistribution companies. The report recommended increasing tariffs paidto CHP operators by 20-50% (solar producers have long been campaigningfor such a rate increase). It noted that in cases where more than 30%of the energy produced by a CHP unit was consumed on the premises, thereward for supplying excess energy to the grid was not sufficient tomake CHP attractive to investors. This meant that while the trend tomultiplication of CHP in buildings and heating grids continued, itreceived no extra boost from the tariff recommendations.The report also pointed to disputes over whether or not therecommendations should apply to an independent autoproducer's totaloutput or just amounts in excess of own needs. Finally, it recommendedrenaming the recommendations as federal "directives" to make them seemmore consequential.Responding to the report, Martin Renggli, who heads the Federal EnergyOffice (FEO) policy service, told PiE that:Efforts will continue to be made to use the tariffs to promote smallhydro plant, even though technically many are not "autoproducers". Hesaid there is unlikely to be any question of increasing the tariffspaid to CHP operators producing from fossil fuel (gas), in view ofparliament's insistence that such measures target renewables, and notfossil fuels.He noted that the legislation clearly intends that the special tariffapplies only to excess production. Thus, to avoid unfair profiteering,independent producers must use the energy themselves as far astechnically possible. A leaflet is currently being prepared to makethis absolutely clear.Despite another of the report's recommendations, he said there will beno change in the "5% rule" which requires the REC to pay whenautoproducer input exceeds 5% of a local distributor's total energysupply.On the financial points, he noted the Sfr0.16 average tariff paid toautoproducers who use renewable energy sources is the equivalent of thelong-term marginal production cost. Meanwhile, as the idea of a tarifffund was broadly opposed during an earlier consultation period for thenew Energy Law, it is unlikely to be considered now.Switzerland is virtually the only country to apply such a tariff andthe biggest electric companies have not really embraced therecommendation. According to the report, the amount they "reinject"from autoproducers is a "minute" 0.2-1.3% of total energy turnover, orjust 0.5-0.7% of costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SWISS REGIONAL ELECTRIC COMPANIES TO FREEZE TARIFFSFive major regional electric companies have agreed to freeze tariffsfor the next three years. The five companies are BKW, NOK, Atel, CKWand EOS. Announcing the agreement, the ombudsman's office in Berne saidit was made possible by the RECs' "good, and in some cases very good,1994 results".Joseph Deiss, one of the members of the ombudsman's team, told PiE thatthe announcement was not really the result of a general "agreement" butrather of separate negotiations with each REC. It was the ombudsman whohad taken the initiative, on the assumption that the excellent 1994-95results announced by these companies, and the very good hydroconditions, should benefit the consumer.Deiss pointed out that as there are over 1,200 electricity companies inSwitzerland, the office had chosen to deal only with the big players onthe assumption that the effect will trickle down. "Our objective is toreverse the trend of the many recent tariff increase, in excess of therate of inflation and at a time when there is an abundance of energy onthe market. We are pleased with our success."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996RESULTS FROM CKW GROUPSwitzerland's CKW Group had total energy turnover of Sfr480m ($417m),an increase of Sfr33.6m improving the Group net profit by Sfr6.3m toSfr25m. This was obtained with the help of a 5% tariff increase inOctober of 1994, a demand increase in the CKW distribution grid of5.2%, and to a slight improvement in prices for energy sold on theinternational spot market.Carl Mugglin, chairman of the board of directors, told a January pressconference that CKW would not increase tariffs in 1996, thus giving"voluntary support to the price ombudsman's efforts to stabilisetariffs".Mugglin repeated warnings about the danger of further increases in theproduction cost of Swiss electricity, and particularlyhydroelectricity, due to various new taxes. CKW and other Swisselectric companies have decided to abandon any major new hydro projectsin the near future, such as the Mauvoisin dam.CKW's profit-and-loss account for 1994/95 amounted to Sfr551.4m.Operating expenditure was Sfr428.1m. Total investments, in plant andfor drawing rights, were Sfr81.7m. The dividend will be unchanged at 8%(Sfr40 per Sfr500 share).Production increased 7.3% and energy from increased use of drawingrights by 45%. The Leibstadt and Gosgen nuclear reactors supplied 7.6%more power, due to greater efficiency. CKW's own nuclear productionamounted to 874 GWh, with another 466 GWh from drawing rights.Nuclear generation accounted for two thirds of the energy supplied toCKW's grid. The total cost of production increased almost Sfr23m toSfr270m. Total demand in the CKW Group distribution grids to 2,400 GWh,up 4.8%. Total CKW Group energy turnover was 4,300 GWh, up 7.1%.Demand in the CKW company's distribution grid increased 5.2%, thanksmainly to a 13.7% increase in demand by three major accounts, and a4.3% increase in demand by "general industry", indicating a strongrecovery in the Lucerne region's economy. The household/trade/agriculture/services sector showed a demand increase of just 1.1%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TURKEY NEEDS 183 POWER STATIONS TO MEET PROJECTED DEMANDTurkey will have to build a total of 183 power stations over the next15 years costing around $16bn to meet projected soaring demand,according to a report compiled by the country's Energy & NaturalResources Ministry. The report says generating capacity must increaseat around 8% over the period to 43,590 MW from 15,235 MW at end-1995 toserve a rise in demand to 271,450 GWh from 94,605 GWh at present.In particular, the report says that a power bottleneck could emerge in1997, unless existing projects are completed on schedule, no existingpower plants are closed down for environmental reasons, and there is noshortage in gas supply or upgraded lignite.To prevent shortages, construction work should also start on plannedbuild-operate-transfer (BOT) schemes as soon as possible, the reportadds. And state-owned Turkish Electricity Generation & TransmissionCorp (TEAS) should install a sufficient amount of shunt capacitors inall power distribution systems operating at ratings of 34.5 kV orbelow.The demand forecast is based on rapid population growth, rising livingstandards and industrial expansion. Per capital consumption isprojected to rise to 3,267 kWh in 2010 from 1,978 kWh, for example.The power stations required break down into 106 hydro-electricstations, 16 thermal plants and two nuclear stations. Further thermalstations will also be required: 33 lignite or hard coal fired stations,14 natural-gas fuelled plants and 12 stations fuelled by imported steamcoal.The present nominal capacity is 20,857 MW, but due to ageing, effectivecapacity is only 73% of this figure. The report therefore also saysrehabilitation and modernisation of existing plants will also beessential.Because of the high investment costs, foreign financing and capitalinvestment will be essential, according to the report. The governmentwill look to the private sector franchise, BOT method as one answer, aswell as the privatisation of existing units requiring updating andexpansion, the report adds.Contracts so far signed on a BOT basis involve projects with a totalcapacity of around 3,710 MW, including two gas-fired plants of around500 MW each at Eregli on the Sea of Marmara, and a 180 MW plant atEsenyurt in an Istanbul suburb. Also included is the 672 MW Birecik damscheme on the Euphrates river in the southeast, says the report.Bids were also invited by the ministry for the BOT implementation ofthe following plants: Beysehir-Konya (2 x 170 MW); Saray-Tekirdag (2 x150 MW), Afsin Elbistan (4 x 340 MW), Tufanbeyli (2 x 150 MW, or 1 x300 MW).Generally, the report foresees:* commissioning of the first natural gas-fired plant with a rating of680 MW in 1996;* start-up of the fifth and sixth units at the Afsin-Elbistan ligniteplant, each with a rating of 340 MW;* start-up of the first hydro-electric plant in 2000;* commissioning of the first nuclear plant with a rating of 1,000 MW in2005;* start-up of the first imported coal fired station with a rating of 2x 500 MW as well in 2005.* In a separate development, the ministry reckons there is a potentialin Turkey for 30% energy savings annually amounting to 13.2m toeequivalent or $2.6bn, based on 1994 production and consumption figures.Had electricity been generated and consumed in the most productive way,savings would have amounted in the construction sectors and industrygenerally to 5.3m toe, or around $1.2bn each; and in the transportationsector, 2.8m toe, or $262m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996MISSION ENERGY ACQUIRES FIRST HYDROMission Energy of the US has joined Eastern Group at the head of theindependent generator league after its #652.5m ($1.01bn) acquisition onDecember 21 of First Hydro, the National Grid's former pumped storagebusiness.First Hydro's two plants in North Wales have a combined capacity of2,088 MW, adding to Mission's 80% holding in the 220 MW Roosecote CCGTin the northwest and a 33% interest in Derwent Cogeneration Limited, a214 MW plant in Derby. The final price was considerably in excess ofthe #450m value put on the business in NGC's flotation prospectus.The two stations give Mission a key role in ensuring the security ofsupply in England and Wales, particularly in winter when Dinorwic andFfestiniog frequently set the pool price. Mission has indicated thesize of the bid - #325/kW - was made possible by its favourable taxposition; it will also have taken into account increasing pricedifferentials in recent price spikes (PiE 214/28). Its bid topped thoseof two others, Scottish Hydro-Electric and Dominion Energy of the US.Mission and Eastern Group, along with Enron and Applied Power Systems,are bidding for National Power's (NP's) 4 GW of capacity (PiE 212/24).James Iaco, Mission's senior vice-president, said the First Hydro dealmade the company keener to win the auction for the three NP coal-firedstations.The 12 regional electricity companies who owned First Hydro after ithad demerged from the Grid stated on December 28 that they would retainthe proceeds from the sale. They will, however, have to pay capitalgains tax on their profits.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996LITTLECHILD PUBLISHES MODIFICATIONS TO LICENCESRegulator Stephen Littlechild has published his proposed modificationsto the licences of South Western Electricity (SWEB) and Eastern Groupfollowing their respective takeovers by Southern Electric Internationaland Hanson.The modifications, already agreed by Southern and Hanson, deal withfinancial ring-fencing of the electricity businesses, restrictions onactivities, availability of resources, disposal of assets and provisionof information to the regulator. The modifications will be applied toother merged companies in due course.Littlechild said: "the merged companies will continue to have to meettheir existing obligations under the Electricity Act and licences.These additional licence modifications will allow me to continue toregulate effectively and to ensure that customers continue to be fullyprotected."Meanwhile, Ian Lang, President of the Board of Trade, in early Januarycleared the proposed #1.6bn southeastern distributor Seeboard by Dallasutility Central & South West (CSW; PiE 212/25). The bid will not now bereferred to the Monopolies & Mergers Commission, as were the bids bylocal generators National Power for Southern Electric and PowerGen forMidlands (PiE 213/9).CSW's offer went unconditional the day after the clearance. Unusually,all executive directors of Seeboard will retain their positions, whilechairman Keith Stuart and six non-executive directors resigned. JimEllis will combine the role of chairman with his current position ofchief executive.The clearance of Welsh Water's #880m agreed bid for South WalesElectricity (SWALEC; PiE 214/28), meanwhile, is not proving quite assmooth. The Office of Fair Trading has delayed its ruling on the bid -the second by a privatised UK water firm for a privatised UKdistributor - until January 25.The bid prospects clouded further in early January as Welsh Waterrejected a proposal by the water regulator Ian Byatt that it maintain aseparate stock market listing for the companies following any takeover.This proposal was believed to be the main condition in a clearance ofthe deal by both water and electricity regulators, both of whom areconcerned to retain sufficient comparators to regulate their respectiveindustries.However, Welsh Water, noting that North West Water (NWW) was notrequired to maintain separate listing prior to clearance of its bid forNorweb (PiE 211/25), claimed a separate listing would make efficientmanagement of the new group difficult. The company is continuingdiscussions and says it will seek alternative ways to meet Byatt'sobjectives.* The merged NWW and Norweb were merged into a new holding company,United Utilities, on January 1. The combined group will have a turnoverof over #2.5bn and is capitalised at over #3bn. The companies willcontinue to trade under their former names.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NATIONAL POWER TO CUT 400 JOBSNational Power (NP) has announced it is to cut 400 jobs in a cost-cutting exercise that is expected to save #100m ($155.3m) over twoyears from its #1.4bn annual costs. The redundancies will come fromsupport divisions  in its Swindon headquarters, and equate to about athird of its headquarters staff and almost 10% of its total 4,900.Most of the cost savings, however, are expected to come from reviews ofbusiness processes, with some #35m as a result of propertyrationalisation.NP said the review was sparked by the increasing competition in theelectricity market, and was the result partly of its enforced sale of4,000 MW of coal plant, which is expected to be agreed by March (PiE209/2).NP has already cut its workforce by over two-thirds from the 16,000staff it had at privatisation in 1991.The move follows the company's mid-December buy back of a further 57mshares, or 4.4% of its issued capital. The buyback, at a cost of #243m,would increase gearing by 9 percentage points, said the company, butwould boost earnings per share by 2-3% in a full year.* The company's finances may also be assisted by a surprising #300mloan awarded in late December by the European Investment Bank for theinstallation of flue gas desulphurisation equipment at its 3,750 MWDrax coal-fired plant in Yorkshire.NP, which applied for the loan several years ago, is due to completethe so far self-financed #750m work on Drax this year.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-14IA086-000616-B014-209http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001613 text/html 110189HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:14:07 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:54 GMTContent-length: 110001Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey24.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES VENEZUELAN FLOTATIONS EXPECTED BY SUMMER (755 words) CHILE'S COLBUN: PREPARING FOR PRIVATE LIFE (1604 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW COMMERCIALISING POWER TARIFFS (1230 words) CHILE CONTINUES ARGENTINE WOOING (956 words) HAITI REFORMS AWAIT NEW LEADER (367 words) $4BN BID FOR YACYRETA? (461 words) PEREZ BUILDS BA THERMAL PLANT (281 words) A LITTLE LIGHT TROUBLE (508 words) NEWS MACHADINHO DAM GO-AHEAD (77 words) ENERGETICA SALE SET FOR APRIL (257 words) CEEE, CERJ PRIVATISATION PROGRESS (629 words) CPFL UPS SALES, CUTS COSTS (348 words) ENERGY DEMAND RISES 7.6% (170 words) HYDRO OUTPUT BREAKS RECORDS (185 words) NEW CHAIRMAN FOR BOLPOW (253 words) TOCOPILLA FLOATED (365 words) CONSUMPTION SOARS 9.2%, ANOTHER 8.8% SEEN IN `96 (291 words) LUKSIC, US GROUPS TIE UP ATACAMA PIPE SCHEME (325 words) ENDESA GETS RALCO DAM LICENCE (102 words) CHILGENER PLANS $500M INVESTMENTS FOR `96 (221 words) ENERSIS BOOSTS CAPITAL THROUGH MAJOR SHARE OFFER (206 words) POWER CRISIS DEEPENS (274 words) PERU OUTLINES EXPANSION PLANS (243 words) MANTARO HYDRO HITS TROUBLE (175 words) OUTPUT UP 3.3% IN 10 MONTHS (195 words) AGUAYTIA DEAL FORMALISED (179 words) GUYANA POWER SECTOR REHAB PLANS HIT SNAGS (504 words) LOCAL TIE-UP STRENGTHENS BIDDERS CHANCES (698 words) MEXICO PUTS ITS CLOCKS FORWARD (439 words) NEW ENERGY MINISTER APPOINTED (260 words) CFE CONFIRMS EXPANSION PLANS (342 words) ARGENTINA CALLS FOR TENDERS FOR OIL EXPLORATION (186 words) CHANGO NORTE X-1 EXPLORATION WELL (130 words) PACIFIC EXAMINING PURCHASE OF STAKE IN ARGENTINE GAS COMPANIES (55 words) BOLIVIA RECEIVES BIDS IN PARTIAL PRIVATISATION OF YPFB (142 words) CALOR GROUP EXPANDING IN LATIN AMERICA (181 words) OFFSHORE RIG CHARTER ORDER FROM PETROBRAS (88 words) YPF OPENS FIRST SERVICE STATION IN CHILE (55 words) PETROBRAS LAUNCHES PRODUCTS IN CHILE (39 words) ENAP ANNOUNCES PROFITS IN 1995 (60 words) PIPELINE MAY NOT GO AHEAD (198 words) COLOMBIAN CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION (57 words) ECOPETROL PLANS TO INVEST $4.7BN (62 words) BP'S COLOMBIAN OIL AND GAS RESERVES (103 words) ECOPETROL TO ATTEMPT TO SELL ITS STAKE IN PROMIGAS (100 words) CUBA HOPES TO PRODUCE MORE CRUDE THIS YEAR (94 words) GOVERNMENT NAMES PRESIDENT OF PETROECUADOR (127 words) MEXICAN ENERGY MINISTER TO PRESS AHEAD WITH MODERNISATION (96 words) PROPOSAL TO DEVELOP GAS FIELD IN NORTHERN MEXICO (131 words) PETROPERU PLANS TO CUT WORKFORCE (82 words) PERU'S OIL PRODUCTION (120 words) PDVSA PLANS TO INCREASE CRUDE RESERVES (133 words) PDVSA EXPECTS OIL OUTPUT BOOST (108 words) VENEZUELA'S AMUAY REFINERY RECORD (99 words) STATOIL CONSIDERING JOINING MARAVEN TO UPGRADE CRUDE (75 words) CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENEZUELAN FLOTATIONS EXPECTED BY SUMMERThe Venezuelan government has set out target dates for theprivatisation of its electricity sector, which it plans to start thissummer and extend through 1997.Potential investors looking for a widely-spread flotation with thepotential for a large shareholding by the investing public will bedisappointed because the government's intention, at least at thisstage, is to place the bulk of power generation in the hands of asingle private sector investor or joint venture. Indications are that aminority portion of shares will be more widely sold.The initial piece of the sector to be placed on the market will be theMargarita Island utility, which comprises a 146 MW power plant and a100 MW submarine cable, as well as transmission and distributionnetworks.The regional utility has 90,000 subscribers, a high, 92% billcollection ratio, and forecasts a demand rise of 8%-10% per year. Theutility, serving a resort area, is 15 miles off the coast.The privatisation programme, disclosed by officials in Caracas, wasfurther explained in statements by Luis Xavier Grisanti, Director ofthe Fondo de Inversiones de Venezuela (FIV), the state holding companythat is overseeing the unbundling process. FIV has $10bn of assets,half of which are in the power sector (Enelven-Enelco and Enelbar).According to officials, the state plans to sell Enelbar (EnergiaElectrica de Barquisimeto), Enelven (Energia Electrica de Venezuela)and Enelco (Energia Electrica de la Costa Oriental), and to follow this- at an as-yet undisclosed date - by the sale of the Planto Centrothermal power generator. FIV owns 99% of the shares in these threecompanies. Planto Central is more problematical, being the country'slargest power generator with 2,000 MW of capacity. Its preparation forsale will take longer, said Grisanti.One generation operation definitely not set for privatisation is themassive Guri hydroelectric complex which is responsible for 10,000 MWof electricity, more than half of all the country's capacity. Thegovernment has said it will never privatise the hydropower complex;most analysts concur that it would probably be impossible to do so.According to Grisanti, the flotations are part of a large privatisationprogramme involving tax reforms, establishment of a market-relatedforeign exchange rate for the bolivar, a lifting or exchange controls,price hikes for gasoline/petrol, the opening of the oil sector toforeign investment (already under way), and an agreement with the WorldBank to supervise the privatisation of the power sector (PLA 5/19, Nov1995).In preparation for the flotation, the FIV has outlined a framework, oraction plan, which calls for the establishment of a rational tariffschedule for 1996/97; a rationalisation of energy prices, such as oil,gas and hydropower, improvement of utility management, and a market-oriented regulatory framework for the sector. This last framework waspresented to the Electric Energy Regulatory Commission (CREE) lastautumn and to the utilities in December. The government says thefinalised framework should be ready by next month.The regulatory framework calls for the following:* Legal separation of generation, transmission and distribution.* A single company to operate the national grid; free access totransmission grid; and establishment of a single power pool.* Freedom of entry to build generation capacity.* Distribution companies and large industrial/commercial clients freeto sign direct P & S contracts.* A new pricing mechanism for the wholesale market; and establishmentof short and long-term wholesale markets.The action plan also calls for large end users to be able to buy freelyfrom generators and for distributors to buy wholesale at negotiatedtariffs.Enelven generates, transmits and distributes thermal power. It has alabour force of 1,702 and its 1,336 MW of capacity generates 3.6 TWh.Enelco has a payroll of 480, installed capacity of 40 MW and an outputof 172.953 GWh.Enelbar's labour force is 896, and its prime operation is to serve Larastate. Its 150 MW of installed capacity, of which 120 MW is in use,provides a gross generation of 1.6 TWh.According to Grisanti, the plan is for a minimum sale of 79.9% ofshares in each of Enelven-Enelco  to a single investor group,supplemented by an employee stock plan of up to 20%.A minimum of 79.9% of Enelbar's shares also will be put on the market,but these will be through an international tender, supplemented by anemployee stock ownership plan of up to 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILE'S COLBUN:  PREPARING FOR PRIVATE LIFEColbun-Machicura, Chile's state-controlled hydroelectric generator, islooking for a partner, or even partners, to provide finance andexpertise for a $400m development plan which will double its output inthe next three years.If the search for a compatible associate is successful, Colbun willeventually be a sizeable player in the industry, which is currentlydominated by two aggressive private sector companies, Endesa andChilgener.Colbun is not selling off assets, as Jose Luis Mardones, its generalmanager, explained in an interview with Power in Latin America.Instead, the government is using the state company as a way to bringnew competitors into the field, specifically into the centralelectricity grid (SIC).Its model is the northern electricity network (SING), where there arethree private generators - Edelnor (controlled by Southern Company ofthe US), Norgener (Chilgener) and Endesa. A controlling share in thefourth, Tocopilla, owned by Codelco, the state copper corporation, wasawarded this month to a consortium of Powerfin, Iberdrola and Enagas(see News). In this network prices have fallen steadily over recentyears.The Colbun management began to develop its plan in the early days ofthe Frei government in 1994, and gained approval for it the same year.It is targeting three main areas, hydro power, gas generation andtransmission.HydroIn the hydroelectric sector, Colbun plans to increase capacity from 500MW to around 730 MW by mid-1998. A first modest increase comes intocommission in May this year, with its 35 MW San Ignacio plant, downriver from the Colbun and Machicura plants. This, its third generatingcentre, has cost $30m and was financed mainly with an equity issuesubscribed by existing private shareholders, bringing their share ofthe company up from 7% to 15%.Its fourth centre is the new 108 MW Rucue project, on a new river,Laja, where it bought water rights from rival Endesa in 1994. Mardonessays preliminary studies are almost finished and a tender is expectedto go out before the end of January. The plant is scheduled to comeinto operation in mid-1998 and represents an estimated investment of$140m.Gas plantsColbun plans a move into gas-fired generation by 1998, with a plant atLimache, in the Fifth Region, one of the most densely populated areaafter Santiago. This is a turnkey project (PLA 4/24, Oct 1995), forwhich General Electric, Mitsubishi and Siemens are reported to havebeen short-listed. The plant will have a capacity of 340 MW-390 MW,depending on the bid chosen. Colbun had originally budgeted $250m forthis project but now expects to be able to cut the cost by as much ashalf.Mardones said an important reason for locating the plant outside theSantiago region was that it would not add to pollution in the capital,which should be declared an ozone-saturated area in March this year. Inaddition, being close to sea level gives greater efficiency, comparedto a Santiago site at 1,500ft. Also, the distance is not so significantas to make transmission costs a major factor in supplying power to themetropolitan region.One other factor was also important. According to  Mardones thegovernment specifically wanted to see natural gas from Argentina takento the Fifth Region. Without Colbun's Limache plant, existing andprojected industrial and domestic consumption would not have justifiedthe $50m extension of the GasAndes pipeline from its route to Santiago.The Fifth Region is industrially depressed, and the government hopesthe availability of natural gas will give it a comparative advantagewhich will enable it to attract new industrial development. (Promotinggovernment decentralisation policy is not new to Colbun - it openedoffices in the southern provincial town of Talca on governmentinstructions.)TransmissionThe third plank of Colbun's strategy is a move into transmission, in adirect challenge to Endesa, whose Transelec subsidiary has a monopolyto carry power from the hydroelectric generating centres of the southto the Santiago area.The decision to build its own transmission line goes back to 1994 whenTranselec announced a hefty rise in its rates, and Colbun startedlooking at the option of going independent. Its management decided thatthe strategic advantage of having its own lines, and being able totransmit up to 600 MW at peak time would be a valuable asset, as wellas making it independent of its competitor.Endesa not surprisingly, has challenged Colbun's project (PLA 6/16, Dec1995)  and has first option on the most convenient transmission route.But negotiations are continuing, Mardones says, and Colbun is willingto share the route and connect with Transelec to avoid duplication. Inthat case, Colbun would be willing to upgrade its line to 500 kV andbring forward its construction schedule to April 1997 to accommodateEndesa's 447 MW Pangue plant, due on-line then.But Mardones said a sine qua non was a satisfactory commercialagreement giving his company freedom to use or sell the excess capacitywhich will become available once a transformation bottleneck isremoved. This condition would only be fulfilled, according to Mardones,if Transelec were to be made independent of Endesa.In the meantime, Colbun intends to proceed with its plans. On January3, it announced that it had awarded a contract to Asea Brown Boveri tobuild the double-circuit 220 kV line, and given instructions to beginwork immediately. The value of the contract was not revealed, butMardones had previously estimated the cost as in the region of $50m.AdviceKleinwort Benson, the UK merchant bank, has been advising Colbun onfinancing for its development plan, and the government is consideringits report. Kleinworts - which also advised on the Tocopilla sale -recommended that Colbun's best option was to take one or more strategicpartners. In the case of multiple partners, Colbun would be dividedinto three companies, covering hydroelectric and gas-fired generationand transmission.Among those mentioned as potential partners for Colbun are SouthernCompany (operating in Chile as Southern Electric), CMS Energy, Entergyand Luksic, a Chilean financial-industrial conglomerate (See News).The latter recently sold a 6% stake in Enersis (PLA 6/16, Dec 1995),the holding company which controls Endesa and the Chilectradistribution company, in a move which was widely interpreted as adeclaration of interest in Colbun, though it is also said to havewanted the cash. It is expected that, as in the case of the Tocopillasell-off, current players in the SIC will not be allowed to bid.Mardones indicates considerable interest in a Colbun partnership,claiming the company has already received many enquiries from potentialpartners. The timing is still not clear, however, and Colbun hasgovernment authorisation to borrow to bridge any financing gap that mayoccur.Colbun is looking for a partner which will not only bring finance,Mardones insists, but which shares a philosophy and a set of strategicgoals for the future of electricity generation in Chile. Colbun wantsto promote competition in the sector, reduce prices, to protect theenvironment and its workers.In the meantime, Colbun has instituted a restructuring designed toincrease the company's asset values and make it attractive tooutsiders. Management changes have been implemented, and programmes tocut costs, increase efficiency and strengthen the company's salesportfolio have been put in place.Mardones was brought in at the beginning of 1995 from Enami, the statecopper refining and marketing company. In July a new finance andadministration manager with a private banking background was recruited,and in September, a new development division was set up. This divisionhas responsibility for the expansion plan.Since July, Knox D'Arcy, a UK management consultant, has been workingwith Colbun on a cost-cutting programme. This, recently completed, isexpected to bring savings of $1m a year, Mardones says, mostly as aresult of cutting out overtime payments. One of the objects of theexercise was to increase productivity without staff reductions.Employees have been redeployed to new projects.A major change has already taken place in sales policy. Until 1990,Colbun was allowed to sell energy only to the SIC, essentiallysupplying other generators. Changes in the law, introduced in 1990,opened the way for the state company to sell direct to its customersand it has since built up a portfolio of clients which it considers oneof its major assets.As of end-1994 it was supplying six distribution companies, includingChilectra and Chilquinta, and a selection of industrial users,including El Teniente, Codelco's major underground mine.Colbun's direct sales activity was boosted further last year with a 29MW a year contract to supply the Ventanas copper refinery, belonging toEnami. And it is targeting further growth in direct supplies todistributors and industrials, irrespective of - but useful to absorb -its projected capacity increases. Mardones says that there will be newson this front in the near future.In 1994, Colbun made an after-tax profit of $55m, with operatingprofits of $53m on sales of $124m. Profits in 1995 will show a drop toaround $40m. Although operating profits increased slightly, non-operating profits were down as a result of lower monetary correction.Beyond 1998, Colbun expects to continue investing around $100m peryear, developing a series of small hydroelectric plants, using waterrights which it bought in 1994 at the same time as those for the Rucueplant. It will also eventually be considering a second gas-fired plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMERCIALISING POWER TARIFFSOne of the biggest obstacles to creating a truly commercial electricitysupply industry in Latin America is the continued subsidisation ofpower tariffs and, in some cases, a political reluctance to wind downsuch practices.The phenomenon is not new, nor is it exclusive to Latin America, beingrampant in Asia and lurking, chameleon-like, within the power sectorsof Europe and North America.As students of the power sector in the Third World know, no twocountries are exactly alike - populations, histories and politicalsystems are different. The same holds true of their electricity supplyindustries (ESI), with some systems staggering under the weight ofsubsidisation and others attacking the challenge of commercialisationwith vigour.The theme forms an important part of a new study*, ElectricityGeneration in Latin America, by David Kurtz, which examines, on acountry-by-country basis, the generation and supply systems of allcountries - save the Caribbean islands - south of the Rio Grande River.Kurtz points out that electricity subsidisation grew out of the beliefthat lower power prices could curb inflation and stimulate economicgrowth, a belief, however honourable, which proved to be folly.What happened instead in the 1972-88 period was that electricity pricesdeteriorated in real terms by 22%, while operating costs rose by around14%. Power was used inefficiently, bill collection deteriorated and thefinancial burden on utilities and governments - most power sectorsbeing nationally owned - increased to the extent that funds to maintainand upgrade power generating and delivery systems dried up.By 1990, the Latin American Electricity Organisation (OLADE) was ableto report, unhappily, that only five of the trade association's 26-members in Latin America and the Caribbean were charging prices at orabove the long-term marginal cost of power.Even now in Brazil, which is preparing for a major restructuring of itspower sector, electricity prices are kept low for electoral purposes,with low prices serving as a disincentive to private investors, whichare unable to gain the necessary returns. (It must be noted that thenoises coming out of Brazil for the past year indicate that the centralgovernment is trying to devise formulas to `take this on' so as tosmooth the way for the partial unbundling of Eletrobras.)According to Kurtz's study, Brazil's tariffs, through July 1994, are,at best, very marginal, with domestic tariffs being set at 4.78o perkilowatt hour; commercial at 5.65o and industrial at just 2.86o. (It isto be noted that commercial rates in the Indian Subcontinent rangearound 7o-plus per kilowatt hour on average. Anything much below 6.5o,the formula used in Pakistan, is a tight squeeze for independent powerproject sponsors.) The study indicates that the worst-case scenario isseen in Venezuela, where domestic power tariffs average just 0.79o/kWh,commercial 2.31o and industrial 1.61o/kWh.There is an upside to this as well, notably in Chile, Argentina andPeru which have embarked on major privatisation programmes which, inthe case of Chile and Argentina, are all but complete. Their collectivetariff levels are, if anything, slightly higher than those of the US,where domestic tariffs averaged 8.82o/kWh through mid-1994, commercial8.08o and industrial 5.02o.The study takes note of some of the individual tariff variations. InArgentina and Colombia (See Table) domestic rates are much lower thancommercial rates and lower also than industrial rates. "This pricingmethod, which is aimed at gaining favour from the voting public,disadvantages industry", says Kurtz. "However, with the exception ofArgentina, where many industries are in the public sector, what thegovernment loses in higher industrial electricity costs it gains fromhigher electricity revenues."By charging the commercial and industrial sectors higher prices, thegovernment is, therefore, better able to subsidise the residentialsector's prices, in return for electoral gains."New playersThe report is encouraged, nevertheless, by the momentum behindelectricity reform - there is scarcely a country mentioned in thereport that has not undertaken reforms or that is at least activelyplanning them. This will mean an enhanced role for foreign concernseither through sponsorship of new projects within the region or through acquisition of existing assets.The report breaks down the likely big players - many of them alreadystakeholders in various countries even now - into three categories.Among regional companies are such active Chilean majors as Chilgenerand Endesa; from North America, there are Enron, Duke Power, DominionEnergy, CMS Generation and Liberty Power/Cogentrix (See Bolivia News).From abroad, meanwhile, the report notes the activities of Broken HillProprietary of Australia, Spain's Endesa and Iberdrola, and the Frenchstate utility Electricite de France. Not mentioned but certainly verymuch a player is British Gas which, since the date of the report'spublication, has decided to shift its all-Americas operationalheadquarters out of Texas to Argentina.In spite of the economic difficulties that have beset Latin America -some of them almost unique by  global standards, such as hyperinflation- the region's share of electricity supply is, on a per capita basis,better than that of Asia, the world's fastest-growing economic region.The Indian subcontinent, with more than 1bn people, has 3% of totalglobal installed capacity of 2,911 GW, whereas Latin America, with lessthan half that population level, has 6%.China, bigger again, has 7%, with the rest of Asia and Australasiataking a 13% share. Europe's share is 35% and North America's 28%(albeit North America's installed capacity per head is nearly twicethat of Europe). Bringing up the rear are Russia/Middle East at 5% andAfrica at 3%.What will Latin America's share be by 2003? Kurtz claims, using figuresfrom General Electric of the US, that total new generating capacityworldwide by then will be 1,089 GW.  Latin America's share will haveclimbed to 8%, while other Third World growth areas, such asAsia/Australia, the Indian subcontinent and China will have increasedtheir shares to 22%, 6% and 16% respectively.It is acknowledged that the European and North American electricitysupply industries are "mature", to say the least. Therefore theirglobal share of new capacity will have diminished to 18% and 17%respectively. (It is for that reason that European and Americancompanies are taking such a high profile role in investing in theelectricity industries of developing countries.)Another area of significant development is the progress made in recentdecades on the rate of electrification. According to OLADE, thisincreased from 40% in 1970 to 70% in 1989. The report does caution,however, that some of this growth increase stems more from urbanisationof national populations rather than rural electrification. The reportdoes not ignore the `convenience' factor in spurring growth - thegrowth in the sale of refrigerators, of cookers/stoves and even ofmicrowave ovens.The most electrified countries so far are Uruguay, Argentina and Chile,all at around 92% as a percentage share of population with electricity.Those with the lost level of achievement are Paraguay, at 60%, Boliviaat about 53 % and Peru at 48%.* Electricity Generation in Latin America: Sector Reform andPrivatisation, by David Kurtz, FT Energy Publishing, Maple House, 149Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9LL. Tel. no (44-171) 896 2222; fax(44-171) 896 2275; 175 pages.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILE CONTINUES ARGENTINE WOOINGThe love affair between Chilean energy groups and their Argentinecounterparts continued in January, when companies from Chile madefurther incursions into the electricity market of their trans-Andeanneighbour. New deals followed the important acquisition last Decemberof 39% of Buenos Aires utility Edesur by Chile's Enersis for $390m.Chilean companies, looking for opportunities beyond their ownrelatively small - though fast growing - domestic market of 14m people,have increasingly turned their attention to neighbouring Argentina withits far larger market of 33m consumers. In the past four years, theyhave spent well in excess of $3bn on acquiring large chunks ofArgentine distributors and generators, mainly through the privatisationprocess that broke up the old state-owned SEGBA. Along with a few othercountries such as the US and Spain, Chile is now one of the mostimportant players in the Argentine energy market.For years Chile and Argentina, very different countries despite their3,000-mile long shared border, were arch rivals. They nearly went towar in the early 1980s, when both countries were ruled by militarydictatorships, over a dispute about the Beagle channel. In those darkdays, when Argentina was still pursuing a protectionist developmentmodel, the idea of big cross-border investments was unthinkable.But stability, democracy and rapprochement between former presidentPatricio Aylwin of Chile and President Carlos Menem of Argentina pavedthe way for much closer economic ties. Chile's participation inArgentina's electricity privatisation process, an already functioningoil pipeline and two planned gas pipelines between the two countriesare evidence that old suspicions are being consigned to history.Indeed, Chilean groups, facing the possibility of a future energy glutat home, show no sign of losing interest in Argentina, richer thanChile, though less stable. With most opportunities in Argentina'snational network having been already bought up, Chilean companies arenow turning their attention to the country's provincial power sector.Early in January, a consortium led by Emec, a subsidiary of Chile'sSidgo Koppers group, beat off bids from three other hopefuls, paying$63m in the privatisation of 90% of Empresa Electrica de San Juan. Theregional utility, which supplies an estimated 130,000 consumers in thewestern Andean province, turns over around $60m a year. Emec will hopeto raise revenue well above this level by emulating other Chileancompanies which have a strong track-record of clamping down on theillegal electricity connections, until recently endemic in Argentina.The Agua Negra consortium, in which Emec has a 66% stake with theremaining 34% held by Chilgener unit Hidroandes, may have been promptedto invest in San Juan by the province's significant potential as amining region. Argentina's nascent mining industry, concentrated in theAndean provinces, will need a reliable energy supply should the bigprojects that are being predicted come on-line.Chilean companies are likely to see further opportunities to purchaseprovincial energy companies in Argentina. The federal government inBuenos Aires is making financial aid to its 23, mostly cash-strapped,provinces subject to a provincial government's willingness to transferstate assets to the private sector.Top on the list with banks are provincial generators and distributors,many of which lose money and tend to be grossly overstaffed. TheChileans, with hard-won experience of downsizing Argentine energycompanies, may feel they are up to the job of turning round these loss-making provincial entities.Among local governments that have already announced plans to privatisetheir energy companies are Mendoza, the prosperous Andean province,Santa Fe, one of Argentina's main industrial centres, Jujuy in thenorth-west and Rio Negro in Patagonia. Chilean groups may to beinterested in all these sell-offs.On the national scene, the Argentine investment arm of Chile's Endesahas been active, buying an additional 17% stake in Buenos Aires-basedgenerator Central Constanera, which, following several expansions, nowhas a nominal installed capacity of 1,260 MW, the largest in Argentina.The purchase brings to 45% Endesa's stake in Central Constanera. Only afew days before, Endesa had bought a 9% stake in generator CentralTermoelectrica Buenos Aires, itself 51%-owned by Central Costanera.These purchases follow a flurry of activity towards the end of 1995,which represented something of a second-wave in the assault onArgentina by Chile's cash-rich utilities (PLA 6/12, Dec 1995).This saw Enersis paying $390m for 39% of Edesur and then swappingshares with fellow-Chilean Endesa to raise its Edesur stake stillfurther. Enersis is now to concentrate on generation, while Endesa willstick more to distribution. Chilectra, in which Enersis is the biggestshareholder, and Chilgener, a Chilean generator, also have importantslices of Argentine utilities. Chilean groups also have stakes inArgentina's provincial hydroelectric plants, such as El Chocon.According to Charles Barnett, energy analyst at Smith Barney, Chileaninvolvement is a positive development for the Argentine energy sector.Chilean electric utilities are " undoubtedly the most efficient andbest-managed in the region", he says. Most have now overcome theinitial resentment of Argentine consumers, many of whom baulked atpaying their electricity bills to a company from Chile.Barnett says the fact that, for example, the future of CentralCostanera is in the hands of "top-notch" management from Endesa shouldhelp to ensure this Argentine generator a bright future. The company'sshares are valued at half those of a typical Chilean energy utility,but over time, says Barnett, their value is likely to catch up withthose of its Chilean rivals.Chilean groups have had such success in Argentina that some are nowseeking to repeat the performance in Peru. When Brazil liberalises itsenergy sector, there is little doubt that Chilean companies will bethere too.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HAITI REFORMS AWAIT NEW LEADERAn improvement in Haiti's deteriorating power supply will have to awaitthe installation in February of Rene Preval, who will succeed PresidentJean-Bertrand Aristide. Preval will then indicate whether he will startthe implementation of politically unpopular reforms, including thedivestment of several state enterprises, including the power company.The state of the company's generation and transmission facilities,however, will deter "even the most optimistic of potential buyers"according to a confidential report prepared by a US consulting firm."The amount of money which will be needed to make the company viablewill be an obstacle, if not to privatisation, at least to the plans fora significant expansion in generating capacity", the report said.The modernisation of the power company will cost about $970m, said ErnsExceus, head of the government's privatisation programme. The company,which uses oil-fired generators, has nominal capacity of 217 MW, but isgenerating 101 MW, he said.According to the country's economic development plan, Haiti will need1,250 MW by 2004, reported Exceus. Current demand is 390 MW, saidgovernment officials, and the shortfall from the power company is beingmet by small private generators."These are expensive problems, but they also represent opportunitiesfor investors", Exceus said. The government hopes to set up ruralelectrification projects using hydro-electric power, he added. The costestimates are "frightening", said Richard Archi, an economist with theInter-American Development Bank, which is Haiti's biggest internationalcreditor.In addition to financing the expansion of company to meet the planneddemand, the investors will have to deal with the politically sensitiveissue of a significant increase in tariffs.Haiti, with a population of 7m, is the poorest country in the Americas,and the report suggests that there is an inadequate client base tofinancially support the magnitude of expansion which the governmenthopes will happen.Commercial consumption has also been reduced in recent years ascompanies closed after an embargo was put on the country to force outof office the military which had overthrown and exiled Aristide forthree years. "The prospects for a rapid and significant improvement inHaiti's power supply are not bright", the report said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996$4BN BID FOR YACYRETA?A consortium formed by Ontario Hydro of Canada and the US company AESAmericas is reported to have offered $4bn to take over Yacyreta, themonstrously expensive 3,000 MW hydroelectric plant that the Argentineeconomy ministry is keen to shuffle off to the private sector.Argentine newspapers reported that the consortium had offered $4bn,more than double the $1.8bn set as a target by the government, afterdiscussions with Argentina's Energy Secretary, Carlos Bastos. Bastosdenied any such offer had been made, although he admitted talks hadtaken place.A western diplomat close to the negotiations confirmed thatrepresentatives of the consortium had been in Buenos Aires on severaloccasions with a view to putting together an offer. He did not know ifa concrete bid had been made."Everything is still very much in the air", the diplomat said. TheArgentine government, which owns the still uncompleted dam jointly withParaguay, had not obtained the go-ahead to privatise Yacyreta eitherfrom the Paraguayan government or from its own Congress, he said."It's not clear whether the Argentine Congress will be amenable to thedeal." Neither had the basis for the sale been properly laid out, whichcould explain the huge discrepancy between the supposed offer and thegovernment's figure. "It`s like trying to shoot at a moving target. Thegovernment is still trying to put a package together and explainexactly what is on offer."The proposal from the consortium is said to involve payment of a fixedsum in return for ownership of, rather than an operating concession forthe dam. The government's idea had been to offer a 20-30 yearconcession on Yacyreta. The consortium would then assume all the risksinvolved in completing the project, a process that would involve adding15 turbines to the bring the dam to its full complement of 20, as wellas raising the level of the dam from 76 to 83 metres.The latter process could involve the potentially controversial andcostly displacement of thousands of people. Indeed, it has taken solong to complete the project that several hundred poor Paraguayanfamilies are said to have moved close to the dam so that they can suefor compensation should they need to be relocated.Bastos, reacting to the reports, said that if the $4bn referred to wassupposed to represent the whole value of Yacyreta, it vastlyunderestimated the dam's worth. Yacyreta, dubbed by President CarlosMenem of Argentina "a monument to corruption", cost an estimated $8bnto build.* Central Costanera has reported a rise in revenues and profits for1995. Net profits reached $40.9m in 1995 compared to $36.7m in 1994, onrevenues up to $302.2m from $271.9m in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PEREZ BUILDS BA THERMAL PLANTPerez Companc, the huge energy-based conglomerate, is to spend $230m onbuilding a 660 MW gas-fired power station in Ezeiza, a Buenos Airessuburb. The power station, to be called Genelba, will be the secondbiggest in the country after Central Costanera. Perez, which hasimportant stakes in electricity generation, transmission anddistribution, will feed energy from the plant into its own network.Perez controls 16.6% of Edesur, through its 32.5% stake in theDistrilec holding company, 5.99% of Central Costanera, the Buenos Airesgenerator, and 9.75% of Transener, which owns and operates the 500 kVand part of the 220 kV Argentine interconnected system.Work started in mid-January and the plant is expected to be inproduction by 1997. Given current market prices, Genelba should produceenergy worth an annual $130m.Meanwhile, a second new Buenos Aires plant is also on the cards.Generator Central Puerto has announced that it is planning to install a360 MW combined cycle plant in the Argentine capital. The plant,estimated to cost $140m, should be completed by 1998 and is expected toproduce energy at a 30% discount on conventional thermal power.Central Puerto is keen to reduce production costs given the sharp risein power supply and falling prices. According to ING Barings, thecompany is already the most leveraged electric utility in LatinAmerica, with a net debt/equity ratio of 88.7%Separately, Central Puerto has merged formally with its 60%-ownedsubsidiary Central Neuquen, which supplies electricity to parts ofPatagonia in southern Argentina. The purpose of the merger is to allowCentral Puerto to take advantage of tax credits held by Central Neuquenworth about $25m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996A LITTLE LIGHT TROUBLEThe privatisation of Light, already delayed from December to March 13(PLA 6/1, Dec 1995), has run into more trouble.A few days before the scheduled December 28 publication of Light'sprivatisation prospectus, the electricity workers' union, which holdsshares in the company, lodged a legal objection to the proposal tosplit the company into two - the viable Light Rio, and LightParticipacoes, which would retain the company's 47% stake in thecountry's largest distributor Eletropaulo and the R$1bn or so of thelatter's debts to Light.Light has around half the capital of Eletropaulo whose total value isput at R$3.5bn (US$3.6bn)  - interestingly close to the new, higherestimates of Light's value, R$3.7bn, despite its R$1bn of Eletropaulodebt. According to the Brazilian press, Eletropaulo - whose cost-cutting includes laying off 5,000 staff in 1995 - is expected to beoperating efficiently in three year's time when Light's stake isexpected to be worth around R$4.5bn.Although the objection was subsequently overturned in the courts, itled to the postponement of a shareholders' meeting to OK the split,which in turn is considered likely to delay the auction date by afurther two weeks to the end of March.Brazilian observers of the process say, however, that even the endMarch deadline is too optimistic and is likely to be met only if Lightdesists from the split, which is now due to be approved by shareholdersat the end of January and sells the company along with its debts.Otherwise, they say, the auction is likely to take place at theearliest in May.This will include an element of shares for sale to consumers via a fundset up in the middle of January by Banco do Brasil. The minimuminvestment in the new fund, BB Investment Privatization Fund-Light, hasbeen set at R$200. Deposits will be held in a fixed interest accountuntil the Light auction date, when they will be used to purchaseshares. Banco do Brasil estimates that the fund would attract R$50m-100m. It intends to establish similar funds for subsequentprivatisations.Meanwhile, once Light is out of the way, Eletrobras intends to move onto other sales. It is currently studying a strategy for furtherprivatisations that would begin with Furnas, the south easterngenerator, which has been asked to prepare alternative scenarios forits future.These include the sale of one hydroelectric dam; the sale of severaldams on the same river basin or the division of Furnas into severalparts. Furnas is to present its recommendations by the end of January.Eletrobras controls three other regional generators - Eletrosul,Eletronorte and CHESF - but Furnas is the most important in terms ofpopulation, industry and consumption. The company currently generates54 GW and plans to double its capacity in the next 12 to 15 years.* Emmanuel Nobrega Sobral was appointed president of Eletropaulo at theend of December. Sobral, formerly Eletropaulo's financial director,replaces Paulo Feldmann.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MACHADINHO DAM GO-AHEADBrazil's energy minister, Raimundo Brito authorised the go ahead forthe $1bn Machadinho Dam project at the end of December. The 1,200 MWdam, located on the border of Santa Caterina and Rio Grade do Sulstate, is scheduled to go on-line by 2003.Eletrosul, the regional electricity generating company controlled byEletrobras will supervise the project which will have majority privatecapital.Eletrosul will issue a tender by March to choose its private partners.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGETICA SALE SET FOR APRILThe auction of Nacional Energetica has been set for April. Originally,it was thought that the company - with assets of R$185m (US$190.2m) -would be sold in January, following the November liquidation of itsparent, Banco Nacional, which went into liquidation and was absorbed inDecember by Unibanco.Nacional Energetica, left on the shelf by Unibanco, is currently underCentral Bank control. Its main asset in the energy sector is a 51.54%stake in the 1,300 MW Serra da Mesa dam on the River Tocantins in Goiasstate. The project, under construction in partnership with regionalgeneration company Furnas Centrais Eletricas, is scheduled forcompletion by April 1998, and is expected to generate earnings of $100m-$400m a year.Work on the dam continues apace despite the uncertainty over NacionalEnergetica's ownership thanks to Brazil's National Development Bank,BNDES, which is providing project finance to the tune of R$57m. Thisamount is sufficient for construction work to continue until the end ofMarch. Camargo Correa is carrying out civil engineering on the damwhich is now 70% complete. Nacional Energetica had invested R$247m inthe dam up to the start of this year, and and BNDES - which has pledgedto provide the remaining finance for the project - R$153m.Nacional Energetica's president, Victor Paranhos, said in late Januarythat he had already been approached by 28 parties interested in thecompany, including nine power companies (seven from the US) the IvenConsortium which controls Escelsa, and Camargo Correa, Brazil's largestconstruction company.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CEEE, CERJ PRIVATISATION PROGRESSThe state energy company of Rio Grande do Sul state, Companhia Estadualde Energia Eletrica - CEEE, was authorised to open its capital to theprivate sector by the state legislature in late December following thepresentation of a bill to this effect in November (PLA 6/2, Dec 1995).A maximum of 49% of the shares in CEEE - estimated to be worth betweenR$2.8bn (US$2.9bn) and R$5bn - will be sold under the proposal. Thecompany, which has debts of $90m, 9,800 active staff and 2,600pensioners, is currently 99.8%-owned by Rio Grande do Sul state.The next step is the evaluation of the company's assets and the drawingup of a model of energy production and distribution in the state. Threeconsortiums and an individual company submitted bids for this task onDecember 28: Fator, Nera, Mercados and Arthur Andersen; AndersenConsulting, Kleinwort Benson, Termoconsult and MMSO; Projeta, Deloitteand Engevix; and consultant Booz, Allen & Hamilton do BrasilConsultores.Prequalifying technical proposals drawn up by the competitors will besubmitted for judgement in mid-January, while their prices for CEEEwill be presented in early February. The winners of the process will beannounced at the beginning of April.The state government wants the consultants to give a clear definitionof all the steps necessary to place CEEE shares with their true valueon the market. It expects to have this information plus  details of anenergy plan for the state ready by the end of June 1996.According to state energy secretary, Assis Alberto de Souza, CEEEshould invest R$150m in 1996 with $100m being financed by an issue ofdebentures. In 1995 CEEE invested just $37m.Rio Grande do Sul is the only Brazilian state where coal-fired powerstations predominate using local low grade, high ash deposits. Foreigncompanies have shown an interest in making the plants moreenvironmentally-friendly in recent years. Neighbouring Uruguay hascomplained of acid-rain caused by the plants.The state government will be pressing for coal-fired solutions giventhe jobs they sustain in the local mining industry.Other regional privatisations are also progressing. Rio de Janeirostate's Companhia de Energia Eletrica de Rio de Janeiro (CERJ) iscurrently speeding towards the private sector.At the end of December the state established a commission to manage theprocess of selling off 14 of the state's 26 companies, and has justpublished a prospectus for consultants to evaluate CERJ's assets andprepare it for privatisation. CERJ distributes 25% of the state'spower, serving 1.2m customers; employs 4,806 staff (down from 5,758 ayear earlier) and had debts of R$54m in 1994.The deadline for bids for the contract to advise on the CERJprivatisation model isMarch 11, with the state announcing the winner amonth later. The privatisation reports are scheduled to be presented bythe end of August, allowing for privatisation in September. TheNational Development Bank (BNDES) has agreed to lend the state R$244mon the back of anticipated privatisation receipts.Meanwhile, Mato Grosso state has also recently joined the bandwagon,with an announcement that the state government was launching a seriesof administrative reforms that would make possible the privatisation ofCemat, as well as the regional bank, Bemat.These will include regulations for offering concessions for publicservices to the private sector and the removal of state subsidies. Abill authorising the privatisations is expected to be sent to thelegislature by June this year.* Sao Paulo state's secretary for energy, David Zylbersztajn, has senta bill to the state legislative proposing the creation of a publicenergy service commission which will have the mission of regulating andcontrolling electric energy services in the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CPFL UPS SALES, CUTS COSTSSao Paulo state electricity company, CPFL (Companhia Paulista de Forcae Luz), has registered increased power consumption of 6% in 1995, withan increase of 90,000 in its customer baseto 2.2m, mainly locatedoutside of Sao Paulo city.Whether this will be sufficient to help stave off the worst of itsimmediate financial problems, however, remains to be seen. In the firstnine months of last year, the company produced a five-fold increase innet losses, and analysts at Brazil's Garantia bank are forecasting fullyear losses of R$84m (US$86.4m) compared to a profit of R$22m in 1994,as a result of higher operating costs and lower tariffs in real termsfollowing the July 1994 price freeze.According to company president, Cesare Manfredi, CPFL is tackling itscosts, and anticipates savings of R$27m in 1996. In 1995, itrestructured its administration and reduced staff from 7,700 to 6,900.The company has also worked on a restructuring of its businessdivisions. In line with the unbundling proposals of state energysecretary David Zylberstajn, it has now separated the accounting of itsgeneration, transmission and distribution sectors. CPFL has alsodivided its operations into three business units: South East, NorthEast and North West.CPFL plans to continue to invest next year, despite the cutbacks,planning expenditure of R$90m, with R$30m of this used to maintain andexpand its system. During 1996 CPFL intends to build new sub-stationsat Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Lencois Paulista, Campinas, Sumari, Itapiraand Americana.Amongst Brazil's electricity supply concessionaries, CPFL boasts theshortest and the least frequent electricity supply interruptions.CPFL's maximum period of interruption was 8.7 hours while the Brazilianaverage was 16.5 hours. CPFL had an average interruption frequency of6.7 per client compared to 21.5 nationwide.There are three electricity concessionaries operating in Sao Paulostate, CESP (Companhia Estadual de Sao Paulo); CPFL and Eletropaulo.Sao Paulo, covering an area the size of the UK, is Brazil's mostpopulous state with over 33m inhabitants and is responsible for around45% of the country's GDP.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERGY DEMAND RISES 7.6%Brazil used 7.6% more energy in the eleven months to November 1995 thanin the same period in 1994, according to the latest statistics releasedby Eletrobras. The figures for the full year should show a rise of 7.8%says Eletrobras, well above the annual average of 3.3% registered in1990-1994.Electricity consumption clearly outstripped Brazil's GDP growth ofaround 4% and points to energy shortages in the short-term ifinvestments are not stepped up in the sector.A significant part of Brazil's increased energy consumption comes fromresidential users. Since the introduction of the country's successfulanti-inflation plan in July 1994 there has been a marked increase inthe purchasing power of low income families who have acquired moreelectric domestic appliances.In 1994 these sales rocketed by 35% over 1993. In 1995 these rose afurther 15% with 40m units sold. As a result of using these appliances,a large number of electricity consumers have moved into the category ofusers of over 200 kW/month.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HYDRO OUTPUT BREAKS RECORDSThe world's largest dam, Itaipu, jointly-owned by Brazil and Paraguaybroke its own record in 1995 by producing 77.21 TWh. This was 11.2% upon the level achieved in 1994. The increase was due to reducedgenerator stoppages through improved maintenance programmes. The 18turbines operated at 93% capacity during 1995. The 77.21 TWhrepresented 31% of all Brazil's energy production in 1995.Despite the progress, Itaipu is still owed large sums - R$1.4bn(US$1.44bn) - by Brazilian energy distributors. The state government ofSao Paulo (CESP, CPFL and Eletropaulo) is the largest debtor, owing$1.2bn for energy used. The remaining $200m is owed by Eletrosul,Furnas and ANDE.Meanwhile, output is also breaking records at Companhia Estadual de SaoPaulo (CESP), which beat its 1993 annual generation high at 10 a.m. onDecember 22 last year, with output of 52 TWh. CESP is Brazil's largestgenerating company, responsible for 22% of the country's energyproduction. It is able to cover the equivalent of all consumption byBrazil's 38m households. The company expects its revenue fromdistribution to increase by R$9m in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW CHAIRMAN FOR BOLPOWBolivian Power Co, the only private sector power generator in Bolivia,has announced the appointment of E. Glen Biggs to succeed Frank Benneras board chairman. Benner will remain a director of the company, whichhas the rare distinction for a Latin America power generator of beingquoted on the New York stock exchange.The company also announced that Bruce McMillen, senior group vice-president and chief financial officer of Cogentrix Energy of the US,had resigned from Bolivian Power's board. He is succeeded by DavidLewis, presently chief executive at Cogentrix Energy.Bolivian Power, founded in 1925, distributes and transmits power in LaPaz and Oruro. It has a 34% share of all generation in the country,operates 13 hydo facilities with a total capacity of 134 MW and isexpanding by 62 MW its hydro capacity in the so-called Zongo Valleyproject.Part of this capacity will be on-line this year and all will bedelivering power by 1998. It is also installing a gas-fired plant of 17MW at El Alto near La Paz, which went on-line last summer. It isconsidering a 230 MW hydropower operation in the Miguillas Valley. Itsgrowth rate this decade has been in excess of 6%.Bolivian Power's shareholding includes a 17% stake held by LibertyPower/Cogentrix Bolivia Inc. According to the New Electricity Law, itwill divest itself of power distribution responsibility, and will focuson generation. Its net income last year was $7.7m on a turnover of$45.9m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOCOPILLA FLOATEDCodelco, the state copper corporation, has chosen a consortium ofBelgium's Powerfin, Spain's Iberdrola and the domestic Enagas as itsstrategic partner for the Tocopilla power plant.The decision was made eventually a month later than the scheduled lateDecember date as a result of a lengthier and more complex due diligenceprocess than Codelco had anticipatedThe agreement calls for the formation of a new equity partnership inTocapilla Holding Ltda., which controls the 615 MW, coal-firedTocopilla power plant near Antofagasta in northern Chile.Powerfin has a 62.5% stake in the bidding consortium, with Iberdrolaholding 25% and Enagas having the balance. The consortium will pay$177. 8m for a 51% stake in Tocopilla, with Codelco controlling theremainder. Codelco is to set up a new company to own the 51% stake,which will in turn be 51% owned by the bidders.The remaining 49% of Tocopilla will also eventually be sold, 10% to theplant's workers and the remainder through local exchanges or ADRs.Powerfin's parent Belgian utility Tractebel said that some $70m neededto purchase Tocopilla will be funded through project financing. Thebalance of $110m will come from the three bidding companies.Tocopilla consists of ten units, a port and 600 km of high-voltag etransmission lines. It has a workforce of 400 and will be operatedjointly by Iberdrola and Powerfin under the latter's lead. The site'selectricity is sold mainly via long-term contracts to northern Chile'scopper mines, including that of Chuquicamata, the world's largest open-pit copper mine, and will supply Codelco's El Abra joint venture withCyprus Amax Minerals (130,000m tpy), when it starts producing in late1996.Meanwhile, the plant has recently picked up yet another mine contract,signing a 20-year deal to supply Codelco's Radomiro Tomic mine, whichwill have output of 130m tpy from 1997. The Radomiro Tomic contract isestimated to be worth $55m and is for 70 MW from 1998 to 2002, risingafterwards to100 MW. It will use part of the same transmission systemas the El Abra mine. A contract for the latter has been awarded to theSpanish-Chilean firm Abenor S.A.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONSUMPTION SOARS 9.2%, ANOTHER 8.8% SEEN IN `96Chile's electricity consumption soared by 9.2% last year compared to1994, reports the National Energy Commission (CNE). The figures showeddemand for liquid fuels climbed 7.4%, while coal consumption was 14%higher."The sector has been able to supply in an opportune way the growingenergy requirements which are the result of the country's strongeconomic and social development", CNE president Alejandro Jadresicsaid.The forecast is for a further increase of 8.8% this year. The energysector is one of Chile's most active, with projects worth more than$4bn under construction or in advanced planning. These include thermaland hydropower stations, two natural gas pipelines and expansionprojects at oil refineries.According to the CNE, the two trans-Andean pipeline schemes continue toadvance. CNE`s records show that the GasAndes scheme, led by Chilgenerand Canada's Nova Corp. had already presented its environmental impactstudy for approval and has negotiated 85% of the rights of way neededfor the pipeline scheme. TransGas, headed by Tennedo of the US andBritish Gas had not yet presented its environmental impact study. Ithad agreed 65% of its rights of way, said Jadresic.Both plan to supply Chile with natural gas from central Argentina butby different routes, Gasandes linking the Neuquen gasfields in northernArgentina to Santiago, the Chilean capital, and TransGas traversing theAndes by a more southerly route.GasAndes says it will start laying pipe on the Argentine side of theborder in January. In Chile, they are waiting for approval of theirenvironmental impact study but say they are still on schedule. They aremeeting steady opposition from neighbourhood groups on the route downto Santiago through a local beauty spot, the Cajon del Maipo.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LUKSIC, US GROUPS TIE UP ATACAMA PIPE SCHEMECMS Energy and the Williams International Pipeline Co. of the US planto go ahead with the Atacama gas pipeline project and have signedletters of intent with the local Luksic group. Luksic would take a 15%-20% stake in the $350m project while CMS and Williams keep 40%. Theproject is still looking for an Argentine partner.The pipeline would bring gas from Jujuy in northern Argentina, near theArgentinan-Bolivian border with northern Chile, to Tocopilla on Chile'snorth coast, with branches further north to Iquique and south toAntofagasta. The new timing is for an open season in the first half ofthis year with work starting before the end of the year and the pipecoming into operation in early 1998.CMS and Williams say they need to sign contracts with power generatorsfor between 600 MW and 800 MW of capacity for the project to be viable.The initial capacity of the pipeline would be 3.4 MMcm per day. Somedoubt has, however, been expressed as to the immediate viability of theproject.The new Collahuasi copper mine has signed a contract with Endesa (PLA3/13, Sept 1995) for power which will be generated by its new coal-fired Patache plant. In the view of the government's National EnergyCommission (CNE), this alone is sufficient to postpone the supply ofgas to the area for the short and medium-term.It is not clear that the generating companies of the northernelectricity network will want to convert from coal to gas. But aspokesman for Williams says they are confident about getting thecontracts they need.The project, if it goes ahead, could bring to three the number of gaspipelines running from Argentina. The northern link would complementthe more complex Gas Sur and Gas Andes pipelines schemes being preparedto deliver gas from Central Argentina to the Santiago/ Concepcion areason Chile's central west coast.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENDESA GETS RALCO DAM LICENCEEndesa has been awarded a two-year provisional licence by the stateauditing board for the controversial 570 MW Ralco dam project on theBio Bio river.The authorisation was given in the face of strong opposition fromenvironmentalists and locals, who were concerned about the visualimpact on the site, a beauty spot, and the enforced relocation of thePehuenche Indians who live nearby.The licence will allow the state generator to begin detailed studiesinto construction prospects for the $600m dam and to examine its impacton the environment. Endesa wants the hydro plant to be on-line by 2002.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHILGENER PLANS $500M INVESTMENTS FOR `96Chilgener's G-M Jose Antonio Guzman announced investments of $500m for1996. These could rise to $650m depending on the success of thecompany's bids in privatisation sales in other Latin Americancountries.Financing will come mostly from bond issues. For example Chilgener thismonth issued a `yankee bond,' placing $150m on the US market in theform of 10-year bonds. The bond issue was placed by Smith Barney, ChaseSecurities and ING Barings. A separate private place of $180m will helprefinance its Gualcolda power plant.The Empresa Electrica de Santiago, which is building the Nueva Rencagas-fired power plant and in which Chilgener has a 51% stake, will not,according to Guzman, need new financing. The plant will be built usingsuppliers credits.* Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Baa-1 rating to the $150mbond. The rating reflects Chilgener's solid financial position andsound business strategy, says Moody's, emphasising that the company isalso operating in a stable regulatory and economic regime.About two thirds of the company's resource portfolio is thermal, withthe balance mainly run-of-river hydropower units. Concerns aboutChilgener's higher production costs relative to hydro-based competitionare largely offset by growing electrical demand in Chile and Argentinaand by the company's ability to maintain reliable production regardlessof rainfall conditions, says Moody's.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENERSIS BOOSTS CAPITAL THROUGH MAJOR SHARE OFFERThe holding company, Enersis, which controls Endesa, the powergenerator, and Chilectra, the Santiago distributor, has made a $240mshare offering. The 30-day preferential share option lasted to mid-January.Demand in the Chilean market, however, has been high and the optionswhich the private pension funds have been unable to take up because oflegal limits on exposure have been bought up by other shareholders orfuture investors.The capital increase will go towards financing the company's two majorinvestment projects - its successful bid for 39% of Edesur, thedistribution company which serves the south and centre of Buenos Aires,and a planned bid for Rio Light of Brazil.Together with its distribution subsidiary, Chilectra, Enersis paid$390m for its new stake in Edesur. Short-term financing took the formof a syndicated loan from five international banks but a bond issue isexpected to follow.At the end of December, Enersis transferred a 5.6% stake in Edesur tothe local Chispas investment companies for an estimated $55m. The pre-arranged move is to help diversify the holdings of the Chispas so thatthey become eligible for private pension fund investment. Currently,the Chispas' main asset are their shares in Enersis.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POWER CRISIS DEEPENSAfter a year of chaos in electricity sector, with brown-outs of up toeight hours a day in the second half of last year (PLA4/4, Oct 1995),Ecuador is settling down to an equally difficult 1996.The year began about as badly as was possible. In the second week ofJanuary, electricity employees declared a two-day strike in protest atthe government's power sector privatisation bill, which was expected tobe passed by Congress that week.The bill foresaw the unbundling of generation, distribution andtransmission and the extention of private sector access to the system.It also proposed the consolidation of the existing 19 distributors inthe country into four or five companies, as well as the restructuringand sale of 49% of state-run INECEL. Its proposals also included thecreation of a regulatory agency.The strike, only affecting administrative functions, was threateningalso to hit the country's already disabled power station production asPLA went to press, notably the Paute hydro plant, which was in thehands of the strikers and which provides some 60% of the country'spower.President Sixto Duran Ballen, meanwhile, has ordered the army to takeover the running of the plants should the bill be passed.The bill, deadlocked in parliament for almost two years, had beenhailed as the solution to the country's deeper capacity problems, byfacilitating the construction of privately-owned plant. Ecuadorcurrently has 2,300 MW of installed capacity, but only 1,590 MW ofeffective, guaranteed capacity, short of the current 1,760 MW of demandand leaving no margin for the 6% growth forecast for last and thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PERU OUTLINES EXPANSION PLANSJorge San Roman, Peruvian vice-minister for energy, is predicting afurther 218 MW expansion of generating capacity in 1996. This should beenough, he says, to preclude power supply problems - always providedthat rainfall is normal.The bulk of the extra 218 MW will be made up as follows: 100 MW in thefirst phase expansion of Edegel, the recently-privatised collection ofhydro and thermal plants serving Lima; 20 MW from the expansion ofthermal capacity at the Zorritos plant, 60 MW from Pucallpa and 13 MWfrom Tarapoto.Additionally, by early 1997, San Roman expects there will be a further140 MW available from Ventanilla, Lima's thermal power station whichwas acquired in December by Endesa of Spain (PLA 6/18).In a recent interview, San Roman justified the government's decision tocontinue with the exemption from the selective consumption tax (ISC)for fuel used for thermal electric generation."There should be no exceptions to taxes applied", he said, "but in thiscase it is necessary, otherwise electricity tariffs would have risen".He accepted that Peru's increased reliance in the short-term on thermalenergy would mean steeper import bills for diesel.Not all government officials are as sanguine as the vice-minister overelectricity sector prospects. Luis Haro, director-general forelectricity at the mines ministry, told a conference in early Januarythat current reserves stood at barely 5% of generating capacity whenthey should ideally be at 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MANTARO HYDRO HITS TROUBLEThe Mantaro hydro complex, backbone of electricity generation forcentral and northern Peru and scheduled for privatisation in the nearfuture, is facing serious problems.Experts predict that, given the precarious state of the concrete liningof the main, 20km tunnel between the main intake and the machine house,the jewel in Electroperu's hydro crown may fetch far less thananticipated when it reaches the auction block later this year or next.Mantaro comprises two separate hydros known as Santiago Antunez deMayolo and Restitucion. Together they account for a quarter of totalnational electricity generation capacity.Mantaro's generating potential is 1,015 MW, with normal output rangingbetween 850 and 900 MW. Today it is generating a bare 715 MW due,according to consultants, to build-up of solids in the tunnel and,probably, the deterioration of the interior walls. The tunnel has neverbeen emptied for maintenance work in the 22 years since it opened.Attempts last year by the Canadian company Aquatic Sciences to carryout inspections with robots were unsuccessful.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OUTPUT UP 3.3% IN 10 MONTHSElectricity output rise by 3.3% in the first ten months last yearcompared to 1994, reports the Energy and Mines Ministry. Total outputstood at 12,236 GWh, said the report.It said that electrical production, including output from Peru'sinterconnected north-central, southwest, southeast and other isolatedsystems reached 11,840 GWh in the January-October period. Power fromhydro plants accounted for 84.6% of total output while thermal powergeneration made up 15.4%.According to the statistics, public service firms produced 10,521 GWhwhile companies generating their own captive power accounted for 861.3GWh. Electroperu, the largest of the country's seven state-owned powergenerators, produced 6,332 GWh, followed by recently privatised Edegel,which had an output of 2,203 GWh, and Egasa 587.8 GWh. Peru's totaloutput in October rose 2% to 1,233 GWh compared to 1,209 GWh in thesame month in 1994.* The Peru stock exchange has approved the listing of Edelnor. Thestate sold 60% of Edelnor, which distributes power in northern Lima toa consortium of Chilean, Peruvian and Spanish interests for $176m. Theconsortium comprises Inversions Distrilima, led by Enersis, andDistribuidora Chilectra Metropolitana of Chile and Spain's Endesa.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AGUAYTIA DEAL FORMALISEDA formal agreement has now been signed with a six-company consortium todevelop the Aguaytia gas and related power project.The project involves the development of the Aguaytia gas field, whichhas proven reserves of 223 Bcm; the construction and operation ofnatural gas processing facilities,NGL storage facilities,  some 140miles of gas pipeline and 65 miles of NGL pipeline. A 145 MW gas plantand 265 miles of transmission lines to connect with the existing gridsystem were to be added at a later date.Only three of the initial four US companies which signed an MOU lastAugust (PLA 2/20) to develop the $200m complex - El Paso Natural Gas,Panhandle Eastern Corp and Maple Resources Corp - are still on board.Entergy, which was to have operated the power plant, has pulled out.The three new participants are Pennsylvania Light & Power arm, PowerMarkets Development Company; Illinois Power arm, Illinova GeneratingCompany; and Scudder Latin American Power.Work on the project is scheduled to begin in the first quarter of thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUYANA POWER SECTOR REHAB PLANS HIT SNAGSGuyana's urgent effort to rehabilitate its decrepit electricity systemand impose a measure of private commercial discipline (PLA 6/20, Dec1995) is running into snags.Trade union pressure last month forced the resignation of RaymondGaskin, chairman of the Guyana Electricity Corp. (GEC). He had beenappointed by President Cheddi Jagan himself. The main electricityunion, the National Association of Agricultural, Commercial andIndustrial Employees (NAACIE), had taken exception to the speed withwhich Gaskin, with government backing, was trying to commercialise theoperation, including successive power supply rate hikes and the sackingof up to 213 workers.NAACIE even called a strike at GEC, illegal in an essential service, toput pressure on Gaskin to withdraw retrenchment notices. He accused theunion of having a `political agenda' and blamed him for the fact that`things are not going well at GEC.'Gaskin said he felt he had no option but to resign after the union fed`lies' about him to the People's Progressive Party (PPP), the seniorpartner in the governing coalition, and to the government itself. Theformer chairman can claim some credit for making efforts to improve thetroubled utility, whose performance record is probably the worst in theCaribbean, with the exception of the Dominican Republic's state-ownedelectricity company.He was instrumental in obtaining additional units from various foreignsources to reduce the gap between supply and demand, and the rate hikesenabled GEC to do away with treasury subsidies. he also tried to rootout corruption at the corporation, and several former employees arebefore the courts on charges of electricity theft and misuse of GECfunds.Gaskin's forced departure is only one of the setbacks facing GEC in itsdesperate effort to move forward.The $12m joint venture between the government-owned bauxite company,Linden Mining Enterprise (Linmire) and the US Resources RecoveryInternational, has been put on hold following objections by thegovernment's privatisation unit. The government unit felt the projectshould have been put to tender on a wider basis. The joint venturecompany was to install 19 MW of new capacity, 5.5 MW of which wouldhave been sold to GEC.The $309m investment by four US companies, trading under the name ofUnited Health Clinics (UHC), to create power from waste, has also beenstalled.Senior government officials apparently do not believe the group candeliver what it says. The proposal was to supply up to 60 MW to thenational grid by using heat generated from all types of local waste.The government investment promotion agency, the Guyana Office forInvestment (GO-Invest) was in favour of the scheme and seemed satisfiedwith the bona fides of the participants. But other officials havestepped into the picture and demanded better feasibility studies of theproject.GO-Invest's director, Dr. Ivor Mitchell, says he will pursue the matterbecause he has seen waste-to-electricity plants operate successfully inthe US and says "I believe they can work in Guyana".Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LOCAL TIE-UP STRENGTHENS BIDDERS CHANCESThe two front runners in the bid to purchase the state-owned JamaicaPublic Service Company, the island's electricity monopoly, have formedconsortia with local companies - a move which bankers say willstrengthen their chances of being selected.Although the government has an official short list of five prospectivebuyers, the two which are considered the leading contenders are HoustonIndustries Energy Inc of Texas, and Southern Electric of Georgia. Lessfancied are Enterprise Diversified Holdings and Charter Oak Energy,both of the US, and Ontario Hydro of Canada.Southern Electric has created its consortium by drafting Life ofJamaica and Mutual Life, two of Jamaica's largest life insurancescompanies. Houston Industries Energy has been joined by Island Life andManufacturers Merchant Bank."These arrangements will enhance the chances of the companies in theirbid to purchase the Public Service Company, and the final decision bythe government's Divestment Committee could be influenced by what thelocal firms can bring to the table", explained one of Jamaica's leadingbankers who is advising one of the consortia.Life of Jamaica and Mutual Life are joining Southern Electric asinvestors. Island Life will also be an investor with Houston EnergyIndustries, while Manufacturers Merchant Bank will provide financialservices support. Southern Electric has also recruited influentialsupport in the form of Andrew Young, the former US ambassador to theUnited Nations and mayor of Atlanta, who has been visiting Jamaicafrequently to lobby for the Atlanta company.Robert Pickersgill, Jamaica's utilities minister, and severalexecutives of the Public Service Company, have visited the USheadquarters and major power installations of both Houston IndustriesEnergy and Southern Electric. Government officials say "nothing ofsignificance" should be read into the fact the installations of theother three bidders were not visited.Jamaican officials are also studying the operations of Trinidad &Tobago's electricity company in which Southern Electric took a 49%stake just over a year ago.The government is hoping that the sale of the power company, which isscheduled to be concluded by the middle of this year, will be followedby increased stability in power supplies. The company currently hascapacity of 663 MW and average production is 505 MW to meet peak demandof 405 MW.With the commissioning of privately owned barge-mounted and land-basedplants, it will have output for the national grid of well over 700 MWby August.Jamaicans will feel the effect of the change in ownership almost assoon as the sale is complete. The government will require thesuccessful bidder to modernise and improve the Public Service Company'sefficiency by spending about $800m over 15 years. This will not befinanced solely from the company's operations. It reported a net profitof $5.8m in the 1994-95 fiscal year, $7.5m less than the previous year.Company officials have complained, however, that the firm's financeswould have been better had the government granted a tariff increase.The last increase was granted in 1991, and the government has beenreluctant to make adjustments, apparently because it would bepolitically unpopular.Lee W. Hogan, chief executive of Houston Industries Energy, has warnedthat divestment of the Public Service Company will be followed by arate increase. If his company's bid were successful, Hogan said, itwould try to curb the hike in rates by selling more power."You make more money by selling more energy", he said. "The way to makemoney in this business is to maximise growth, not price." An acceptablerate of return for the company would be between 8.5% and 9% on totalassets, adjusted to debt and interest charges, he said.The Public Service Company's financial position would have beenstronger in the 1994-95 year, were it not for an explosion at the OldHarbour Station which destroyed over 100 MW of capacity, said DerrickDyer, the company's chief executive. "This is not a fire sale", he saidof the impending divestment. "The company is very much alive andkicking and, in many respects, is a showpiece for other developingcountries. This is the opinion of international agencies."Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEXICO PUTS ITS CLOCKS FORWARDMateo Trevino, who is head of the Mexican government's energy savingorganisation, has one very basic problem.His job is to convince consumers and producers that wasting electricitymakes no economic sense. But with electricity tariffs that themselvesmake little economic sense his task is a difficult one. This year, heand his organisation, the Support Trust for the Energy Saving Program(FIDE), have to convince the country to put its clocks forward by anhour for six months, a change the government thinks will bring aboutannual savings of $1.5bn.A presidential decree establishing Mexican `'summer time" appeared inthe Diario Oficial, Mexico's version of the Federal Register, onJanuary 4 of this year.Environmental interest groups and government officials said that themeasure,which will affect Mexico's three time zones from April 7 toOctober 27, should save up to 1% of the energy the country currentlyuses, through rationalising the use of extended daylight hours. From1996 on, clocks will be set forward one hour on the first Sunday ofeach April and back on the last Sunday of each October.According to Rogelio Gasca Neri, Director General of Mexico's FederalElectricity Commission (CFE) the time change should result in fewer aircontaminants being released, as well as more efficient dispersion ofairborn pollutants.The adoption of summer time is the first step of a six point energyplan Trevino has the responsibility of promoting. In its entirety, theplan aims to reduce Mexico's energy consumption by 7.3% by the year2000 through rationalisation of energy use. By the government's ownreckoning, electricity wastage has already fallen by 5% in recentyears.As a country with many remaining infrastructure problems and hundredsof isolated communities, Mexico rations itself when it comes toexecuting large scale changes in popular perceptions. A proposal tointroduce summer time in 1992 was brushed aside because at the time theMexican government was busy with a programme to re-denominate thecurrency.`'The need to introduce summer time has not been so pressing in Mexicoas it has been in countries further to the north, with greater seasonalvariations in their day", said Trevino. `'But we clearly need to createa culture of energy conservation.''Many of the campaigns promoted by Trevino and FIDE aim at theelectricity consumer rather than the producer, such as is the case withtwo programmes that seek to introduce the use of more efficient lightbulbs and air conditioners. Revamping existing electricity generationand transmission equipment to increase efficiency and reduce waste is,after all, a very costly proposition.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ENERGY MINISTER APPOINTEDA Mexican government reshuffle in the dog days of 1995 took mostcommentators by surprise by its timing and heralded changes in theenergy sector.President Ernesto Zedillo's late December restructuring of his cabinetremoved Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza, the former energy secretary, andsomething of a member of the ruling party's old guard, replacing himwith Dr Jesus Reyes Heroles, an economist.Pichardo's position had greatly weakened since he took office a littlemore than a year before. Troubled by ill health, and - particularlyduring the beginning of his time at the energy ministry - afflicted bypolitical controversy, Pichardo never seemed the natural choice topreside over the privatisation and liberalisation of much of Mexico'senergy policy.At the beginning of 1995, tensions appeared to arise between Pichardo'senergy ministry and the Finance ministry with regard to the futurecourse of energy privatisations and liberalisation. He will now move onto a post within the Mexican foreign office, most likely as a diplomatoverseas.Pichardo's successor, Jesus Reyes Heroles, son of a Mexican politicianfrom a generation before, won early recognition as head of a Mexicaneconomics thinktank, Grupo Economistas y Asociaciados.In the job he held immediately prior to his new appointment, ReyesHeroles served as head of Banobras, a Mexican state development bank,where he tried to up investment by innovative schemes including the useof seed money. Whether he will try similar mechanisms in a sector whereprivate spending has drawn close to a halt is yet to be determined.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CFE CONFIRMS EXPANSION PLANSMexico's Federal Electricity Commission (CFE) announced that over thenext two years it plans to increase its installed generation capacityby 2,250 MW, to reach a national total of 35,702 MW to meet nationaldemand.In a press release, the CFE emphasised the importance of plans to beginoperating units three through six of the geothermal Cerro Prietocomplex, in Baja California, as well as referring to the 350 MW unit 4of the coal fired Carbon II programme, in the northern state ofCoahuila, and the thermal combined cycle units 5 and 6 of the AdolfoLopez Mateos project, which between them will provide 700 MW for thetown of Tuxpan.The CFE said that hydroelectric dams will be put into commercial use inthe northwestern state of Sinaloa, where two 200 MW units should comeon-line, as well as between the southern states of Veracruz and Oaxaca,where the Temascal dam will have two units of 100 MW each, and betweenthe central areas of Hidalgo and Queretaro, where the Fernando Hiriartdam will have two units of 140 MW each.The release said that at the beginning of the Zedillo administration inDecember 1994, 1,675 MW of capacity was being tested to be put intooperation, while 2,251 MW was in the process of being contracted orconstructed, all of which should enter into operation before the end of1997.During 1995, 1,345 MW was put into operation, leaving 2,581 MW to beswitched on over the next two years.* Luz y Fuerza del Centro, the main electricity distributor in theMexico City area with 24m clients, has contracted the services ofSpain's Union Fenosa Acex to begin a modernisation process. Acex is theinternational consultancy arm of Union Fenosa, Spain's third largestutility.The contract, which will involve a major technical renovation at Luz yCentral, underlines Fenosa's presence in the region, where it alreadyhas development and technical transfer projects with utilities in theDominican Republic, Nicaragua, Venezuela and Colombia.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ARGENTINA CALLS FOR TENDERS FOR OIL EXPLORATIONArgentina is calling for tenders for oil exploration in seven areasnear disputed waters around the Falkland/Malvinas/Malouines islands.Tenders will have to be lodged by January 31, says the EnergySecretariat. Britain withdrew objections last year against oil tendersin waters bordering its claims after an historic agreement withArgentina. The agreement allows both countries to charge royalties forany oil or gas extracted from Falkland waters - Argentina plans to levy3% and Britain 9% without compromising their conflicting claims tosovereignty. British Gas and YPF will jointly study hydrocarbonpotential off the islands.As far as Falkland locals are concerned, there are still tensions, saysRichard Ralph, the new British governor. He said locals do not bearArgentina any ill-will, despite the 1992 Argentine invasion (andsubsequent eviction with extreme prejudice), but do not wish to havemuch, if anything, to do with Argentina so long as sovereignty isdisputed. Despite increased potential for co-operation, notably inenergy and fisheries, Argentines travelling on national passports arenot allowed on the Falklands, apart from relatives visiting the gravesof sons killed in the war.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANGO NORTE X-1 EXPLORATION WELLAmpolex, the oil and gas producer, says that its Chango Norte X-1exploration well in Argentina, in which it has a 23% stake, has flowedgas and condensate from a short-term production test. Australia-basedAmpolex said a drill stem test conducted over the interval 3,318 to3,690 metres recorded a flow of 19 MMcfd of gas through a 3/4 inchchoke at a pressure of 2,300 pounds per square inch over a five-hourperiod. A total of 723 barrels per day was recovered.Ampolex has been active in the Aguarague field since June 7, 1995, whenthe XP-1 field showed gas in three formations. It is now test flowingat 25 MMcfd. Other participants are Tecpetrol 23%; YPF 30%; Petrobras15%; Cia General de Combustibles 5% and Ledesma 4%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PACIFIC EXAMINING PURCHASE OF STAKE IN ARGENTINE GAS COMPANIESThe international arm of Pacific Enterprises is examining a purchase ofa significant but minority stake in Argentine gas companies, SodigasPampeana and Sodigas Sur. Pacific, which has signed a non-bindingmemorandum of understanding for discussions on the purchase of 12.5% ineach for an estimated $47m-$52m, is to make a final decision by March.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOLIVIA RECEIVES BIDS IN PARTIAL PRIVATISATION OF YPFBBolivia has received bids from 40 foreign companies in the partialprivatisation of state oil company Yacimentos Petroliferos FiscalesBolivianos (YPFB), according to vice president Victor Hugo Cardenas. Hesaid the government expected to complete the company's capitalisationand to announce the winning bidders by May.The bidders included BHP Petroleum, Elf Aquitaine, Repsol, Ampolex,Esso, Exxon, Nova, Panhandle and Unocal.The capitalisation programme will involve the division of the countryinto two regions for exploration and production. In addition,transport, refining and servicing divisions will be split into threeseparate companies, while marketing and distribution will be subdividedinto three other competing firms.The successful bidders will gain control of a 50% stake and managerialcontrol.of the companies, which they will be obliged to invest in. Theremaining 50% of shares will be allocated to Bolivia's pension funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALOR GROUP EXPANDING IN LATIN AMERICAThe Calor Group of the UK is further expanding Latin Americanoperations with a $31m investment in Supergasbras Distribuidora de Gas,the Brazilian liquified petroleum gas major. The UK group's investmenthas been matched by SHV Energy, its joint venture partner in SHV CalorBrazil, which was set up last year. Calor and SHV are spending $62m fora 49% stake in Supergas and 50% of the voting rights. Supergas lost$4.2m in 1994.Calor was in the news last August with the acquisition of a majoritystake in Minasgas, a bottled gas supplier. It is understood Supergasand Minasgas will be operated as separate companies. Calor said itwould encourage rival suppliers to draw up a co-operation arrangementfor the future. The two companies supply a combined total of 1.35mt ofLPG to a customer base of 40m people. Calor announced last year plansto spend #70m ($110m) in projects in Latin America and Asia inconjunction with SHV Energy, the privately-held Dutch group withultimately controls Calor. The strategy is to broaden Calor's baseoutside the UK market.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OFFSHORE RIG CHARTER ORDER FROM PETROBRASCelsius, a Swedish defence engineering group, said a minority-controlled offshoot company owned by its GVA unit had won an offshorerig charter order from Petrobras. The contract is for five years and isworth SKr275m. Louisiana Overseas Inc., 30% owned by GVA, is to rebuildand charter an offshore rig used for servicing production equipment onthe sea bed and in deep sea drilling in Brazilian waters. The remaining70% of Louisiana Overseas is owned by Petroserve of Brazil. The totalvalue of the deal is SKr915m.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996YPF OPENS FIRST SERVICE STATION IN CHILEYPF of Argentina has opened its first service station in Chile and hasannounced that it will be spending $22m in 1996 on expanding thenetwork. It has been operating the small Gazpesa service station chainsince 1995, after it bought the chain for $15m. The new station is thefirst under its own name.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PETROBRAS LAUNCHES PRODUCTS IN CHILEBR Petrobras Distribuidora has announced the launch of its products inChile where the lubricants market has been growing at a healthy10% ayear but is expected to slow down. The other major distributors areEsso, Castrol and Texaco.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENAP ANNOUNCES PROFITS IN 1995ENAP, Chile's state oil company, has announced profits of $110m in1995, with production at approaching 600,000 cubic metres. In 1996, itplans to invest $160m on expanding its two refineries, improving thequality of its products and on exploration, mostly in other countries.An agreement with Petroecuador to develop a joint exploration programmeis expected to be announced soon.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PIPELINE MAY NOT GO AHEADHondo Oil & Gas of the US is expressing fears that a natgas pipelineplanned by it and Amoco may not go ahead because of changes in pipelinetariffs and natgas prices. The company said also that its Opon No. 5development well has been delayed indefinitely because of right-of-waydisputes with landowners. Hondo said the Comision de Regulacion deEnergia y Gas had set a ceiling price for natgas and a maximum rate ofreturn of 12.5% (before local taxes) for pipeline tariffs. The ceilingis interpreted to include costs or fees for the processing of natgas,thus processing costs cannot be passed on to buyers.As a consequence, these regulations "will reduce the amount the companyexpects to receive for natgas and pipeline tariffs in the future", thecompany said. The regulations affect the terms agreed to in a MOU withEcopetrol for the construction of a pipeline and the sale of natgas.The agreement was signed on July 31. It calls for an 88 km pipelinefrom the contract area to Ecopetrol's refinery at Barrancabermeja.Negotiations are continuing with Ecopetrol to seek relief from theregulations so the project can be got under way.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COLOMBIAN CRUDE OIL PRODUCTIONCrude oil production averaged 583,428 bbl per day in 1995, a 28.5% riseover daily production of 454,020 bbl in 1994, says Ecopetrol.Production in December was below the annual average at 579,060. Foreignoil companies accounted for most of the output, producing an average of458,632 b/d last year, up from 328,155 b/d the year before.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ECOPETROL PLANS TO INVEST $4.7BNEcopetrol plans to invest $4.7bn over the next five years, says thecompany. Some $2.2bn of this will be invested in its associationcontracts with foreign companies, with $1.3bn allocated to the Cusianaand Cupiagua fields alone - $620m in 1996, reducing to $47.5m in 2000.A further $1bn will be invested in refining and petrochemicals, and$773.9m in exploration and production.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BP'S COLOMBIAN OIL AND GAS RESERVESGood news for BP in Colombia where oil and gas reserves are now muchlarger than originally estimated. BP will be producing 1m bbl of oilswithin 10 years, slightly less than what comes out of the UK sector ofthe North Sea. BP is staying mum but did acknowledge that output fromthe Cusiana-Cupiagua field was rising fast and that 500,000 b/d couldbe in production by end-1997. Last month's production would be 180,000b/d, up from 40,000 b/d in 1994. Guerrilla activity remains a threatand are estimated to have caused $45m in damage to pipeline and otherfacilities since 1986.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ECOPETROL TO ATTEMPT TO SELL ITS STAKE IN PROMIGASEcopetrol is to make a second attempt to sell its stake in natgasdistributor Promigas, with an offer of 38.87% of the company on January24 at Ps2,800 per share. The shares include 24.99% owned directly byEcopetrol and 13.88% owned by Explotaciones Condor. Ecopetrol firsttried to sell the stake locally to employees, pension funds and co-operatives at the end of 1995. In September 1994, it sold 3.29% of thecompany, whose other shareholders include the IFC (11.79%) andfinancier Corfivalle (9.82%). The sale is part of a wider divestment of$235m of Ecopetrol's non-operational assets in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CUBA HOPES TO PRODUCE MORE CRUDE THIS YEARCuba hopes to produce some 1.5mt, or about 11.3m bbl, of crude thisyear, fractionally up from last year's figure of 1.45mt and 1.28mt theprevious year. Granma, the Communist Party newspaper, said theincreased production was due to new technology and injection of capitaland resources through linkups with foreign companies. Currentproduction was less than one-fifth of the country's total needs ofabout 7.5mt a year. Cupet, the Cuban petroleum company, has been on aninvestment drive overseas in an attempt to line up more joint ventureswith foreign oil exploration groups.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GOVERNMENT NAMES PRESIDENT OF PETROECUADORThe government has named Patricio Lopez, an army general, as presidentof Petroecuador. Lopez is a former aide-de-camp to President SixtoDuran Bailen. He succeeds Federico Veintimilla, who stepped downrecently along with top managers after allegations of mismanagement.Petroecuador produces 330,000 b/d of the Andes nation's 380,000 b/d. Itis now undergoing a major restructuring as a result of the top-levelcleanout, which led to the resignation of all managers at Petroecuadorsubsidiaries, such as Petroproduccion, Petrocomercial andPetroindustrial.The alleged irregularities were in connection with the purchase of27.5m gallons of diesel from Hiperoil, a local company which hadimported it from Venezuela. Hiperoil is claimed to have added unduetaxes to the sale price for a profit of 30bn sucres ($10.2m), reportsReuters.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEXICAN ENERGY MINISTER TO PRESS AHEAD WITH MODERNISATIONPresident Ernesto Zedillo has called on Jesus Reyes Heroles, the newEnergy Minister, to press ahead with a modernisation of the sector. Hesaid Jesus Reyes' main responsibility "will be to promote a rapidexpansion of the energy sector" and stimulating a quicker modernisationof state-owned companies. Mexico is destined to sell a large part ofits petrochem industry this year. It has been under the control ofPetroleos Mexicanos. The country has already liberalised the naturalgas sector and expects billions of dollars in investment in natgastransportation as well as in new power plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PROPOSAL TO DEVELOP GAS FIELD IN NORTHERN MEXICOA consortium of US firm Conoco, Canada's Nova Corp and Canadian HunterExploration have presented a proposal to develop a potentially enormousnatural gas field in northern Mexico, according to a report in the WallStreet Journal. Under the terms of the proposal, made several monthsago, the group would agree a long-term service contract with PetroleosMexicanos (Pemex) to explore for and produce gas at Burgos Basin,bordering Texas. The companies, which would be equal partners in thedeal, would initially invest $100m in the project.If successful, the proposal, said to be in a very early stage ofdiscussion, would be taken as a signal that Mexico may relax itsrestrictions on foreign involvement in the energy sector. Mexican lawcurrently forbids foreign ownership of its energy resources.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PETROPERU PLANS TO CUT WORKFORCEPetroperu plans to cut its workforce before a stage-by-stageprivatisation later this year, the company says. "The programme . . .foresees the retirement of excess personnel, to whom an economicincentive will be given as well as legal benefits", it said. The ideawas to make the company's various divisions more efficient beforeprivatisation. Officials would not say how many of the company's 5,500workers were likely to go, but speculation is that numbers could be cutby 1,000 by July.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PERU'S OIL PRODUCTIONPeru's oil production fell 4.36% in 1995 from an average of 127,309 bpdto 121,762 bpd, according to a report from regulatory agency Perupetro.The fall was blamed on problems over the past few months with thedepletion of old wells before new wells came on-stream. Officialsexpect the situation to improve in 1996, following last year'ssignature of deals with foreign oil producers, and the start of a four-year privatisation programme for Petroperu.The country produced a total of 44.44m barrels in 1995 compared to46.47m in 1994, said the report, with some 95.1% produced by state oilfirm Petroperu (14.54m bbl), Petro-Tech (7.09m) and US firm OccidentalPetroleum (20.64m). Private contractors accounted for the remaining4.9%.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PDVSA PLANS TO INCREASE CRUDE RESERVESPDVSA plans to increase crude reserves to 66bn bbl in 1996 from 64.4bnthis year, said PDVSA at its annual general meeting. It said it plansto invest Bol 1.7 trillion next year ($5.86bn at the new officialexchange rate of Bol 290 per dollar in effect since December 11), upfrom Bol 901.9m in 1995 ($3.1bn). Most investment will go intoproduction and exploration, said a company statement.PDVSA said the programme will allow it to meet production targets "andincrease in 1996 proven reserves of crude to about 66bn bbl, or 1.6bnmore than 1995". PDVSA gave no figures for projected crude outputcapacity or the budget that was approved. The company said recentlythat its average production was rising to 5.659m b/d by 2005 comparedto 3.157m b/d now.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PDVSA EXPECTS OIL OUTPUT BOOSTPDVSA expects oil output to be boosted further by the currentliberalisation programme. The company expects output from the tenblocks being auctioned to reach at least 500,000 bpd by 2005, accordingto president Luis Giusti. Some 60 companies in 20 consortia have bidfor the estimated $11bn of profit-sharing contracts. At the time ofgoing to press, two winners had been announced - a consortium of Mobil,Veba and Nippon with a bid of $104m for La Ceiba tract, and Conoco,bidding $21.2m for a second tract. The remaining concessions will beannounced by the end of January, with exploration beginning possibly bythe last quarter of1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENEZUELA'S AMUAY REFINERY RECORDVenezuela's Amuay refinery, the country's largest, processed 471,000b/d last year, a 41,000 b/d rise over 1994, says Lagoven, a subsidiaryof PDVSA. It said that 100,000 b/d were heavy crude, which representeda new record for the refinery, located in Falcon state. Venezuelaprocessed an average 972,000 b/d in 1994, say the latest figures. Atthe same time, the Eastern Cyrogenic Complex, run by Corpoven, producedan average of 34m b/d of LNG in 1995, up 9% over 1994. The PDVSAsubsidiary exported an average of 11m b/d of its LNG output, theremaining 23m b/d sold domestically.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER IN LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STATOIL CONSIDERING JOINING MARAVEN TO UPGRADE CRUDEStatoil is considering joining forces with PDVSA's Maraven subsidiaryto upgrade crude in the Orinoco Tar Belt. President Harold Norvik ofStatoil was in Venezuela recently to undertake discussions. Theupgrading project is being carried out by Total and Itochu and Marubeniof Japan. The project calls for production of heavy crude from the TarBelt, which would be converted into crude with a 31 degree API for saleto Europe, Japan and North America.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-15IA086-000616-B015-17http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001643 text/html 85937HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:14:34 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:55 GMTContent-length: 85750Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey21.html Sample Issue Copyright POWER UK via NewsNet January 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LITTLECHILD REDIRECTS 1998 PLAN (3098 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW ESI WARNED OF "POLL TAX ON WIRES" (1397 words) ENRON APPLIES FOR SUPPLY LICENCE (218 words) NEWS SOUTHERN MOVES INTO GAS SUPPLY (55 words) BG/HE GO AHEAD WITH SEABANK (279 words) MISSION/EASTERN VIE FOR NP PLANT (445 words) PG BRINGS ON DISTA PRODUCTS CHP (117 words) NT ALARMED BY ABB INTENTIONS (334 words) CCGT GENERATION GROWTH SLOWS IN 1995 (337 words) WELLHEAD GAS GENERATOR SET TO TRADE BELOW GSP (177 words) COAL GENS TO FACE ONE RAIL COMPANY (84 words) NEW YEAR SEES PRICE TUMBLE (306 words) RIGG STEPS DOWN AS POOL CHAIR (96 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW MCILDOON CALLS FOR COMPETITION (717 words) DTI CLEARS CSW BID FOR SEEBOARD (212 words) NEWS HE FACES TOUGHER SUPPLY STANDARD (71 words) BANKS RESCUE COAL INVESTMENTS (38 words) UNDERGROUND STARTS TENDER PROCESS (137 words) NATPOWER TO CUT #60M FROM COSTS (156 words) SEI AND HANSON AGREE LICENCES (65 words) EASTERN ACQUIRES OVERSEAS ARM (81 words) CITY ANALYSTS RESHUFFLE (56 words) UKDCS WIN QUALITY AWARD (74 words) KING TAKES TOP JOB AT PG (138 words) MEE RETIRES FROM EASTERN BOARD (37 words) ROBERTS JOINS SWALEC (40 words) MAGNOX ELECTRIC SPLIT OUT (66 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BE PRIVATISABLE ONLY AT TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE SAY MACKERRON AND SADNICKI (1376 words) PRICE SETTING GENSETS: DECEMBER 1995 (1679 words) CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996LITTLECHILD REDIRECTS 1998 PLANThe Regulator has told the Pool and the ESI that it must redirectefforts to finding a workable and economic arrangement for introducingfull competition in April 1998. He says that the estimated costs ofimplementing and running the Pool's proposed Operational Framework areneither reasonable nor necessary. Offer has proposed a number ofsimplifications that it believes will facilitate implementation andreduce costs. It believes that implementation costs should not exceed#50m, while subsequent operating costs should be around #15m. Thesecosts are about one fifth of the Pool's estimates.The difference in cost estimates reflects two factors:* a real cost saving arising from abandoning some of the more complexand expensive systems, most particularly the Pool's proposedregistration system;* the Regulator's judgement that some of the costs incurred by the PESsrelate to activities that would in any case have to be carried out byPESs in discharging their duties as distribution companies. Many ofthese costs have already been provided for or else the additional costsare not significant.In addition to slashing the implementation costs that the industry willbe allowed to cover, Offer has told the industry that customers shouldnot face any additional charges before 1998. It recommends thatimplementation costs should be recovered over five years from April1998, with all <100kW customers paying in relation to theirconsumption. The current non franchise sector would not have tocontribute to the implementation or running costs.In many ways Offer's recommendations echo the call by a number of RECsfor a major re-think on how best to implement the 1998 project. ThreeRECs, Southern Electric, Yorkshire Electricity and MidlandsElectricity, had in late December put forward an alternative framework,which was dubbed the SYM proposal. This group called for the ESI toabandon the implementation of the Pool's Operational Framework. Itargued that the industry should switch now, before it was too late, toa simpler and more manageable programme that could be implemented intime and yet would meet all the primary objectives.The SYM plan backers are uncompromising in their criticism of the ESI'scurrent 1998 plans. They argued that the "Operational Frameworkproposals are unlikely to be delivered on time. With a development costof #276m (+100%.-50%) and some #80m/yr to operate, it is so expensive,it makes it very difficult for companies to accept. It also underminesthe benefit available to customers from competition."They say that a simpler framework is needed in order to meet time-scales. This must use existing systems, procedures and practiceswherever possible. Not only would this make implementation of fullcompetition a more manageable task, it would also substantially reducecosts. They argue that there is no time to lose in pushing forward withthe alternative.Offer's proposalsStream-lined registrationOffer thinks that the Pool's registration system is unnecessarilycomplex and that it would be more appropriate for the PES to provide aregistration service to meet the requirements of suppliers and the Poolfor all consumers in its area. It is prepared to propose licenceamendments to ensure that the PES fulfil these activities.The Pool's proposed on-line registration system - the so-called TradingSystem Data Provision (TSDP) and its associated Gateway - is generallyregarded as one of the more complex systems the Pool has proposed. TheTSDP would be made up of regional satellite databases (one per REC)holding data necessary for trading. A common access path to the data(the so-called Gateway) would allow all suppliers to access the data.It is envisaged that eventually the system will provide on-line access.The Regulator proposes a much simpler system based on a uniqueidentifier for every metering site, which would be printed on allcustomers bills and would provide suppliers and others with necessaryinformation. PES would be responsible for assigning this meteringsystem identifier (MSID), which would give information on thedistribution exit point, profile, line loss factor and meter readingfrequency and perhaps other data. PESs would maintain databases of allcustomers in their area as well as provide a service to respond toenquiries from customers and suppliers. Suppliers would have anobligation to alert the PES to any change, and in particular toregister their responsibility for supply to any premises. The PESdatabases would also provide the Pool with standing data it requiresfor settlement.Regulatory safeguards, such as performance standards and penalties, arelikely to be required to ensure prompt and non discriminatory provisionof information.ProfilingOffer accepts the Pool's proposals for eight profiles for 100kWcustomers. And while its says that assignment of profiles has not beena contentious issue, customers and suppliers should have the right toseek independent determination where there is a dispute. The eightprofiles comprise two profiles each for domestic and smaller non-domestic customers (unrestricted and Economy 7) and four profiles(based on load factors) for larger non-domestic customers suppliedthrough conventional maximum demand metering.SettlementUnder the Pool's current arrangements metered half hour data andprofiled data for all second tier customers is provided to the Pool'sagents for settlement, while first tier consumption is evaluated on agrid supply point (GSP) basis as the difference between total secondtier use and total GSP take, suitably scaled for losses. The Pool's PTAis that the existing arrangements for second tier data will continuewhile PESs will be able to choose the basis by which they will submitfirst tier consumption data to settlements. The option of continuingthe existing "differencing" approach has not been allowed for, as itwas considered to place too great a risk on PESs, should large numbersof customers opt for second-tier suppliers.Instead, the PTA allows the PES to select one of three trading options:* Global: where the host PES submits customer data on an individualsite basis both for initial settlement and reconciliation, on the samebasis as second-tier suppliers;* Super customer: where the host PES submits aggregated data for one ormore profile groups to initial settlement and reconciliation;* Hybrid-difference: where the host PES submits individual customerdata on a global basis at initial settlement, but at the reconciliationstage only meter data from second-tier customers is used.The global approach is the most demanding in IT terms - if all RECsadopted this approach settlement systems would have to handle data on23m sites. The hybrid-difference approach is the most easiest, as mostof the aggregated data is not processed for Pool use. The supercustomer lies in between.As the amount of data provided for settlement increases so does thecost, but this must be offset against reduced differencing risk. ThePool's costings assume that all RECs adopt the global approach, inorder to avoid differencing risk.Offer says that this is unreasonable and given the balance betweencosts and risks there is no justification for adopting the globaloption. Indeed in the initial period, Offer proposes that PESs muststay with the existing differencing approach. It adds that PESspursuing the super customer or hybrid difference approach will not begiven an extra revenue allowance to meet the additional costs it andthe Pool incurs.PESs should be obliged to provide data aggregation services to allsuppliers operating in their area on a non-discriminatory basis.Suppliers could then decide whether to provide the data aggregationservice to the Pool themselves or through an independent accreditedagent or sub-contract their requirement to the host REC.Operating costs of 1998 PTA: #m/yrCost component             Direct     Indirect                           costs      costsSystem operation& maintenance               4         30Monitoring                  5          0Audit systems               7          0Management & support        3          0Other, includingprofile maintenance         1          0Total                      40         30Source: PoolHalf-hourly metering in reconciliationThe Pool's PTA allows for half hour metered data to be delivered tooutside settlement timescales. The Regulator endorses this as it allowscustomers to benefit from half hour metering without installing on-linecommunications. This will allow a wider range of tariffs than can beoffered to customers and will reduce the reliance on profilingtechniques for larger customers under 100kW.Competition in metering and data collectionOffer has re-affirmed its view that suppliers should takeresponsibility for metering and data collection in 1998. However in thenon half hourly metered sector of the market, the Offer has endorsedthe Pool's recommendation for a two-year transitional arrangement. Thiswill involve the supplier sub-contracting to the local PES (or itsagent), those data collection functions that are related toconventional meters, at least in so far as they are necessary fortrading system purposes. Offer envisages that PESs would enter intobilateral contracts with suppliers, which would set out the terms uponwhich the data collection service would be provided. Any dispute aboutterms would be subject to determination by the Regulator.Parallels with SYM lineIn essence the SYM proposal involves applying the existing tradingarrangements to all customers with half-hourly on-line meters, whileassigning responsibility for all other customers to the RECsdistribution businesses. Like Offer, the SYM scheme involves replacingthe Pool's centralised registration system with a simple one based onPES distribution businesses, while the existing settlement process,supplemented by a local aggregation and reconciliation system, will beretained. PESs would continue to trade on the basis of differencing, asOffer proposes for the initial period.The Pool would continue to clear on a daily basis. All half-hour meterdata will continue to be processed through the current centralsettlements system. This will include all the additional data frommandatory and non-mandatory half hour meters.For all non half-hour data, the REC distribution business would providea data aggregation and reconciliation service for all supply customersin its area. Distributors would provide initial estimates of annualconsumption that will be used for settlement purposes. These estimateswould be updated following receipt of physical meter reading, validatedcustomer own readings or estimates carried out by the RECs' existingestimating process.Aggregated data would be fed to the initial settlement. This would becarried out on a calender basis. In this way it would spread theprofile and line loss risk across all suppliers.The reconciliation process, carried out between the host PES and secondtier suppliers, would be synchronised with the meter reading data flowsthat feed it. The host PES would have to accept the difference risk,which applies to a small margin between the published and out-turn lineloss factors. These would be small.Unlike the Pool's proposal the SYM plan would not allow customers totrade on the basis of half hourly data unless it is provided on-linewithin settlement timescales. The SYM backers argue that since few>100kW customers have chosen to take supply on multi-rate terms, thegains from continuing to allow half hourly data to be processed outsidetimescales, would be outweighed by the savings due to the simplifiedsettlement task. They point out that it would not be possible to caterfor data delivered outside settlement timescales due to thedifferencing principle at reconciliation.They say that their proposals would enable new suppliers to givereliable quotations to prospective customers without direct involvementwith the existing supplier or distributor. Equally, the SYM backersacknowledge that the main disadvantage is the reliance of non host PESsuppliers on effective regulation of host PESs' systems and procedures.However these concerns can be addressed by appropriate licenceamendments and performance standards. SYM point out that supplierswould be able verify meter readings on Pool statements against thosecontained within DUoS (distribution use of system) statements.On competition in data collection and metering in the conventionalmetering segment, the SYM backers say that while the PES should retainresponsibility for this, there is no reason why actual data collectionand meter operation should not be carried out by third parties. Thiswould have to be subject to:* current meter data flow being preserved (in other words the datacollector will have to send data to host REC - the data is anywayrequired for billing suppliers' distribution use of system charge);* data collector and meter operator parties having proper accreditationand complying with codes of practice;* maintenance of a evenly loaded quarterly cycle of data processing(which might imply some data being stored prior to processing). This isnecessary in order that the reconciliation system is not overloaded.Costs and risksThe cost saving in IT systems of the Offer and SYM alternativeframeworks are huge. The largest savings stem from the removal of theneed to develop new data collection and delivery systems, and toprovide half-hour profile data to the Pool trading system. In addition,there would be savings in reduced programme management costs and trialcosts. While Offer puts the total implementation costs at under #50m,SYM's estimate is #89m, and for a system that is more trimmed down thanOffer's. Similarly, SYM's estimate of annual operating costs, c.#25m issubstantially above Offer's.Simplifying the operational framework will also ease the task ofimplementing it, in terms of making development of IT systems moremanageable and also in terms of reducing legal re-drafting of thePooling and Settlement Agreement and other arrangement.The SYM operational frameworkCustomer driven registration:* Customer provides new supplier with information from bill.* New supplier confirms supply to customer.* New supplier registers customer with host PES registration  service.* New supplier sets up billing record.* Host PES registration service registers change/Notifies previous  supplier.* Meter reading decided (actual, customer own, agreed estimate).* PES calculates DUoS bill.* PES sends termination DUoS account to previous supplier.* Previous supplier sends supply termination account to customer.Cyclical meter reading:* Host PES meter reading (actual, customer own, agreed estimate).* Host PES send meter reading to supplier.* Supplier calculates supply bill.* Supplier sends supply bill.* PES calculates DUoS bill.* PES sends DUoS bill to supplier.* PES settlement module derives reconciliation amounts and submits  to the Pool's agents Energy Pool Funds Administration Limited  (EPFAL).* EPFAL clears reconciliation amounts.Calendar-settlement timescales:* Existing settlement arrangements applied to half hour metered  customers.* SSA provides differences between GSP and line loss factor adjusted  half-hourly metered data to PES settlement module.* PES settlement module submits supplier aggregates by profile to  SSA.* SSA bills suppliers and pays generators for initial settlement via  EPFAL.Pool and SYM Operational framework implemention costs: #mProgramme                        Pool's  Proposal  SYM      OfferElement                          Direct  Indirect  Proposal Estimate                                 Pool    CostsTrading system data provisionsystems                           24      90        0         0Initial settlement & reconcil-iation systems                    17       0       17        17Data collection systems            3       0        0         3Pilot trails & audit              13       0        6       }Systems integration & testing     11      18       14       }Commercial arrangements            8       0        4       }19Programme/project management       9      15       12       }Data acquisition & load            6      27       16       }Other system developments,including modifications toexisting systems                   6       4        5         9System architecture & design       2       0        1         2Other                              2       0        0         0Total                            101     154       75        50Source: Pool, Offer and SYMIndustry and customer reactionThe industry has still to digest the Regulator's proposals, which havetaken many by surprise. Many are pleased that Offer is taking a moreproactive stance and that it has at last outlined the principles forcost recovery. But there is widespread feeling among the PES that Offerhas slashed too deeply into the PESs allowable implementation andoperating costs. Yorkshire's Bill Wilkinson, told Power UK that "Onfirst impressions, Offer's disallow any extra spend by distributionbusinesses, which could be significant, is harsh especially if itadopts an inflexible approach on ring fencing distribution and supplybusinesses".A number of PESs will certainly be unhappy that Offer will only meetthe costs of trading on a differencing basis, rather than meeting thecosts of alternative, more data-demanding, settlements arrangements.National Power, PowerGen and the aspiring independent suppliers arelikely to welcome the Offer proposals, if they believe that they willreduce the costs to customers of taking competitive supply. It does notmatter to them that PESs may find it difficult to keep costs to theallowed levels, as long as the PES can deliver the requiredregistration and data aggregation services. However they are concernedthat no key competition elements should be lost in the effort tosimplify. NP's commercial director, Graham Brown told Power UK, "NPwelcomes any proposal that leads to lower costs that will eventuallyfeed through to the customer, but the industry must be careful not toover simplify as this could jeopardise competition. We will be studyingthe proposals closely".Customers' representatives and buyers' groups are likely to support thetougher Offer stance if it reduces the costs of taking competitivesupply. Yvonne Constance, the chair of the Electricity ConsumersCommittee, backs the Regulator's decision to allow PESs to startrecovering implementation costs from 1998 rather than in advance.Larger >100kW customers will be pleased that Offer has proposed thatPESs will be able to recover the implementation costs for 1998 from the<100kW consumers. Also they will take some satisfaction that Offer hastold the PES that there should be no disruption in the tradingarrangements for the >100kW sector. The Utility Buyers Forum (UBF) onlylast week called for a two-year postponement of the 1998 project on thegrounds that there were too many unresolved issues and too little timeto implement the necessary changes. Alan Mitchell Rae, UBF's directorgeneral, said "that many of our members have sites which canpotentially benefit from competition but would rather have an orderlytransition and postpone these benefits than see more major upsetthroughout the market."UBF also say that neither the Regulator nor ESI had yet made a firmbusiness case for extending competition to residential customers. Therewas instead an ideological commitment. According to Bob Spears, UBF'selectricity technical adviser, "its rather like the governmentdeclaring that the UK will join the Single European Currency in 1998,whatever the costs and benefits and whatever the level ofpreparedness".Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ESI WARNED OF "POLL TAX ON WIRES"The ESI's current plans for introducing full competition in 1998 are sodeeply flawed that they could present a "poll tax on wires", accordingto a new report by Alex Henney. Henney warns that the systems the Pooland Offer have in mind are unnecessarily complex and costly, and thatthe gains to be had from competition do not justify building a hugecentralised settlement system. He adds that, as with complex ITsystems, there is a more than even chance that they will exceed budgetand will not be more than ready in time. The solution, according toHenney, is to ditch the current centralised system and develop adecentralised system based on PESs' distribution businesses.That this criticism should come Henney - a well known advocate of freemarkets, an astute independent thinker, and former Electricity Councileconomist, makes it all the more pertinent. That its conclusions arelargely endorsed by the breakaway RECs and now even Offer gives it aradical manifesto flavour.ESI's 1998 costs outweigh competition benefitsHenney contends that even if the Pool can contain the implementationand running costs to the targets set out in its Operational Framework,the costs may outweigh the benefits from competition. Adding theoperating costs (#80m) to the development costs (#250m, amortised overfour years on a 10% discount rate) and dividing by the number ofcustomers (23m), yields an annual cost per customer of #5.80. Thesecosts are about double the level implied by the Regulator, who hasstated that the costs are unlikely to exceed 1% of customers' bills,which average #300/yr.What riles Henney is the singular failure of the Regulator or industryto examine the benefits side of the equation. Henney points out that itis disengenuous to cite the reductions in prices that followed eitherthe  opening of the 1MW or 100kW markets as deriving from the effectsof head-to-head competition. The reductions owe more to the fact thatcustomers no longer had to subsidise British Coal through the REC'svesting or "coal deal" contracts; and in 1994 to the imposition ofOffer's Pool price cap.Henney argues that in order to see what the potential gains are it isnecessary to focus on the energy and supply business component ofbills. For a typical domestic customer these components amount to#157/yr. The great bulk of this is energy (generation costs) with just#27 accounted for by the supply business, including an average supplymargin of #7.40. This average does of course disguise a range of supplycosts, in the order of #10 for a customer on direct debit to #60 for apoorly paying credit customer. There is also some variation betweenRECs' franchise revenue allowances.In theory, competition in supply will force suppliers:* to reduce supply costs by improving efficiency in marketing andbilling through smarter IT systems or by sharing operations with otherutilities. Henney suggests that higher cost RECs could cut costs by 15%(#6) while lower cost companies might trim costs by 10% (#3).* to trim margins. The scope for trimming is extremely small given thesmall margins: margins on domestic customers are unlikely to be muchover #5.* to purchase energy more efficiently. With no data available on RECs'purchasing skills/luck, Henney suggests that perhaps #1-2 might beavailable. In addition, some RECs with expensive long-term IPPcontracts will no longer be able to pass the costs on customers, butwill be forced to take the above market cost on their supply businessbottom line. For a few RECs this could amount to #3.00 per typicaldomestic customer.Summing these potential benefits, gives a maximum potential reductionof #11/customer (where the customer is served by a high cost REC andpoor buying). Expressed as a percentage of the typical bill this savingis equivalent to 4% of the total bill (7% of energy costs). In anaverage REC, potential savings may be nearer #7 or 3% of the totalbill.These potential saving are not much greater than the costs, whichamount to near #6/customer. On this basis the potential net customerbenefit of competition is perhaps #2-3/customer. Henney questions,whether in practice even these gains will be realised. Competition willonly bring price reductions where customers are prepared to switch totake advantage of lower prices. The limited evidence that exists fromother commodity/utility markets and from other countries (most notablyNorway) suggests that the 3-4% savings on offer is unlikely to temptmany residential customers buying singly to move. Unless residentialbuyers are willing to delegate their purchasing to agencies purchasingfor many customers, it is difficult to see many domestic customersgaining from competition.Indeed, if the costs of the new systems come out nearer the top end ofthe Pool's contingency forecast range (at c.#500m) most domesticcustomers will pay for competition. Henney warns that residentialcustomers may not actually become aware of this situation, as theseincreases should be more than offset by reductions elsewhere. Thebiggest gain is likely to come with the ending of the RECs' coal backedfranchise contracts.Complex systems don't always workThe cost-benefit balance looks even worse if the risks of systemfailure are factored in. Henney warns that complex IT systems rarelycome in on time, to budget and without operational gliches. He citesone recent survey of IT programmes in 200 organisations which showedthat 90% of projects were over budget, 60% delivered late and 20%inappropriate for the task. In recent years there have been notable ITfailures including major system developed for the DHSS, Inland Revenue,the London Ambulance Service and the Stock Exchange. The Pool's ownexperience, albeit so far on a more modest scale, has hardly beenimpressive. The Transmission Service Scheme implemented last year tomanage Uplift overshot its target cost by 150%. The proposed settlementand registration systems are much more complex.Regulator is key to forcing progressLike many in the industry, Henney is also concerned about who, ifanyone, is taking responsibility for designing and implementing thesystems for full competition in 1998. He points out that the ESI has nolegal obligation nor financial allowance to design and develop thesystems for 1998. It is the Regulator who has the obligation to"promote competition in the supply of electricity" and who also haslegal power to propose the necessary commercial framework.Henney points out that a REC's primary duty is to its shareholders. Infact it has a duty not to commit funds until such time as licencesobligations require it to do so. And they certainly cannot spend theircustomers' money without Offer's authorisation, but as yet Offer hasmade no allowance. This is hardly taking a proactive stance, as theRegulator claims.Build systems on PES distributionHenney says that the Regulator should take control and reconstruct analternative streamlined programme based on existing distributionbusiness systems. He proposes an alternative systems that will:* allow anyone to have half-hourly meters, and allow data to beprocessed within or outside settlement timescales;* build the necessary registration systems on the current systemdeveloped for the current non-franchise market;* produce pseudo half-hour data with a handful of profiles in themanner currently proposed;* use PES distribution businesses to effect local settlement andreconciliation.Henney says that adopting such an approach is not a jump into theunknown, as Norway has already implemented such a system. And under thecurrent competitive market arrangements, RECs already know to whom eachmeter relates and who the suppliers are as they have to recover DUoS(distribution use of system) charges from suppliers.Daily settlement through GSP (grid supply points) which is required bythe Pooling and Settlement Agreement (PSA) could be done for profiledcustomers by RECs distribution businesses (for a fee) on behalf of allsuppliers in its area. The difference between profiled and meteredsupply and final metered use (scaled for losses) would be allocatedproportionally among suppliers.* Proposals for liberalising the electricity market in England & Walesin 1998: a poll tax on wires?, by Alex Henney, available from EEElimited, 0171 284 4217, Fax 0171 284 4331. Price #200.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ENRON APPLIES FOR SUPPLY LICENCEEnron has applied to the DTI for a second-tier supply licence forEngland and Wales. It lodged its application on January 12. If it isawarded a licence, which should be a formality, it will be able tooffer supply terms to any >100kW customer. The company is alreadyactive in the gas supply business and would be expected to operate ajoint gas and electricity marketing operation.Enron's application follows Norsk Hydro's successful application foran STS licence on January 10. NH is now setting up an electricitytrading and supply arm, Norsk Hydro Energi (UK), under the direction ofJamie Hamilton. Hamilton says he expects NHE to offer and trade CfDs(contracts for differences) including EFAs (electricity forwardagreements).NH has already has considerable experience as a supplier and trader inthe Nordic electricity market, which is of comparable size to the UKmarket.Hamilton joined NHE in December from National Power, where he was thefuel strategy manager. Prior to that he was at Shell.NH also has manufacturing interests in the UK, and around 2,000employees.Contact: Jamie Hamilton, Norsk Hydro Energi (UK), Tel. 0181 255 2510.* John Tarpey has taken over as manager of Energy Direct, NationalPower's electricity supply business. Tarpey was previously manager ofby-products.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SOUTHERN MOVES INTO GAS SUPPLYSouthern Electric is to begin marketing gas to around 40,000 of itscustomers in Somerset, who are in the first tranche of customers ableto choose their gas supplier from April 1996. The gas will be soldthrough its associated company, Southern and Phillips Gas. Southernalready has extensive experience in the commercial gas market.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BG/HE GO AHEAD WITH SEABANKBritish Gas and Hydro-Electric announced on January 22 that they hadformed a 50:50 joint venture, Seabank Power Limited (SPL), which willconstruct and operate a 755MW CCGT plant at Avonmouth. The backers saythat the plant will be designed to operate profitably in the mid meritsegment of the market.The total capital cost of the project is expected to #315m, which willbe funded equally by HE and BG, through a mix of shareholder loans andequity in an 85:15 split.HE has signed a power purchase agreement under which it will buy allthe electricity produced by the plant for the first 10.5 years. Thecompany will  also be responsible for providing fuel to SPL from itsgas portfolio, which has been augmented by a new contract with BG. Thisadditional gas is understood to have been purchased under a contractthat links the delivered gas price to electricity prices (Pool andcontract). This suggests that HE will be transferring a significantpart of the electricity price risk through to BG.Siemens has been awarded the turnkey contract for design andconstruction, with commercial operation scheduled for late 1998. Theplant will be based on two Siemens V94.3a 250MW gas turbines and asingle 255MW steam turbine, which will give an overall efficiency ofover 55% (on an LHV ISO basis). Firing will be solely by natural gas,with no distillate backup.The design configuration does allow space for further units. However,the partners point out that the current 755MW represents the mostappropriate configuration, given the changing market circumstanceswhich have seen Seabank project scaled down from a >1.3GW baseloadscheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MISSION/EASTERN VIE FOR NP PLANTMission Energy is now the City's favourite to win control of the 4GW ofNational Power coal capacity following the company's winning bid forFirst Hydro. At more than #150m above the next highest bid, Mission'swinning bid is regarded as a strategic entry bid. Many in the Citybelieve that this acquisition is likely to feed Mission's hunger formore capacity and a broader portfolio of plant. Industry sources, incontrast still tend to put Eastern Group as favourite, as it too hasconsiderable financial muscle and strong ambitions to play a biggerrole in the UK generation sector.AES and Enron are considered to be outside runners in the contest,although both have significant interests in the UK generation sector.But these companies should not be ruled out. Enron has always presenteditself as a clean generation company, so it was something of a surprisewhen it declared an interest in the NP coal plant. While Enron have notconfirmed it, most observers (Power UK included) have assumed thatEnron interest in the plant on offer, is driven by the options forconverting or repowering the plant to run on gas.NP's conversion of two sets at Didcot (1,000MW) indicates that NP atleast thinks there is an economic case for dual firing capability.However, none of the three stations (West Burton, Ironbridge andRugeley) have connections to the gas network (as Didcot has), so theconversion cost is likely to be somewhat more than the c.#10m (#10/kW)for Didcot. But even if the cost were double or treble, a conversionmight pay, especially if low cost gas could be secured.The gas break-even price with coal bought on the spot market (asopposed to the headline "coal deal" price) is likely to be around 11-12p a therm. This is achievable at present, but it would be a braveinvestor who would count on prices remaining at current levels. Thissuggests that if the plants are to have a future burning gas they willhave to be upgraded, which implies a commitment to invest much biggersums than a simple conversion. By installing gas turbines and modifyingthe boilers and steam turbines, it would be possible to convert thestations into combined cycle stations. Operating in this mode thestations could achieve efficiencies of 45-48%, compared with about 38%running in single cycle mode. The extra efficiency points would give ahigher break-even gas price versus coal, but then it comes at asubstantial investment price, some #200m for West Burton.Switching to gas would, of course, bring considerable environmentalbenefits, most particularly in reducing sulphur dioxide emissions.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996PG BRINGS ON DISTA PRODUCTS CHPPowerGen CHP has commissioned its 10MWe/16MWt combined heat and powerat Dista Products' Merseyside site two months ahead of schedule andjust over 15 months after construction started. The plant will beoperated by PG CHP for 10 years under a total energy managementcontract. It comprises two 5MW Typhoon gas turbines provided byEuropean Gas Turbines and two waste heat boilers each supplying 11.5tonnes of steam an hour.PG CHP has also announced that it has won a contract to provide a #23mgas fired CHP plant at Conoco's oil refinery on the Humber estuary. Theplant's four gas turbines will be supplied with natural gas by a spurfrom the main Killingholme-Theddlethorpe line.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NT ALARMED BY ABB INTENTIONSThe National Trust (NT) has reacted with alarm to an approach by ABBthat it develop a 720MW CCGT on NT land adjoining an Exeter substation.ABB argued that the plant could be appropriately designed andlandscaped to minimise visual impact. By siting the plant next to thesubstation, the project would also avoid the need for further intrusivetransmission lines. This didn't wash with NT, which said that large-scale power generation was incompatible with the NT's goal ofstewardship.ABB says that the Exeter project had been little more than plucked offthe map - and the approach to NT the land-owners was the first timethat ABB had revealed its intentions. While it may represent amisjudgment it certainly does not represent a setback for the company.More importantly, it does indicate that generators are actively lookingfor sites in the capacity-short zones of the Grid.US oil giant Amoco, is also considering entering the UK generationmarket. The company's electricity subsidiary, Amoco Power Resourcesposted an invitation to tender for turnkey for a 250MW CCGT. Amoco toldPower UK that the company has several potential sites in mind, not justin East Anglia as mentioned in the Official Journal, and that it neededprice quotes from equipment companies in order to carry out itseconomic assessments.Amoco's invitation to tender follows a series placed by Enron Europe inDecember 1995, for various CCGT components for an unspecified site inthe north west of England. The supply contracts includes a 240MW gasturbine, high pressure steam boilers and one or more back-pressure 75MWsteam turbines and one or more heat recovery steam generators.Enron would not comment on the site for the plant, but did confirm thatthe CCGT in question would be suitable for a combined heat and powerapplication.The rating of the plant and the northwest site suggest that Enron isbidding to provide CHP facilities at Brunner Mond or at ICI Runcorn.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CCGT GENERATION GROWTH SLOWS IN 1995Current industry estimates are that total CCGT generation in Englandand Wales in 1995 reached just over 45TWh. This compares withprojections of over 50TWh made at the beginning of the year. CCGTgeneration in 1994 was 36TWh, indicating a 25% increase in 1995.The lower than expected growth in generation is largely due to thedelayed commissioning of several major new CCGT plants - (most notably,Little Barford (National Power), Keadby (Hydro-Electric/Norweb) andMedway (AES, Seeboard and Southern).Keadby has just this week completed handover (from John BrownEngineering, the construction contractor). Handover had been originallyscheduled for last summer, but vibration problems meant that thecommissioning programme was disrupted. It is the same story at theother two stations. Medway now reports, as do the others, that its twoturbines are running fine. However, it does not now expect to completehandover until late summer, almost a year behind the original scheduleddate. None of the companies would comment on who has borne the burdenof the delay costs, but industry rumours suggest that GE has covered asubstantial portion.With these three plants now running and with PowerGen's 1,400MWConnah's Quay expected on in the summer, and a full year's output fromBarking, CCGT generation should exceed 70TWh in 1996.Current CCGT developmentStation             MW      Commercial   Company/Partners                            operationCommissioningLittle Barford         680  early 1996   National PowerKeadby                 680    Jan 1996   Hydro-Electric/NorwebMedway                 660    Aug 1996   AES/SEEBOARD/SouthernSub-total            2,020Under constructionDidcot               1,350    mid 1997   National PowerConnah's Quay        1,400    mid 1996   PowerGenIndian Queens          160  early 1997   Turbine Power - DestecKing's Lynn            340    end 1996   Eastern GroupSouth Humber           750  early 1997   Humber Power - Midlands/IVOSalt Union              47        1996   Salt Union/Hydro-ElectricCitigen                 60        1996   CitigenAvonmouth              755        1998   Hydro-Electric/British GasSub-total            4,862Firm plannedRuncorn                700        1998   InterGen/Winnington             300        1999   Brunner MondEnfield                280   late 1998   IndeckTeeside                800        1999   Flotilla (Enron)Staythorpe           1,500        1999   National PowerSub-total            3,580Grand total         10,462Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996WELLHEAD GAS GENERATOR SET TO TRADE BELOW GSPIndependent Energy UK, a small West Midlands-based energy company isset to begin operations at its first on-shore wellhead gas power plantthat will export power onto the local distribution network. The firstplant, due on in April will only be rated at 1MW, but IEUK's commercialdirector John Sully, says that the company has licences for several on-shore sites. He expects to have 30-60MW of generation capacity acrossthe Midlands within a year.IEUK has been born from a merger of Ipsco, an oil industry servicingcompany, and EUKAN, a small gas company with several on-shore gasconcessions. By diversifying into generation, Sully, who recentlyjoined from Scottish Power's energy trading arm, says the company isable to exploit the added value of moving downstream. Sully adds thatthe vertical integration does not need to stop at generation and thatIEUK intends to be an active trader in electricity and gas. The companyis also likely to apply for a second-tier supply licence.For John Sully's contact details: call Power UK 0173 265095Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996COAL GENS TO FACE ONE RAIL COMPANYThe success of Wisconsin Central Transportation in winning all three ofthe rail-freight concerns means that the English coal generators willagain face a single railway carrier. Coal industry sources fear thatthe generators and coal suppliers will see their bargaining positionweakened, so railage costs could increase which would feed through tohigher fuel costs. National Power is best placed among the generatorsas it already has acquired several train sets and has options withsuppliers which would cover its full coal needs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NEW YEAR SEES PRICE TUMBLEThe run up to Christmas saw a step gear change in the generators bidswhich as seen PPP (Pool Purchase Prices) over the last four weeks ofslightly over 2p/kWh, versus an average level from mid November to midDecember of over 6p/kWh. The capacity component of prices has in thelast three weeks (business days) has been just 0.3p/kWh, an order ofmagnitude less than the level seen prior to the pre-Christmas tumble.SMP (system marginal prices) have also come down) to around 2.2p/kWhversus 3.25p/kWh.The fall in prices to some extent reflects an increase in availablecapacity, especially this month as Nuclear Electric has brought all bartwo of it reactors back on line. As last year, however, the major partof the reduction reflects a marked change in genco bidding, as thecompanies endeavour to make a effort to stop both the time and demandweighted price caps being broken by a large margin.Financial year to date prices (PPPs) are still below the cap. As ofJanuary 18, the demand-weighted average is 2.65p/kWh versus a cap of2.694p/kWh. The time-weighted average is 2.34p/kWh, compared with2.535p/kWh.On present trend the time-weighted cap is likely to be under shot by asignificant margin, while it is touch and go as to whether the demand-weighted cap will be exceeded. The sense of deja vu is obvious, butthis time the generators know the extent to which they can attributethe failure to meet the cap to "unpredictable events". Some observershave suggested that this year the generators will be less concerned toerr on the side of caution.FY-to-date prices to January 18                        Time      Demand                        weighted  weightedSystem Marginal Price   1.94      2.09Pool Purchase Price     2.34      2.65Pool Selling Price      2.54      2.88Source: Energy SettlementsBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996RIGG STEPS DOWN AS POOL CHAIRRichard Rigg is to step down as chairman of the Electricity Pool inMarch at the AGM, after almost three years in the job. The Pool isseeking a replacement, this time on a renumerated basis (Rigg and histwo predecessors were not renumerated).Rigg is the managing director of Kings Lynn power station, which isoperated by Anglian Power Generators, a wholly-owned subsidiary ofEastern Group.* John Holden, the Pool's development director is also leaving in Marchto take up a position at Companies House. Holden joined the Pool inJune 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MCILDOON CALLS FOR COMPETITIONDouglas McIldoon, the Northern Ireland Regulator, has reaffirmed NIOffer's desire to see greater competition in the Province's generationand wholesale supply businesses*.In a report, his first since taking office in November last year,McIldoon reviews the predicament that NI faces in terms of the vestingstructure - particularly the long-term must-take generation contracts.McIldoon says that even "if NI can avoid to pay for new capacity duringthe next seven years, and particularly if the adverse effect of theBallylumford gas contract can be minimised, the prospects are forprices being broadly stable - subject to coal, oil and gas prices notmoving dramatically upwards." But as energy prices are already abovethose in the rest of the UK, prices need to be cut, if the Province isnot to miss the opportunities provided by the development of a morepeaceful society.McIldoon has proposed a number of possible steps that might be taken toextend competition, which he says are in line with the draft EuropeanDirective on liberalisation of the electricity market and thegovernment's tenet that customers should pay the full cost of theenergy they consume.* Ending of Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE)'s power procurementmonopoly. This requirement has already been relaxed for self-generationprojects, but it is possible that once the termination dates for gensetcontracts are reached the generators could be freed to sell tosuppliers and customers of their  choice. This could lead to a gradualexpansion of independently contracted generation from as early as thisyear if Offer exercises its termination rights on the generationcontracts. However, the earliest termination dates for the biggerstations, Kilroot and Ballylumford, are not until 2010 (Power UK10/17). On this basis Belfast West (240MW) could be brought fully intothe independent sector by 2000, with Coolkeeragh joining in 2004. Newindependent generators and self-generators would also be allowed totrade direct to customers and suppliers of their choice.In order that this could work effectively it would be a logical step toallow independent generators access to the grid. However, in order thatthere was not an excessive build of capacity that could leave NIE withconsiderable stranded capacity, the Regulator has suggested that theremight need to be  limits on independent generation. This could be onthe basis of MW ratings of independent and self-generation sites orrestrictions to CHP or renewable generators.* Allowing independent power lines. There may be scope for allowingindependent generators to construct direct power links to dedicatedcustomers, but this would have to be weighed against the environmentalimpact of such links.* Liberal interconnector trading. The North-South interconnector couldalso be available both for certain customers in NI to buy directly fromthe Electricity Supply Board (ESB) or for NI generators to selldirectly to ESB's power procurement business.* Stimulating the market for energy efficiency. This would includemeasures to improve availability and accessibility of energy efficientappliances, information and awareness campaigns, and soft financingpackages for energy efficiency schemes.* Renewable energy. New arrangements could be implemented to create amarket for renewable energy. This would take the initial cost ofsecuring further capacity out of the general tariffs.* CHP. It is important to ensure that CHP competes on equal terms withelectricity only plant. Removing some current distortions could lead tonew CHP schemes being developed. The Regulator says a paper on thiswill be published later.* Supply competition. While there is no protected franchise in NI,second-tier suppliers have made no impression in the market place. Thisalmost certainly reflects the dominant position of NIE as the solepower procurement body. Once that goes supply competition may blossom.McIldoon concedes that there is no head to head competition ingeneration at present and that the existence of the long-term contractsties the Regulator's hand on what can be proposed. He has indicatedthat he will want to discuss with the generators and NIE thepossibility of revisiting the vesting contracts. However, the chases ofunscrambling the vesting stitch are must be slim as the generators holdall the aces.* Consumer choice, competition and prices, available from OfferNorthern Ireland, Belfast. Tel 01232 311575.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996DTI CLEARS CSW BID FOR SEEBOARDThe DTI has decided not to refer Central and South West (CSW)'s #1.6bnbid for SEEBOARD to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. This is thefirst bid to be approved since trade secretary Ian Lang referred thebids of National Power and PowerGen to the MMC in November. Lang saidthat CSW had given assurances that it would provide the regulator withall the information he required and that the REC would retain itsfinancial independence.CSW's bid is the fifth REC takeover to be cleared. The five approvedbids also include Southern Electric International's for SWEB, Hanson'sfor Eastern Group, Scottish Power's for Manweb and North West Water'sfor Norweb.Ian Lang, industry minister, has also decided not to refer the proposedacquisition of South Wales Electricity (SWALEC) by Welsh Water plc tothe Monopolies & Merger Commission. In making this decision, Lang tookthe advice of Offer, the Office of Fair Trading and Ofwat (the waterindustry regulator), all of which saw no case for referral oncompetition grounds.Welsh Water has given the DTI assurances that if the proposedacquisition of SWALEC is successful it will agree to licenceamendments, on financial ring fencing, provision of adequate financialand management resources and regulatory access to information.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996HE FACES TOUGHER SUPPLY STANDARDOffer has set a tougher target for improvements in the quality ofsupply provided by Hydro-Electric over the next five years. The targetfor 1999/2000 is for 105 customer minutes for lost supply, arising fromfaults in the company's HV distribution network. This represents a 16%improvement on the 10-year average figure of 125 minutes. The toughertargets were recommended by the Monopolies & Mergers Commissionpublished in June last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BANKS RESCUE COAL INVESTMENTSCity sources say that the banks will shore up wobbly Coal Investmentson the condition that the company goes ahead with a rights issue.Investment and output plans appear to be so far unaffected by thefinancial restructuring.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996UNDERGROUND STARTS TENDER PROCESSLondon Underground Limited (LUL) has formally started the tenderprocess for a 30-year supply contract to cover its power needs, byposting notice of the contract in the European Union's OfficialJournal.LUL says the contract would be expected to cover therefurbishment,operation and maintenance of the company's distributionnetwork and the provision of DC and AC supplies (either imported orgenerated). Presently, total annual electricity consumption amounts to900GWh. (PUK 17/3).The company says that a decision to award a contract, which will beperformance-based, is expected to be made by the end of 1996. Thedecision will depend on there being a sound business case forcontracting out. A short-list of companies is expected to be drawn upby end March. The contract is being pursued under the UK government'sPublic Finance Initiative.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996NATPOWER TO CUT #60M FROM COSTSNational Power has announced that it intends to cut it's annualoperating costs by around #60m following a major review of its nonpower station activities. The cost savings are expected to be phasedin, #40m in 1996/97 and #60m in 1997/98, both compared with currentcosts. As part of the cost cutting, the company expects to shed around400 jobs in non power station areas. Most of the job losses will be atthe company's Swindon offices, where around 1,400 staff are employed.NP says that its renewed cost drive is a response to increasingcompetition in the generation and supply businesses, and the expectedreduction in the company's generating capacity following disposal of4GW of coal fired plant.* NP's director of fuel management, Keith McNair is leaving thecompany. He is returning to the US where he will join CSX. One of thecountry's major railroad concerns, as a board-level troubleshooter.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SEI AND HANSON AGREE LICENCESSouthern Electric International and Hanson plc, the new owners of SWEBand Eastern Group respectively, have agreed modifications of the RECs'public electricity supply licences. The modifications deal withfinancial ring fencing of the electricity businesses, restrictions onactivities, availability of resources, disposal of assets and provisionof information to the Regulator.The modifications will be applied to other merged companies in duecourse.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996EASTERN ACQUIRES OVERSEAS ARMEastern Group has acquired the consultancy British Power International(BPI). BPI, is an offshoot of BEI Training Services a consultancyjointly owned by National Grid Company and British ElectricityInternational (a subsidiary of National Power). Eastern says that thisacquisition will help the group identify potential power projectsoverseas. BPI has contracts in many countries including Brazil, Poland,Thailand and Brunei. BPI currently has a four man team, all of whichwill be operating out of Eastern's Borehamwood office in Hertfordshire.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CITY ANALYSTS RESHUFFLEThe new year has seen a number of movements within the stockbrokers'analysts community. Kleinwort Benson's top rated UK electricityanalyst, Simon Williams, has quit the company to join Deutsche MorganGrenfell, while Philip Green and Isabelle Haine have left LehmanBrothers to join Goldman Sachs International. Simon Taylor has movedfrom JP Morgan to BZW.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996UKDCS WIN QUALITY AWARDUK Data Collection Services (UKDCS) has been awarded an ISO 9002accreditation for its services to the energy supply industry. Theaward, which was made by independent assessors Lloyds Register ofQuality Assurance, covers the entire scope of UKDCS's work frommetering, data retrieval and aggregation to processing anddistribution. UKDCS says that the information it handles from over24,000 customers accounts for around one quarter of energy traded inthe Pool (or #1.75bn).Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996KING TAKES TOP JOB AT PGPowerGen has appointed Deryk King to the new post of managing director,where he will be responsible for day-to-day operations. King will takethese duties off Ed Wallis, the company's current chief executive, whowill retain responsibility for strategy and external relations. Walliswill move up to executive chairman in July when Colin Southgate stepsdown as non-executive chairman.King, who is currently MD of ICI's global polyester business, is PG'sfirst top level appointment from outside the ESI. National Power hasrecruited from outside the industry on several occasions.* Chris Boon, East Midland's corporate development director has beenappointed to the company's board. In addition to strategic planning,business development, investments and disposals, Boon is alsoresponsible for the company's electrical contracting business, itsinternational business and Lincoln Green Energy, EME's energy servicesbusiness.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MEE RETIRES FROM EASTERN BOARDDavid Mee, Eastern Group's engineering director is leaving the boardand taking voluntary retirement. Mee, who will step down at the end ofMarch, will be replaced by Edward Hyams, currently director ofengineering with Southern Electric.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ROBERTS JOINS SWALECWelsh Water, the new owner of SWALEC, has announced that it hasappointed John Roberts, the former chief executive of Manweb, as chiefexecutive at SWALEC. The appointment is conditional on the successfuloutcome of WW's current offer for SWALEC.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996MAGNOX ELECTRIC SPLIT OUTNuclear Electric and Magnox Electric have been successfully separatedand are now shadow trading in preparation for formal separation inMarch. Magnox Electric has moved its permanent HQ at BerkeleyTechnology Centre, allowing NE to consolidate its own head officefunctions at Barnwood, Gloucester. Meanwhile, core staff and directorshave moved to British Energy's new HQ at Edinburgh Park on the westernoutskirts of the city.Back to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996BE PRIVATISABLE ONLY AT TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE SAY MACKERRON AND SADNICKIOn the basis of a detailed station-by-station analysis a new study byGordon MacKerron and Mike Sadnicki concludes that the privatisation ofBritish Energy is unlikely to achieve anywhere near the government'starget of #2.6bn. MacKerron and Sadnicki (M&S)'s results show thattaking a prudent investor's view and applying conventional nuclearindustry discounting practice (whereby liabilities are discounted at alow (2%) rate), yields a net present value (NPV) of minus #2.6bn. Ifthe operational discount rate is applied to liabilities that will bedischarged over the operating life of stations, then the NPV is raisedto just over #0.8bn.The authors argue that investors are likely to take the latterapproach, as there is little commercial reason to treat cash outflowsto meet operational expenses any differently from cash spent ondischarging liabilities. On this basis, investors will see a positivevalue for BE.But M&S point out that this valuation adopts the nuclear industry'sestimates of liabilities and that there are reasons to believe thesecould be substantial under-estimates. They claim this is the case withAGR waste liabilities, where the industry estimates are #0.7bn (#0.3bndiscounted) compared with their own estimate of #6.6bn (#3.6bndiscounted) (- see below). If investors believe waste liabilities arenearer the M&S estimates than the industry's own estimates this wouldof course take the NPV well into negative values. And there are otherpotential downside risks, most notably on station performance andelectricity sales price.Just how the government has come up with its #2.6bn valuation isunclear as the DTI has provided no hints as to the cost and performanceassumptions nor the discounting approach. M&S suggest that there aretwo ways in which such a high value can be achieved, using their costand performance assumptions.* by applying a 6% discount rate to both operational and liability cashstreams, or;* by unloading liabilities related to pre-1996 operations.M&S point out that KPMG adopted a 6% discount rate when evaluatingliabilities management options in its report to the DTI as part of thegovernment's Nuclear Review in 1994. The 6% rate is the lowest publicsector test rate. But the authors argue that it is inappropriate to usesuch a low rate, and the government itself advocates a 10% hurdle ratewhere public sector concerns sells their output in a competitive marketplace. M&S use a 13% discount rate. They argue this is consistent withwhat National Power and others had advocated in nuclear reviewsubmissions, and is also the outcome of applying a capital assetpricing model.Waste liabilities likely to top #6bnM&S say that the nuclear industry's estimates of waste liabilitiescould be out by an order of magnitude. This conclusion is based on ananalysis of the components of waste costs. According to the authors,waste liabilities include:* packaging, storage and disposal of low level waste (LLW);* disposal at NIREX of intermediate level waste (ILW) produced byThorp;* packaging, storage and disposal at NIREX of ILW produced at stations.Using data on a US disposal site M&S estimate LLW costs to amount to#376m.M&S's assumptions on valuation* AGR load factors will on average be lower than achieved in the  last two years, at 69.6% (versus 75.8% and 71.6% in 1993/94 and  1994/95), but will be higher than the average over the last six  years, 64.7%.* Sizewell B load factor will be 70%.* Station life will be 30 years for Dungeness B, Heysham 1 and  Hartlepool and 35 for the other four AGRs, while Sizewell B's life  is 40 years.* Present capacities will be maintained.* Average sales price for electricity is 2.5p/kWh.* Station fuel costs are 0.45p/kWh.* Non-station operating and maintenance (ORM) costs will fall 5%/yr  until 2000, and then remain fixed, while station ORM costs are  assumed stable across the station life.* Marginal reprocessing costs are estimated to be #598,000 a tonne  of uranium.* AGR decommissioning costs amount to #560m per station based on the  industry's "reference strategy", rather than the "deferred  safestore" option.* Annual operating costs of Sizewell B are #90m.* AGR waste liabilities are estimated to be #0.7bn undiscounted,  based on estimates by the NUCG (Nuclear Utilities Chairmans'  Group) and Fred Pallant.* A 13% discount rate is applied to operational cash streams, while  a two alternative rates are applied to liabilities (2% and 13%) to  produce two base case valuations, which M&S call the conventional  and innovative.ILW disposal is costed on the basis of the fully built up costs of theNIREX repository which is assumed to be available by 2011. Using a 6%discount rate, capital cost of #1.88bn and an annual operating cost of#15m M&S estimate a disposal cost of #28,000 a cubic metre. This figureis a factor of three to four times higher than any industry estimate.Applying this figure to the rate of waste generation, making allowancefor stockpiled waste and adding on waste packaging and transport costsgives a total ILW disposal cost of #4.7bn.Plutonium storage costs are estimated on the basis that littleplutonium will be used in making mixed oxide fuels. Taking the AGRplutonium generation rates and applying US data on storage costs yieldsa storage cost which averages almost #50m annually in the period up to2030. M&S say that these costs are so high that they cut off theircalculation at 2030, on the assumption that the industry would find alower cost disposal route. Taking costs up to 2030 gave a totalundiscounted plutonium storage cost of #1.65bn.Summing these costs together gives a total waste storage and disposalcost of #6.737bn. When discounted the figure is reduced to #3.6bn.The City will undoubtedly look closely at the M&S report, as itprovides by far the best bottom up analysis of costs. Not everyone willagree with the approach adopted or the assumptions. Most analystsconcur with M&S that investors are likely to discount operational andliability cash flows at the same rate at least over the life ofstations, but several point out that the NPV of the assets is only justthe beginning of the valuation process. They argue that until thecapital structure, tax rules and any government guarantees on risks areknown it is very difficult to put a value on BE. There is also theissue of terminal value, which is particularly thorny issue for anuclear generator. Intuitively, many would say the terminal value mustbe negative, due to the high back-end liabilities. Not so, says JohnReynolds, of James Capel, who argue the value could be significantlypositive, if BE is able to generate new assets. Reynolds also says thatthe expected stable market share over the next decade gives BE anadvantage over the gencos, which could largely offset the nuclear riskpremium on the discount rate.Net present values of British Energy: #m                               Nuclear   Scottish  Sizewell  Total                               Electric  Nuclear   PWR                               AGRs      AGRsIncome stream*                 6,036     2,742     1,438     10,216Operational cost stream*       3,287     1,523       738      5,548Net operational income*        2,749     1,219       700      4,668Liabilities - reprocessingdiscounted at 2%               4,653     2,319       303      7,275Liabilities - reprocessingdiscounted at 13%              2,458     1,096       303      3,857Net present value:Conventional -reprocessing discounted at 2  (1,904)   (1,100)      397     (2,607)Innovativereprocessing discounted at 1     290       122       397        809* discounted at 13%Zero discount rate assumed beyond 2026Figures in brackets are negativeExpressed in October 1994 moneySource: MacKerron & SadnickiCapacities, assumed lifetimes and load factors of BE stations                    Capacity  Assumed  Closure  Plant load factor %                    MW        life     date     Assumed  6yr average                              yearsDungeness B         1,100     30       2015     50       40Hartlepool          1,210     30       2014     65       64Heysham 1           1,150     30       2104     70       69Heysham 2           1,250     35       2023     75       66Hinkley Point B     1,220     35       2011     75       77Hunterston B        1,150     35       2011     75       73Torness             1,250     35       2023     75       62Sum/average of AGRs 8,330     32.9              69.6     64.7Sizewell B PWR      1,188     40       2035     70Source: MacKerron & SadnickiBack to Headline List CopyrightPOWER UK via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996PRICE SETTING GENSETS: DECEMBER 1995Genset               No. of    Level of SMP #/MWh            Companyimport tranche       times     Minimum   Maximum   Averagedemand bidder        SMP setDidcot 1             80         9.04     39.62     24.34     NPWillington B 5       72        14.32     45.60     29.87     NPAberthaw B 8         65         8.95     33.19     28.23     NPIronbridge 2         58         9.02     34.00     22.58     NPEdF-Imp 4            49         6.03     30.01     15.78     EdFDidcot 2             39        20.05     40.63     33.60     NPDinorwic 6           37        19.13     46.55     31.77     NGCDrakelow C 9         33        27.35     53.85     49.31     PGFerrybridge 9        32         9.05     39.72     15.27     PGKingsnorth 1         32         9.07     48.40     31.18     PGKingsnorth 3         31         9.07     34.43     24.84     PGRatcliffe 2          31         9.05     21.88     16.98     PGWillington B 6       31        16.53     47.01     29.34     NPCottam 4             30         8.90     16.56     11.02     PGIronbridge 1         29        14.36     39.20     26.37     NPAberthaw B 9         28         8.95     34.06     19.55     NPSP-Imp 3             28         9.49      9.99      9.97     SPWest Burton 1        28         9.02     35.25     22.82     NPDinorwic 5           26        15.73     47.94     37.02     NGCTilbury 9            26         9.06     39.45     22.38     NPEdF-Imp 3            25        11.02     30.00     23.92     EdFHigh Marnham 1       24        30.90     39.24     36.89     PGBlyth B 7            22        12.87     27.01     17.27     NPWest Burton 4        22         8.95     31.89     13.60     NPDinorwic 2           21        40.62     48.00     42.91     NGCTilbury 7            21        12.47     36.89     23.63     NPTilbury 10           21         8.99     38.21     25.84     NPCottam 2             20         8.98     22.33     16.28     PGDinorwic 1           20        41.58     49.00     44.75     NGCAberthaw 7           19         8.94     32.10     15.17     NPFidlers Ferry 1      19         9.05     31.86     13.27     PGDinorwic 3           18        22.35     45.31     37.20     NGCDrax 3               16         8.90     13.55     12.10     NPEdF-Imp 2            16        11.01     20.01     17.32     EdFBlyth A 2            15        14.04     46.51     29.10     NPSP-Imp 2             15         9.48      9.98      9.85     SPDidcot 3             14        25.40     41.83     36.85     NPFidlers Ferry 2      14        11.99     34.57     15.02     PGBlyth A 1            13        20.51     39.13     26.70     NPFerrybridge 1        13         9.09      9.09      9.09     PGFfestiniog 4         13        30.11     51.23     47.25     NGCHigh Marnham 3       13        16.58     39.17     28.27     PGSMP = System Marginal PriceIPP = Independent generatorDSB = demand side bidderSource: Energy & Information ServicesPrice setting gensets: December 1995Genset               No. of    Level of SMP #/MWh            Companyimport tranche       times     Minimum   Maximum   Averagedemand bidder        SMP setDrakelow 10          12        35.55     56.40     52.52     PGHigh Marnham 5       12        20.90     45.40     33.92     PGLittlebrook 2        12        33.45     42.08     36.87     NPFfestiniog 1         11        32.48     35.95     34.15     NGCEdF-Imp 1            11        11.00     20.00     18.00     EdFRatcliffe 1          11         8.91     10.11      9.24     PGTilbury 8            11         9.04     31.98     16.77     NPDidcot 4             10         9.03     15.04     12.20     NPFidlers Ferry 4      10         8.89     14.26     10.64     PGEdF-Imp 5            10        14.00     30.00     23.70     EdFKingsnorth 2         10         9.02     36.95     17.07     PGPembroke 2           10        39.21     47.55     41.40     NPWest Burton 3        10        13.37     30.67     18.04     NPBlyth B 8             9         9.04     19.42     11.53     NPCottam 1              9         8.97     15.03     12.40     PGFerrybridge 2         9         9.10      9.10      9.10     PGDrax 4                8         8.93      8.93      8.93     NPKingsnorth 4          8        12.22     47.49     32.72     PGDrax 2                7         8.91      8.91      8.91     NPFawley 3              7        38.77     46.69     42.63     NPHigh Marnham 4        7        26.98     37.43     35.80     PGRatcliffe 3           7         8.95     14.01     11.68     PGBlyth A 4             6        15.30     44.30     33.96     NPEggborough 2          6         8.90      8.94      8.93     NPFerrybridge 3         6        11.92     47.62     21.60     PGFfestiniog 3          6        50.00     56.00     52.22     NGCGrain 1               6        77.98     82.70     81.12     PGHigh Marnham 2        6        34.60     42.80     41.43     PGRugeley B 6           6         8.91     14.50     12.64     NPCottam 3              5         8.12     33.42     23.46     PGRedditch 1            5        51.37     63.28     56.13     IPPRugeley B 7           5         8.89     13.73      9.87     NPSP-Imp 4              5         6.99      6.99      6.99     SPDrax 5                4         8.92      8.92      8.92     NPEdF-Imp 6             4        15.01     50.00     32.51     EdFHE-Imp 1              4        10.34     15.24     12.29     HEBlyth A 3             3         9.08     41.18     30.48     NPDSB-Hays Chem.        3        70.00     70.00     70.00     DSBDinorwic 4            3        50.00     52.69     50.90     NGCEdF-Imp 8             3        20.01     20.01     20.01     EdFRatcliffe 4           3         9.00      9.00      9.00     PGWest Burton 2         3        13.81     13.81     13.81     NPDSB-ASW               2        85.67     85.67     85.67     DSBFfestiniog 2          2        60.00     60.00     60.00     NGCDrax 1                1         8.86      8.86      8.86     NPEdF-Imp 7             1        20.00     20.00     20.00     EdFSMP = System Marginal PriceIPP = Independent generatorDSB = demand side bidderSource:  Energy Settlements & Information ServicesMonthly average genset Table A prices for November 1995Company     Genset          Average  Company Genset        Average            demand bidder   bid price        demand bidder bid price            import tranche  #/MWh            import tranch #/MWhBNFL        Calder Hall 1      0     PG      Ryehouse 1     2.95BNFL        CHAPX01Z           0     PG      Fidlers Fy 4   4.26NE          Bradwell 2-3       0     PG      Ferrybridge C  4.51NE          Dungeness A 1-4    0     NP      Killingholme   4.74NE          Heysham1 1-2       0     PG      Cottam 3       5.01NE          Heysham2 7-8       0     NP      Deeside 1      5.21NE          Hinkley B 7-8      0     PG      Ratcliffe 4    5.35NE          Oldbury 1-2        0     PG      Ferrybridge C  5.62NE          Sizewell B 1-2     0     PG      Ferrybridge C  5.80NE          Wylfa 3            0     PG      Cottam 4       5.87HE          HE-Imp 1           0     Derwent Derwent        6.62Lakeland    Rooscotte          0     Teeside Teeside 2      6.70Corby       Corby              0     Teeside Teeside 1      6.71Peterbrough Peterbrough        0     EdF     EdF-Imp 1      6.73Fellside    Fellside           0     EdF     EdF-Imp 2      6.74Keadby      Keadby             0     EdF     EdF-Imp 3      6.75NE          Hartlepool 1    0.01     EdF     EdF-Imp 4      6.76Medway      MEDP_01Z        0.02     NP      Little Barfor  7.00NE          Hinkley Pt A 3  0.03     NP      Eggborough 3   7.08NE          Hinkley Pt A 2  0.04     NP      Eggborough 4   7.10NE          Hinkley Pt A 1  0.05     NP      Rugeley 6      7.15NE          Bradwell 1      0.20     NP      Drax 1         7.17NE          Sizewell A 2    0.21     NP      Rugeley 7      7.17NE          Wylfa 4         0.22     PG      Ratcliffe 3    7.19NE          Sizewell A 1    0.23     NP      Eggborough 1   7.27NE          Hinkley A 4     0.25     NP      Drax 6         7.60NE          Hinkley A 5     0.26     PG      Ferrybridge 1  7.76NE          Dungeness B2 1  0.32     PG      Cottam 1       7.97NE          Hartlepool 2    0.43     PG      Richborough 3  8.00NE          Hinkley Pt A 6  0.47     PG      Richborough 2  8.01NE          Bradwell 4      0.50     PG      Ratcliffe 2    8.78NE          Wylfa 2         0.86     NP      Drax 5         8.86Barking     Barking 2       1.62     NP      Drax 4         8.87SP          SP-Imp 2        1.99     NP      Eggborough 2   9.28SP          SP-Imp 3        2.00     NP      Drax 3         9.41PG          Ince B 5        2.64     PG      Ratcliffe 1    9.47Barking     Barking 1       2.68     NP      Drax 2         9.89PG          Killingholme 1  2.82     EdF     EdF-Imp 5     10.07Settlements: provides a wide range of services to help youunderstand the working of the Pool:* Raw and processed data* Bespoke data analysis* Data Broadcast of day-ahead Pool prices and information* Settlements data analyser* Annual statistics year book - all the key statistics since April  1990* One day training courses on the Pool and its operation* One day training courses on the Pool and its operationContact: Settlements service desk Tel: 0115 945 6789Monthly average genset Table A prices for November 1995Company Genset         Average   Company     Genset        Average        demand bidder  bid price             demand bidder bid price        import tranche #/MWh                 import tranch #/MWhNP      West Burton 2  10.12     NP          Didcot 3       31.41PG      Cottam 2       11.56     NGC         Dinorwic 1     31.56NP      West Burton 4  13.07     PG          High Marnham   31.60NP      West Burton 3  15.20     PG          Kingsnorth 4   31.68NP      Blyth B 8      15.55     PG          High Marnham   31.71NP      Blyth A 4      16.29     OG          Drakelow 10    31.88NP      Aberthaw B 7   16.56     NP          Didcot 2       31.92     20 Brigg 1        17.12     PG          Kingsnorth 3   31.95NP      Blyth A 2      17.38              12 Redditch 1     34.63NP      Blyth A 3      18.17     NGC         Ffestiniog 4   34.79NP      Aberthaw B 8   18.25     NGC         Dinorwic 3     36.74NGC     Dinorwic       18.42     NGC         Dinorwic 2     39.63NP      Ironbridge B 2 18.53     NGC         Ffestiniog 3   44.00NP      Blyth A 1      18.82     NGC         Dinorwic 4     46.00NP      Aberthaw B 9   19.58     EdF         EdF-Imp 6      50.01NP      Blyth B 7      20.61     PG          Grain 1        51.64NP      West Burton 1  20.90     EdF         EdF-Imp 7      51.69NGC     Dinorwic 6     20.92     EdF         EdF-Imp 8      51.70PG      Fiddlers Fy 1  21.49     NP          Littlebrook 2  54.48NP      Tilbury B 8    24.72     NP          Pembroke 2     54.66NP      Tilbury B 9    24.87     NP          Fawley 3       54.69PG      Fiddlers Fy 2  26.23     PG          Grain 4        54.74NP      Ironbridge B 1 26.71     PG          Grain 3        54.79NP      Tilbury B 7    27.06     NGC         Ffestiniog 2   55.00NP      Tilbury B 10   28.46     Hays Chem.  DSB            70.00PG      Kingsnorth 1   28.56     Co-Steel    DSB            86.67NP      Willington B 6 29.29     ASW         DSB            82.67PG      Kingsnorth 2   29.93     ASW         DSB            82.79NP      Willington B 5 29.94     ASW         DSB            83.17PG      High Marnham 2 30.53     Alpha Steel DSB            90.58NP      Didcot 4       30.55     NP          Cowes 2       134.5NGC     Ffestiniog 1   30.56     NP          GTs           134.5PG      High Marnham 4 30.69     PG          Taylors Lane  147.32PG      High Marnham 1 30.75     PG          GTs           148.14NP      Didcot 1       30.91     DBCPL01Z    DSB           942.93PG      Drakelow 9     30.92Table A price averaged over days where genset is available.DSB = Demand side biddersPS  = Pumped storageIMP = importsASW = Allied Steel & WireSource: Energy Settlements & Information Services (Settlements)Electricity production to October 1995                       Total  Total  %       Jan-Oct Jan-Oct  %                       93     94     Change  94      95       ChangeElectricity generated  300.51 302.81  +0.8   245.54  249.23    +1.5Own use (in stations)   19.34  17.97  -7.0    14.72   14.81    +0.6Electricity supplied:Total                  281.17 284.84  +1.3   230.83  234.43    +1.6Conv. steam plant      178.31 167.29  -6.2   135.44  130.82    -3.4Coal                   144.03 137.80  -4.3   111.47  107.13    -3.9Oil                      8.30   6.21 -25.3     5.13    3.44   -32.9Other conv.steam        25.97  23.28 -10.4    18.84   20.25    +7.5CCGT                    22.61  36.82 +71.7    29.48   37.21   +26.2Nuclear                 76.84  76.41  -0.6    62.67   63.16    +0.8Hydro (incl net PS)      2.95   3.63 +22.9     2.71    2.69    -0.8Other (GT/diesels/wind)  0.46   0.69 +49.9     0.53    0.54    +3.3Net imports             16.72  16.89  +1.0    13.88   14.13    +1.8Other net purchases*     7.31   7.40  +1.2     6.09    5.14   -15.6Total elec. available  305.20 309.12  +1.3   250.79  253.10    +1.2* Purchases from UKAEA, BNFL and other generatorsSource: Energy TrendsBack to Headline List WT02-B36-16IA086-000616-B015-52http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey80.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001718 text/html 32127HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:15:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:47 GMTContent-length: 31940Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey80.html Sample Issue Copyright PUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING: ELCON Releases Its Blueprint For The Future (346 words) GAS TRANSPORTATION: Bay State Gas To Offer New Programs (193 words) CREDIT RATINGS: Moody's: Northeastern Utilities Are Under Pressure (423 words) ELECTRIC RATES: S.Carolina E&G Pleased With Ruling (233 words) INTERNATIONAL ACQUISITIONS: Moody's Finds U.K. Deal Manageable (137 words) ELECTRIC FUTURES: NYMEX Looks Forward To Approval (90 words) DISCOUNT RATES: Vermont Customers to Get Break (149 words) NATURAL GAS PIPELINES: Nixed Sale Leads To New Deal (146 words) LEAST-COST PLANNING: Oregon PUC Finds Idaho Power Reasonable (78 words) TELEPHONE COMPETITION: Colorado Works On Local Rules (136 words) ELECTRIC COMPETITION: Tribal Choice Causes Lawsuit (154 words) INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATORS: FERC To Hold Technical Conference (115 words) Electricity -- Flexible Rates (497 words) Electric Industry Restructuring (150 words) Mergers -- Rate Increases (187 words) LECs -- Competition -- Interconnection tariffs (246 words) Trimble County Generating Plant -- Rate Disallowance (228 words) American Electric Power (41 words) DTE Energy Co. (42 words) SIGCORP, Inc. (31 words) Enova Corp. (30 words) New Century Energies (38 words) Constellation Energy Corp. (20 words) CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING: ELCON Releases Its Blueprint For The FutureThe Electricity Consumers Resource Council (ELCON), a Washington,D.C.-based trade association representing large industrialcustomers, has released its "Blueprint for Customer Choice," whichit believes contains the economic and regulatory frameworks, aswell as legislative reforms needed for the emergence of realcompetition in the electric industry.ELCON advocates removal of federal and state impediments to marketentry by any entity that seeks to provide or purchase products orservices presently offered as a bundled service by utilities. ELCONbelieves that only a minimum of physical assets and services needbe regulated to ensure the reliable operation of the grid. It wantsall market segments to be unbundled. But while generation serviceshould not be regulated, the rates, terms, and conditions for useof transmission and distribution facilities that continue to beprovided as monopoly services should be regulated.Existing contractual relationships between native load customersand their utilities, and between utilities and their suppliers,should be honored. But ELCON advocates that utilities mitigatestranded costs by writing off or writing down those assets againstearnings, by the sale of those or other nongenerator assets, byrenegotiating purchased power or fuel supply contracts, and by costreductions. No utility should be allowed to seek recovery of anycosts associated with uneconomic assets that were incurredsubsequent to enactment of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct).ELCON desires creation of an independent system operator, splittingthe traditional distribution functions between a "wires" businessand the electric services merchant business, and creation of afederal-state joint board to recommend actions to statelegislatures.Cynthia Mansfield, a General Public Utilities Vice President, anda leader of the PURPA Reform Group, expressed dissatisfaction thatELCON would deny utilities recovery of prudently incurred costsassociated with uneconomic assets committed to after passage ofEPAct, yet require utilities to continue buying PURPA power for theindefinite future. Mansfield claimed that ELCON's proposal toextend PURPA benefits to all producers and consumers who hadachieved PURPA qualifying status by the beginning of the transitionperiod, would increase stranded costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS TRANSPORTATION: Bay State Gas To Offer New ProgramsThe Massachusetts commission has approved a settlement authorizingBay State Gas Co. (BSG) to redesign its gas rates and launch aresidential unbundling pilot program, believed by BSG to be thefirst of its kind offered in New England.The pilot will allow participating residential customers to buynatural gas transportation service from BSG, while choosing gassuppliers. The program will be conducted in three phases ofdevelopment, pilot implementation (by heating season of 1996), andprogram assessment.The settlement will enable BSG to introduce new rates that moreclosely reflect the actual costs associated with serving differentcustomer classes. New rates became effective January 1, 1996.Other components of the utility's rate redesign will be aimed atmaking transportation service from BSG more attractive to a largergroup of commercial and industrial customers. (Presently only 100of BSG's largest customers buy unbundled transportation service).Specifically, BSG will offer supplemental gas supply service duringthe winter period to meet seasonal demand. Also, it will offer`needle peaking' service to help commercial and industrialcustomers guard against supply shortfalls during the coldest dayswhen marketers may be unable to guarantee deliveries.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CREDIT RATINGS: Moody's: Northeastern Utilities Are Under PressureMoody's Investors Service has released a report, "Northeast Break-Even Analysis," which foundsthat while wide variations exist in thecost structures of investor-owned, municipal, and state electricutilities in the Northeastern United States, that in a deregulated,price competitive market for electricity, a solid majority of theutilities would be at a significant disadvantage in relation totheir peers in contiguous regions. If full competition isintroduced, Moody's concluded that Northeastern utilities withabove average costs likely would experience deterioration in creditquality as some investments are unrecoverable from ratepayers.Moody's defines the Northeast competitive arena as all major ratedutilities within two transmission interconnects of ConsolidatedEdison Co. of New York. It includes 25 IOUs in nine states, as wellas two public power and two Canadian utilities. They represent over$153 billion in combined assets, $29.7 billion in combined equity,and over $48 billion in annual revenues.Moody's said that most of the utilities have the highest "break-even" prices in the nation. (Moody's defines break-even as theprice a utility must charge for each unit of capacity to cover itsfixed charges after applying all profits or margins from its energysales. Because Moody's generating cost model is a residualanalysis, differences in relative cost position are magnified,which allows for meaningful comparisons among utilities).Moody's estimated $43 billion in stranded costs in this regionalone, which accounts for about one quarter of all U.S. strandedcosts.Regulatory initiatives remain at the information gathering stage,with principles for guiding an orderly transition to competition inplace in New York, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island (see Weekly No.3234). They are in the process of being developed or endorsed inNew Hampshire, New Jersey, Vermont and Maine (see weekly Nos. 3228,3230, 3234). Moody's noted that Pennsylvania is leaning toward a"wait and see" approach, with a recent PUC staff recommendationsuggesting that it is not yet time for extreme change.Based on average price assumptions, Moody's found that only Hydro-Quebec would be able to cover all fixed costs and earn a profitthrough energy sales alone. Hydro-Quebec and the New York PowerAuthority fell at the low end of the scale, with negative break-even prices, reflecting much hydrogeneration. At the high end ofthe price scale are United Illuminating, Long Island Lighting Co.,and Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Co-op. Moody's saidit expects downgrades to continue for utilities in the Northeast,especially due to negative transition cost decisions and definitivemoves toward open access.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC RATES: S.Carolina E&G Pleased With RulingThe South Carolina PSC has approved a $67.5 million (7.34%) retailelectric rate hike for South Carolina Electric & Gas Co. (SCEG), tobe phased-in over a two-year period. SCEG had requested a $76.7million (8.35%) increase.The approved rates are based on a 12% return on common equity,resulting in an overall return on rate base on 9.59%. The Phase 1increase of about $59.5 million (6.47%), will become effective uponcompletion and commercial operation of SCEG's new, 385-Mw, coal-fired Cope generating plant, expected January 15, 1996. The totalcapital cost of the plant is expected to be about $436 million(including AFDC), which is under the original budget of $537million. About one-half of the plant's total capital cost alreadyis included in base rates due to a June, 1993 order. The PSC nowapproved recovery of remaining capital costs and annual operatingexpenses associated with Cope.Also included in Phase 1 is a $4.3 million increase for a stormdamage reserve account, that will be capped at $50 million andcollected through rates over a ten-year period.The PSC granted SCEG's request to accelerate recovery of almost allits regulatory assets, and to shift about $257 million ofdepreciation reserves from its transmission and distribution assetsto nuclear production assets. The latter change will enhance itscompetitive position by reducing the cost of its nucleargeneration.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INTERNATIONAL ACQUISITIONS: Moody's Finds U.K. Deal ManageableMoody's Investors Service has lowered the commercial paper ratingfor Central and South West Corp. (CSW) from `P-1' to 'P-2' inresponse to significantly greater leverage assumed by CSW toacquire SEEBOARD, a regional electric distribution company locatedin Great Britain.The CSW bid valued SEEBOARD at $2.5 billion, and Moody's said itfinds the additional debt manageable given the good competitiveposition of CSW's U.S. utilities, and the generally stable businessoutlook for SEEBOARD. But Moody's expects the increased leverage toput some strain on CSW's cash flow, reducing overall financialflexibility.CSW plans to fund the acquisition 60% through nonrecourse bankdebts raised in the U.K., and 40% through an equity contributionfrom the U.S. parent corporation. It has negotiated an $850 millionunsecured bank facility to raise funds for the equity contribution.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC FUTURES: NYMEX Looks Forward To ApprovalThe New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) expects approval of itstwo West coast electric futures contracts by the Commodity FuturesTrading Commission (CFTC) this month, and anticipates launchingthem before the second half of 1996.The futures, the first ever for electricity, have the same deliveryterms but one has a delivery point at the California-Oregon border,while the other is at Palo Verde, Arizona.Meanwhile, the two proposed electric options contracts, which arebased on the futures contracts, are expected to receive CFTCapproval later in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DISCOUNT RATES: Vermont Customers to Get BreakGreen Mountain Power Corp. (GMP) has asked the Vermont commissionto approve a one-year pilot electric discount program, which wouldbe available to residential and small business customers who usemore electricity in 1996 than they did in 1995.The program is aimed at GMP's smaller customers and would providea 25% discount on electricity use that exceeds the amount acustomer used during the previous year. The discount would belimited to 15% of additional electricity use, and customers wouldnot have to sign up for the program but instead would automaticallyqualify."Qualifying customers can take advantage of the discount withoutincreasing the cost to other customers, said GMP President and CEODouglas G. Hyde. "That is because there is a surplus of electricityin new England, and we are giving out customers an opportunity totake advantage of this unusual energy situation," Hyde added.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NATURAL GAS PIPELINES: Nixed Sale Leads To New DealTenneco Energy (TE) has agreed to sell its 50% interest in the KernRiver natural gas pipeline system to the Williams Companies, Inc.for $205 million. The companies are joint venture partners in theWyoming to California pipeline.The plan came about after the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ruledat the end of December that the sale by TE of its 50% interest toQuestar Pipeline could result in market power by Questar in theSalt Lake City area (see Weekly No. 3235). But the new sale planstill requires FTC approval."Based on discussions with our partner, Williams over the past fewdays, we concluded it was in Tenneco's best interest to avoid thetime and expense involved in restarting the bidding process, and goahead and finalize the terms of the transaction before year end,"said Steve Chesebro', TE Chairman and CEO.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LEAST-COST PLANNING: Oregon PUC Finds Idaho Power ReasonableThe Oregon PUC on December 29 acknowledged Idaho Power Co.'s (IP)least-cost plan, which implements new conservation programs andsystem efficiency improvements, continues efforts to relicense itshydroelectric plants, and continues solar and windpowerdevelopment.PUC acknowledgement of a least-cost plan means that the plan seemsreasonable to the PUC at the time, but favorable ratemakingtreatment is not guaranteed. It gives considerable weight in theratemaking process to utility actions that are consistent withacknowledged plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TELEPHONE COMPETITION: Colorado Works On Local RulesThe Colorado PUC is beginning hearings this month on proposed rulesto open the local telephone market to competition beginning July 1.The proposed rules would implement state legislation passed lastyear instructing the PUC to open up local service to competition.For six months, various working groups have attempted to agree oninterconnection and number potability, resale, high cost funds, 911services, and certification. Each group drafted a set of proposedrules, and consensus was reached in the areas of 911 requirementsand certifications. More than one set of proposed rules weredrafted for the other areas, and the PUC need by law only givesubstantial deference to those rules where consensus was reached.The hearings run through March, with an initial decision expectedin early April, and a final decision by May 31.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELECTRIC COMPETITION: Tribal Choice Causes LawsuitMadison Gas and Electric Co. (MGE) on January 3 filed a lawsuit incourt and a complaint at the Wisconsin PSC against Wisconsin Power& Light Co. (WPL), because WPL will provide electricity to a NativeAmerican tribe's bingo hall to be located in MGE territory (seeWeekly No. 3232).WPL on December 1, 1995 had won the bid to provide service to thetribe. Although present state law only allows provision of serviceby a certificated utility in its own service territory, the tribehas raised the argument that it is excluded from the law because itis a sovereign nation.In court, MGE has asked for treble actual damages -- lost marginson electric sales made by WPL. MGE also asked for punitive damagesand award of attorneys' fees. At the PSC, MGE asked it to requireWPL to remove any electric lines and related plant from  MGE'sservice territory.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATORS: FERC To Hold Technical ConferenceThe FERC on January 4 announced that as part of its electrictransmission open access NOPR, it would hold a technical conferenceon independent system operators (ISO) and reform of power poolsunder the federal power act. The conference will be held January 24at 9:30 A.M. at the FERC.The FERC said that at its December 5 and 6, 1995 conference oncomparability for power pools, that several speakers had describedproposals for developing ISOs as one method to address fullcompetition. It wants to (1) define the essential elements andoperational characteristics of an ISO; (2) explore principles to beused in reforming power pools; and (3) explore utility formation ofISOs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Electricity -- Flexible RatesThe Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities has approved a new"market-based" electric tariff for Fitchburg Gas & Electric Co., acombined electric and gas utility. The new Energy Bank Serviceoffers rates for new or expanding industrial customers that arepriced competitively with average industrial rates in the UnitedStates.  While the utility had supported the new rate offering asconsistent with the state's restructuring goals of greater customerchoice and access to wholesale market prices, the departmentrejected the utility's position that the new discount customersshould be exempted from any specific stranded cost charges in thefuture.According to the company, it currently has no excess capacity andintends to meet the power requirements for the new service offeringform wholesale markets through short-term contracts of one month orless.  The department said that utility's proposal deservedstricter scrutiny than other discount proposals recently approvedfor utilities who had extra power to sell. Nevertheless, it foundthat revenues would more than offset incremental power costs andseparate fuel procurement and accounting procedures devised by theutility would allow the department to determine whether the newservice offering affected costs for other ratepayer groups. Thedepartment also directed the company to include in the new tariffa statement that the structure and design of the new rate mightchange as a result of the implementation of a restructuring planfor the utility. Re Fitchburg Gas and Electric Co., D.P.U. 95-75,Nov. 30, 1995 (Mass.D.P.U.).The Missouri Public Service Commission has turned down a request byKansas City Power and Light Co., an electric utility, for approvalof a generic tariff for special contract offerings to its largeindustrial customers. The proposed service would have allowed theutility to "flex down" from rates in its established Primary LargeService tariff in order to meet a competitive threat. The utilityhad proposed to limit availability of the discount service tocustomers with demands of 1,000 kW or greater who are faced withcompetition from other energy suppliers. It would have provided theservice at a rate not less than the greater of 1.3 cents per kwh onan annual average basis or its annualized incremental cost per kwh.The commission rejected allegations that special rate contractswere unlawful and also ruled that the protection of confidentialbusiness information associated with the contracts was within itsauthority, but it concluded that a generic tariff for discountsshould be considered as part of an investigation of the utility'soverall rate design. Nevertheless, the commission found that thetype of competition currently facing the utility could require a"bundled service" offering of the type suggested by the utility. Italso said that an unbundled service offering with a price ceilingand price floor for each service component might also be necessaryin "preparation for the full range of competition" in the utility'sservice territory. Re Kansas City Power and Light Co., Case No. EO-95-181, Dec. 6, 1995 (Mo.P.S.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Electric Industry RestructuringThe Maine Public Utilities Commission has launched a formal inquiryinto the restructuring of the electric industry in the state. Thestate legislature had allotted the commission a one-year period,beginning on January 1, 1996, to develop at least two plans for thetransition to a competitive retail electric market including: (1)a plan to achieve full retail market competition by the year 2000and (2) a plan to achieve retail competition "wherever effectivecompetition is likely" while maintaining regulation wherenecessary. Under the legislative mandate the commission is requiredto provide a range of estimates of stranded investment associatedwith each restructuring proposal.  the commission seeks comments ona variety of issues including whether rate decreases can beexpected  and whether retail competition would provide benefits toconsumers that cannot be obtained through enhanced wholesalecompetition.  Re Electric Utility Industry Restructuring, DocketNo. 95-462, Dec. 12, 1995 (Me. P.U.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Mergers -- Rate IncreasesThe Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission has turnedback a pre-merger attempt by Puget Sound Power and Light Co. tomake permanent a $165.5 million rate increase allowed under itsperiodic rate adjustment mechanism (PRAM), a ratemaking clausedesigned to remove disincentives to utility conservation efforts by"decoupling" revenues from sales levels and instead relying on arevenue per customer approach to cost recovery. The utility hadearlier agreed to defer a scheduled base rate filing pending reviewby the commission of its proposed merger with Washington Energy Co.The commission said that it had approved the deferral subject tothe utility's agreement to file a rate case by April of 1996 if nomerger application was filed, but that any extension of the PRAMcollections beyond their scheduled expiration on October 1, 1996would be treated a temporary rates subject to refund. It added thatthe utility could choose to file a base rate case at any timeseeking permanent recovery of the PRAM collections. WashingtonUtilities and Transportation Commission v. Puget Sound Power andLight Co., Docket Nos. UE-901183-T et al., Nov. 7, 1995(Wash.U.T.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LECs -- Competition -- Interconnection tariffsThe New York Public Service Commission has ordered New YorkTelephone Co., a telecommunications local exchange carrier (LEC),notify customers of the newly instituted opportunity to choose analternative carrier for intraLATA toll calling. Interexchangecarriers in the state had complained about the LEC's plans forimplementation of a recent order by the commission reqiring equalaccess for intraLATA toll services. (Prior to the "intraLATApresubscription" ruling, customers who desired their "local" tollcalls to be carried by an interexchange carrier such as AT&T, MCI,or Sprint were required to dial special code numbers in addition tothe telephone number.)  The LEC had proposed that in negotiatingnew services with customers its representatives would not informcustomers of the rule change or ask customers who they want astheir intraLATA toll carrier. It claimed that to do so would placeit at a competitive disadvantage and increase the cost ofprocessing new service orders. The commission disagreed with thecarrier finding that while the claims may have some merit, the LEChad ignored the advantages it possessed in controlling thetelephone order processing function and from beginning the equalaccess process with 100% of the presubscribed market. For acompetitive market to develop customers must be informed ofavailable choices, the commission said. It also noted that withoutspecific instructions from regulators "irresistible incentives"would develop to sell the LEC's service unfairly. Re New YorkTelephone Co., Case Nos. 28425 et al., Dec. 1, 1995 (N.Y.P.S.C.)Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Trimble County Generating Plant -- Rate DisallowanceThe Kentucky Public Service Commission has approved an agreementfinally concluding a long standing case governing rate treatment ofthe investment by Louisville Gas & Electric in the Trimble countygenerating facility. The matter had been before the commission inone form or another for well over a decade.  In 1989 the commissiondetermined that 25% of the 495 megawatt coal-fired plant wasdisallowed from rate base. Under the approved agreement the utilitywill refund current customers $22 million with $5.3 millionreserved to special contract customers and the rest refunded to allother customers through a per-kwh credit over a five year period.The utility also agreed to apply an additional $4.5 million to fundlow-income energy assistance programs over the same five-yearperiod. Commissioner Linda K. Breathitt expressed concern in aseparate concurring opinion over the length of time necessary forresidential customers to receive their refunds while certainindustrial customers would receive immediate payments. She alsonoted that the agreement was an example of a recent trends insettlement agreements presented to the commission where theutility, its large industrial customers, and low income customersare the obvious beneficiaries of ardent representation at thebargaining table while the vast majority of customers appear tohave a much smaller voice in the process. Re Louisville Gas andElectric Co., Case No. 10320, Dec. 8, 1995 (Ky.P.S.C.).Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996American Electric PowerThe seven operating companies of American Electric Power (AEP) haveadopted the AEP name. The seven -- Appalachian Power, ColumbusSouthern Power, Ohio Power, Indiana Michigan Power, Kentucky Power,Wheeling Power, and Kingsport Power -- all will be known as AEP.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DTE Energy Co.On January 1, DTE Energy Co. became the holding company for DetroitEdison, providing a structure to separate the regulated utilitybusiness from nonutility subsidiary companies. DTE Energy beginsits corporate life with a logo that features a person and asunburst.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SIGCORP, Inc.On January 1, SIGCORP, Inc. became the holding company for SouthernIndiana Gas and Electric Co. The utility customers will notaffected by the restructuring, and the service territory remainsintact.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Enova Corp.On January 1, the name change of San Diego Gas & Electric to EnovaCorp. resulted in replacement of the former ticker symbol, SDO,with the new ticker symbol, ENA.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996New Century EnergiesUpon completion of the pending merger between Public Service Co. ofColorado, and Southwestern Public Service Co., the new holdingcompany name will be New Century Energies. The two utilities willretain their names in their service territories.Back to Headline List CopyrightPUR UTILITY WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996Constellation Energy Corp.Potomac Electric Power Co. and Baltimore Gas and Electric Co., uponmerger completion, will be known as Constellation Energy Corp.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-17IA086-000616-B015-90http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey89.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001812 text/html 99634HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:16:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:43 GMTContent-length: 99447Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey89.html Sample Issue Copyright SOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST INJULY 1994 -- FROM REPORTS TO FERC (51 words) BIG RIVERS AND PACIFICORP ARE EXPECTED TO SIGN THEIR DEAL BY END OF JANUARY (536 words) ENRON POWER MARKETING, OGLETHORPE IN 4-MONTH SALES, PURCHASE DEAL (550 words) COLDEST WEATHER IN SIX YEARS CAUSES RECORD PEAKS THROUGHOUT FLORIDA (504 words) RESTRUCTURING REGIONAL STATE-BY-STATE SCORECARD OF ELECTRIC INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING (921 words) AEP DROPS NAMES OF OPERATING UNITS; ALL CALLED AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER (396 words) VIRGINIA POWER TO CUT STAFF BY 30%; MAY PUT TWO 882-MW UNITS IN RESERVE (250 words) SOUTH CAROLINA ALLOWS SCE&G TO SHIFT DEPRECIATION FROM T&D TO NUCLEAR ASSETS (766 words) WEATHER `BLIZZARD OF '96', WHILE DUMPING MUCH SNOW, CAUSES RELATIVELY FEW OUTAGES (410 words) INDEPENDENT POWER ENERGY INITIATIVES WINS FIRST ROUND ON FIRM CAPACITY PAYMENTS IN FLORIDA (350 words) PANDA ENERGY, FLORIDA POWER CONTINUE FIGHT OVER PROJECT IN POLK COUNTY (372 words) POWER MARKETS NCEMPA-1 TO USE NEW METERING EQUIPMENT TO EASE ENTRY INTO WHOLESALE MARKET (764 words) LG&E POWER MARKETING SEEKS TO BROKER POWER SALES AND PURCHASES BY TVA (504 words) WTU TO SUPPLY CO-OP WITH 11.7 MW, INCLUDING NEW COTTON SPINNING PLANT (161 words) LG&E AND LG&E MARKETER MAKE DEAL WITH OHIO ED SWAPPING COAL FOR POWER (248 words) NYMEX LOOKS TO TVA, SOUTHERN COMPANY AS POSSIBLE FUTURES CONTRACT SITES (349 words) RATES GREENVILLE, N.C., MUNI USES COINCIDENT PEAK RATES TO CUT INDUSTRIAL COSTS (598 words) TECO ROE CAPPED AT 12.5% IN AGREEMENT TIED TO 260-MW COAL GASIFICATION PLANT (382 words) DSM NEW GEORGIA POWER RESIDENTIAL DSM PROGRAM SHIFTS CONTROL TO CUSTOMERS (247 words) FLA. COMMISSION APPROVES DSM GOALS AND PLAN FOR LAKELAND ELECTRIC & WATER (204 words) DOCKET WATCH ALABAMA (41 words) ARKANSAS (92 words) DELAWARE (34 words) FLORIDA (1165 words) GEORGIA (320 words) KENTUCKY (224 words) LOUISIANA (107 words) MARYLAND (119 words) MISSISSIPPI (50 words) NORTH CAROLINA (167 words) Oklahoma Corporation Commission (140 words) SOUTH CAROLINA (101 words) TEXAS (968 words) VIRGINIA (234 words) WEST VIRGINIA (157 words) Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (865 words) CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST INJULY 1994 -- FROM REPORTSTO FERCIllustration(s):Table: FUEL PRICES PAID BY UTILITIES IN THE SOUTHEAST IN JULY 1994 -- FROMREPORTS TO FERC (C-contract; CC-combined cycle; F-firm; GT-gas turbines; I-interruptible; IC-internal combustion engines; NC-new contract;OP-offpeak; S-spot)( This table is not availabl electronically. Pease seeJanuary 12, 1996, issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   BIG RIVERS AND PACIFICORP ARE EXPECTED TO SIGN THEIR DEAL BY END OFJANUARYBy the end of January, Big Rivers Electric Corp. and PacifiCorp hope toannounce a ``letter of intent'' under which PacifiCorp would lease andmanage Big Rivers' coal-fired power plants in western Kentucky over thenext quarter century.   ``We're working on it diligently right nowhopefully we'll see somethingin the next two to three weeks,'' a PacifiCorp spokesman told SoutheastPower Report on Jan. 8. A spokeswoman for financially troubled Big Rivers,based in Henderson, Ky., echoed that sentiment.   Meanwhile, Big Rivers' two largest customers--Alcan Aluminum andSouthwire/NSA--were trying to insert themselves in the process to guaranteethat their desire for lower, more stable electric rates is addressed.Together, aluminum smelters operated by Alcan and Southwire/NSA at Sebreeand Hawesville, Ky., respectively, consume nearly 70% of the electricitygenerated by Big Rivers.   The late December announcement that Big Rivers was negotiating withPacifiCorp on a 25-year lease/operation agreement ended months ofspeculation over which of several suitors would meet with Big Rivers'approval.   Even with the ongoing Big Rivers/PacifiCorp talks, however, severalsuitors have not given up all hope. At least three--U.S. Generating, anindependent power producer, Cinergy Corp. and Louisville Gas &Electric--reportedly believe they still have a chance if the PacifiCorpdiscussions collapse.   While neither Big Rivers nor PacifiCorp, an aggressive Portland,Ore.-based investor-owned utility, apparently believes that will happen,the Big Rivers spokeswoman stressed, ``We're not going to close any doors.It wouldn't be wise considering the investment we've made in this processso far.''   Big Rivers has been trying to find a solution to its $1.2-billion debt,much of which is owed to the Rural Utilities Service for construction ofthe 440-MW D.B. Wilson coal-fired plant in the early 1980s. Some of theoffers submitted to Big Rivers were to buy the generation and transmissioncooperative and/or its generating assets.   PacifiCorp's, however, was different. The Oregon utility would create asubsidiary that would lease and operate Big Rivers' three plants: 480-MWGreen, 455-MW Coleman and Wilson, in addition to the 315-MW Station Twoplant that Big Rivers operates under a long-term contract with the owner,the city of Henderson.   The subsidiary would sell power to Big Rivers, which would resell it toits four distribution cooperatives, Henderson-Union Electric Cooperative,Jackson Purchase Rural Electric Cooperative, Meade County Rural ElectricCooperative and Green River Electric.   Perhaps as importantly, if not more so, the PacifiCorp subsidiary alsowould handle Big Rivers' coal-buying activities and sell surpluselectricity from the power plants to other utilities in the eastern U.S.   Big Rivers' past coal-buying practices have been the subject of stateand federal investigations. They have resulted so far in the conviction ofthree individuals on bribery/kickback charges involving former Big Riversgeneral manager William Thorpe. Thorpe, who has denied any wrongdoing, isexpected to stand trial next summer on related charges.   Most observers believe PacifiCorp, the largest wholesaler of bulk powerin the western U.S., would be more successful than Big Rivers has been inmarketing surplus power.   ``We have said we want to take our core skills in that area and use itin markets outside the West,'' said the PacifiCorp spokesman. ``We want todo that in Kentucky.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENRON POWER MARKETING, OGLETHORPE IN 4-MONTH SALES, PURCHASE DEALOglethorpe Power Corp. announced Jan. 5 that it began a major four-monthenergy sales-and-purchase deal with Enron Power Marketing Inc. Under thearrangement, Enron will have the first option to buy energy fromOglethorpe's 5,000-MW system, while covering energy requirements ofOglethorpe's 39 member cooperatives through April 30 (SPR, 29 Dec. 95, 1).   Oglethorpe customers can expect to save ``several millions of dollars''as a result of the arrangement because Enron will meet their needs at aprice lower than the current Oglethorpe energy charge. Enron expects tomake a profit on sales of energy which some Oglethorpe members cannot use.   The two sides have not released details of the deal. However, Oglethorpeofficials acknowledged that a major selling point of the arrangement wasEnron's first option to all energy available from Oglethorpe plantentitlements and contracts. Oglethorpe estimates that Enron will buy morethan 5.2-million MWh of energy over the four months.   Oglethorpe resources include 1,185 MW of must-run nuclear capacity and1,500 MW of dispatchable baseload fossil capacity in Georgia at WansleyUnits 1 and 2 and Scherer Units 1 and 2. It also has 636 MW of dispatchablepumped hydro capacity at the new Rocky Mountain plant and contracts forbaseload and peaking power with Georgia Power and a 300-MW independentpower project at Hartwell, owned jointly by American National Power andDestec.   Under the arrangement, Enron essentially will take over the marketing inthe region of Oglethorpe's excess, bearing the risks of a flat market aswell as the potential gains from a strong market. Its strategy provedprofitable in the early part of January when the Southeast was hit withseveral days of subfreezing weather.   Oglethorpe will continue to operate its system and control area andcarry out dispatching. But Enron will also be present in the Oglethorpecontrol center and will have a say in decisions affecting energy based onprovisions in the contract.   Oglethorpe officials said the Enron contract contains no provisions fora follow-up deal after April 30.    But the company sees the arrangement as one possible model for futureoperations. A second alternative would be an energy pool operated byOglethorpe itself, which was proposed in late 1995 and is now inpreparation.   Officials at Cooperative Power Inc., made up of six large Oglethorpemembers, said they are still on track to contract with a marketerthemselves to handle their power trading and procurement after April 30.   Because of the Enron arrangement and other developments at Ogelthorpe,including December's restructuring announcement, Georgia Power is delayinga request for proposals for power purchases in 2000. The RFPs had beenscheduled to go out in early January.   Georgia Power had told the state Public Service Commission in Octoberthat it planned to seek bids for up to 600 MW of peaking and intermediatesupplies using both traditional and options contracts.   But since the company currently has contracts to sell 750 MW of power toOglethorpe, which could be canceled over the next three years, it hasdecided to review its future needs because of the Oglethorperestructuring.   Oglethorpe itself is still holding in suspension a 1993 RFP for 600 MWof 1999 peaking power while it works out its future plans and power needsunder the restructuring.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   COLDEST WEATHER IN SIX YEARS CAUSES RECORD PEAKS THROUGHOUT FLORIDAWhile snow blanketed much of the East Coast of the U.S., Florida felt thecoldest weather in more than six years, as high demand set new winter andall-time peak records throughout the state.   The state's three largest utilities all set new all-time record peaks,as temperatures dropped nearly to 20F in much of the state on Jan. 9. Theprimary source of heating in Florida is electric, which puts an additionalstress on the system. Still, state-wide reserve capacity was about 3,800 MWon Jan. 9, according to Tom Hallam, staff engineer of the Florida ElectricUtility Coordinating Group.   Tampa Electric, which is normally the chief supplier of purchase power,hit a new all-time peak of 3,526 MW about 7:11 a.m. on Jan. 9. A spokesmansaid TECO had no reserve capacity and had to crank up its rarely usedcombustion turbine units in order to meet demand. TECO had expected a lowof about 31 degrees and a demand of about 3,400 MW, which would haveexceeded the previous all-time peak of 3,339 MW set on Feb. 9, 1995.   Florida Power broke records on both Jan. 8, when it hit 8,086 MW, andagain on Jan. 9, when demand soared to about 8,500 MW, a spokesman said. Tomeet demand, Florida Power exercised about 600 MW of residential loadcontrol and cranked up all but one of its small combustion turbine units.It did not resort to interrupting its large industrial and commercialcustomers, which would have given it another 700 MW, a spokesman said.   Florida Power & Light hit a new all-time demand record of about 17,300MW on the morning of Jan. 9, which easily exceeded the previous record of16,563 MW set on Feb. 9, 1995, a spokesman said. At the time, about 34,000or 1% of its customers were out of service due to scattered distributionproblems. To meet demand, FP&L used about 300 MW of commercial loadcontrol, but was not forced to use the 500 MW of residential load controlit had available.   The Orlando Utilities Commission broke all-time peak records on bothJan. 8, when demand reached 893 MW at about 7:30 am., and Jan. 9, when thepeak was 917 MW at about 7 a.m. OUC operates a power pool for itself, theFlorida Municipal Power Agency, the Lakeland Electric & Water Dept.,Kissimmee Utility Authority and the city of St. Cloud. An OUC spokesmansaid the pool set a record of 2,272 MW on Jan. 8, then broke that record onJan. 9 at 2,410 MW.   In North Florida, the Jacksonville Electric Authority broke its previousall-time peak of 2,247 MW, which was also set on Feb. 9, 1995, on Jan. 8,when demand hit 2,339 MW. On Jan. 9, JEA came within 5 MW of breaking thatrecord, a spokesman said. Gulf Power set a new winter peak of 1,821 MW onJan. 8, beating its previous winter peak of 1,821 MW on Dec. 23, 1989.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   REGIONAL STATE-BY-STATE SCORECARD OF ELECTRIC INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING    Over the last three months, restructuring debates have heated up inmost parts of the country, with 30 states now reporting some sort ofactivity. The California Public Utilities Commission came out with a majorcompromise plan in late December, several New England states are askingtheir utilities to file restructuring plans in the coming six months, andregulators have issued initial restructuring guidelines in severalMidwestern states. Restructuring debates have even begun in a few Southernstates, even though lower power prices in the region kept activity at aminimum. The following is a state-by-state survey of restructuring activityin the Southeast. All dates are 1995 unless otherwise noted.ARKANSASIn early 1995, a bill was introduced in the state Legislature that wouldallow large industrial users to switch retail suppliers under certainconditions. But the bill was quickly withdrawn without a major debate.State regulators say they expect to start a restructuring proceeding in1996, but so far the Public Service Commission has issued no initialnotice.FLORIDAThe state Legislature has created a special subcommittee to investigatecompetition in the electric industry. The panel will gather information andcould make legislative proposals in 1996.GEORGIAThe Public Service Commission said it will hold an investigation in 1996on whether the state's current territorial franchise system needs to beadapted to the more competitive electric industry environment. The currentsystem lets large users choose among supply options when adding new loadbut gives no freedom of choice to smaller customers.In December, a bill was introduced in the state Legislature that wouldforce utilities to provide retail wheeling services to all customers andgive customers wide rights to switch retail suppliers without penalty. Thebill contains no stranded investment provisions and is strongly opposed byutilities.LOUISIANAA group of industrial users proposed in May that the city of New Orleansconsider an open-access approach, with several suppliers competing forretail users using the existing New Orleans Public Service distributionsystem. But the plan got a cold reception from the City Council, andplanned hearings on competition issues have been postponed indefinitely.MARYLANDThe Public Service Commission is carrying out a proceeding on competition(Case No. 8678). In comments filed in January, industrial users havefavored full retail competition, while utilities have backed somederegulation of generation and limited retail competition tied to strandedinvestment. The PSC final report issued Aug. 18 rejected the use of retailwheeling, saying that the relatively low power rates in the state meantMaryland did not need ``dramatic fixes'' at this time.NORTH CAROLINAIn February, industrials asked the Utilities Commission to begin aninvestigation into retail competition. After receiving generally negativecomments from utilities, the commission decided on July 21 not to implementretail wheeling at this time (Doc. No. E-100, Sub. 77). It said wheelingpresented too many legal uncertainties and that it preferred to wait andsee what other states did. It asked parties to offer further comments onthe issue.   In October, large industrials warned that the go-slow approach would putthe state at a competitive disadvantage and called on the commission tosponsor a new round of public meetings on retail competition in early1996.OKLAHOMAIn June, the Legislature set up a 14-member task force to review allaspects of the electric industry in the state. It is not clear how much thegroup will deal with competition issues.SOUTH CAROLINAIn July, the Public Service Commission turned down a request fromindustrials to initiate a formal review of retail wheeling. Instead, thePSC staff will carry out a low-key study of the issue.TEXASA major bill passed by the Texas Legislature in late May ordered variouschanges in the operation of the state's wholesale market. But due to apolitical stand-off, the bill did not change the status quo on retailwheeling issues. A proposal for a retail wheeling pilot was dropped fromthe bill, as were various anti-retail wheeling provisions. Instead, theLegislature asked state regulators to conduct studies on key issues. Sincethen, industrials have begun to organize a wider coalition in support ofretail competition and hope to apply greater political pressure in the 1997legislative session.   The Texas Public Utility Commission in October opened a generalrestructuring proceeding (Docket No. 15000) to make recommendations to theLegislature by 1997 on competition and stranded investment issues. Partieswere asked to comment on specific unbundling and stranded cost conceptsfloated by commission members.   The PUC also is asking for comment by January 1996 on a separatetransmission rule. It would set up a regional postage stamp pricing systemfor use of the state grid and also bring in an independent system operatorto manage the system.VIRGINIAIn September, the Virginia State Corporation Commission announced it wasopening a formal review of electric industry competition and restructuringissues. It said its staff would issue a report on March 31, 1996, makingpolicy recommendations. After a 60-day public comment period, the SCC willmake final decisions.  In its notice, the commission said its staff had already held informaltalks with key parties and that even though Virginia already had lowelectric prices, there could be improvement through increased competition.In comments submitted to the SCC in December, Virginia Power urged ago-slow approach to retail competition and said the commission shouldconcentrate first on alternative ratemaking for utilities.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   AEP DROPS NAMES OF OPERATING UNITS; ALL CALLED AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWERAfter decades of operation, Kentucky Power, Appalachian Power, WheelingPower and Kingsport Power are no more. In early January, the four utilitiesadopted the name of their parent company, American Electric Power.   The change--AEP's three other subsidiaries outside the Southeast wereaffected as well--is part of AEP's ``New Directions Next Steps'' program toprepare for competition and deregulation in the utility industry by tradingon its ``brand name'' recognition. AEP's other units are Columbus SouthernPower, Indiana Michigan Power and Ohio Power.   All seven operating companies are now known as one company: AmericanElectric Power. From now on, the AEP logo will be emblazoned on companyfacilities, vehicles and communications with customers. For the first time,AEP's corporate headquarters in Columbus, Ohio, will bear a large ``AEP''logo atop the building.   Also this month, individual company publications are being consolidatedinto one publication that will have a tabloid newspaper format.   ``We've always been AEP, a world-class energy company dedicated tohometown service, and our employees have worked under a variety of companynames in the past,'' said AEP chairman Linn Draper. ``Using AEP as our namethroughout the company is a sign that all of these individuals have joineda single team to find ways to serve our customers even better.   ``We do not need to change legal, financial, rate or regulatoryrelationships as the result of the new one-company strategy,'' continuedDraper, ``but we expect our customers will see many benefits andefficiencies from this change in days to come.''   Not everyone within AEP was an enthusiastic supporter of the name changelast summer when Draper first disclosed plans to phase out operatingcompany identities. Over the years, fierce loyalties and friendlycompetitions had developed within the seven subsidiaries.   In the end, change won out as it is doing more frequently these days inthe utility industry.   In keeping with its one-company philosophy, AEP has named new AEPpresidents as top statewide contacts for customer groups, legislators andregulators. Effective Jan. 1, new state presidents include Timothy Moser,Kentucky; Dana Waldo, West Virginia; and Daniel Carson, Virginia andTennessee.   The state presidents will discuss what AEP believes are the benefits ofcompetition in the electric power industry with the company's customers,regulators and legislators. They are expected to ``work diligently to builda consensus on industry restructuring,'' Draper said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   VIRGINIA POWER TO CUT STAFF BY 30%; MAY PUT TWO 882-MW UNITS IN RESERVEVirginia Power said Jan. 8 that its fossil and hydro business unit is inthe final stages of a far-reaching restructuring and downsizing effortaimed at optimizing the cost-competitiveness of the utility's hydroelectricfacilities and plants fired by coal, oil and gas.   Among other things, Virginia Power said, the fossil and hydro unit plansto reduce by about 30% the number of salaried and hourly employees and to``remission'' two large oil-fired plants from regular to emergency-onlyuse. These and other moves, it said, should save the utility $55 million to$65 million a year and help maintain the utility's position as one of thelowest-cost generators in its region.   In a series of announcements over the past several months, the mostrecent of which was Jan. 8, the fossil and hydro unit has said it will trimits salaried and hourly payroll by a total of 537 positions by early March.That will leave the unit with 1,254 employees.   The utility said reductions are part of a ``comprehensive redesigneffort'' that grew out of the utility's Vision 2000 strategic planningprocess.   Last year, teams composed of fossil and hydro unit employees examinedpotential efficiency and cost-cutting measures. In addition to recommendingthe staffing reductions, the teams had urged that two 882-MW oil-firedplants that have been providing intermediate and peaking capacity since themid-1970s--Possum Point Unit 5 and Yorktown Unit--should be placed inemergency reserve, and be run four weeks each peak season.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINA ALLOWS SCE&G TO SHIFT DEPRECIATION FROM T&D TO NUCLEARASSETSThe South Carolina Public Service Commission has decided to allow SouthCarolina Electric & Gas to transfer nearly $257 million in depreciationreserves from its transmission and distribution assets to its nucleargeneration assets as part of a rate case (Docket No. 95-1000-E).   The move has angered non-utility generators, industrials, and thestate's Dept. of Consumer Affairs, who claimed that the ruling will giveSCE&G--already one of the lowest-cost generators in the Southeast--anunfair competitive advantage over other generators after deregulation, andwill increase the cost of accessing SCE&G's T&D system.   The PSC also granted a 7.34%, $67.5-million rate hike for the utility.   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, deputy consumer advocate at the state Dept. ofConsumer Affairs (DCA), explained that the depreciation-reserve shift willresult in a lower ``book value'' for SCE&G's two-thirds stake in the 900-MWV.C. Summer nuclear plant, and a higher book value for the utility's T&Dassets.   That, Coombs continued, will have the effect of shifting SCE&G's costsaway from its generation sector, which is likely to face increasingcompetition as deregulation takes hold, to its T&D sector, which is likelyto remain a monopoly.   In the increasingly competitive generation market, she said, othergenerators and power marketers will be forced to compete with theartificially lower generation costs SCE&G will be able to offer thanks tothe depreciation-reserve shift. Generators and marketers also will beforced to pay artificially higher costs to wheel power across SCE&G linesbecause those costs are based in part on the book value of its T&D assets.   An irony in the matter, Coombs said, is that SCE&G already was unusuallywell-positioned for generation competition even before it secured the PSC'sapproval for the depreciation-reserve shift. ``Its rates are the lowest ofany investor-owned utility in South Carolina,'' she said, ``and are amongthe lowest in the Southeast, which as a whole has the second-lowest ratesof any region in the country.''   Coombs said the DCA will ask the PSC to reconsider its ruling, and addedthat if the commission fails to do so, her agency is likely to file a legalchallenge in state court, asserting the depreciation reserve transferviolates South Carolina law.   The DCA's concerns were echoed by Craig Roach, a principal with BostonPacific Co. Inc. of Washington, D.C., who represents the CarolinaCompetitive Energy Producers, a NUG group. ``The whole point ofunbundling,'' he said, ``is to reveal the true cost of generation,'' andany effort to artificially lower the cost of generation is ``clearlyanti-competitive.''   Roach added, however, that while he wishes the DCA well in its effort toreverse the PSC's ruling, the group he represents cannot commit thefinancial resources that would be involved in joining the fray. ``There aretoo many battles to fight,'' he said.   Also expressing concern about the depreciation-reserve shift was ArthurFusco, a Columbia, S.C., attorney who represents the South Carolina EnergyUsers Committee (SCEUC), a 57-member industrial group that was beenpressing state regulators to accelerate deregulation and retail wheeling.   Fusco said the depreciation reserve transfer would increase the wheelingcosts industrials would pay if, once retail competition arrives, they wereto buy their electricity requirements from a utility other than SCE&G.   He said SCEUC also will urge the PSC to reconsider the magnitude of therate increase itself, which he said was ``way too high,'' in part becausethe commission will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate of return on commonequity--a full percentage point higher than it had been earning.   SCE&G general counsel Belton Ziegler defended the PSC's ruling, however,and dismissed assertions that the transfer is anti-competitive. He said theruling will help his utility ``prepare for competition.''   Among other things, Ziegler said the reserve shift is a necessarypreemptive step to ensure that any large retail customers that leave theutility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G had developed toserve them. Without the shift, he said, residential and small-commercialcustomers would likely end up paying for ``100%'' of the utility's strandedinvestment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''   He continued, ``If you look at the natural gas industry, the benefits ofderegulation went for the most part to large customers who could move offthe system'' and avoid, as much as possible, the responsibility for payingoff the investments their old gas companies had made to serve them.   ``We are telling industrials that if they leave as generation customersthey still will have to pay [for the nuclear assets SCE&G developed forthem] as transmission and distribution customers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   `BLIZZARD OF '96', WHILE DUMPING MUCH SNOW, CAUSES RELATIVELY FEW OUTAGESGiven the magnitude of the snowstorm that swept through the northern tierof the Southeast on Jan. 6 and 7, utilities in the region fared relativelywell, reporting customer outages that--taken together--ran only into thetens of thousands.   American Electric Power, which serves portions of Virginia and WestVirginia under what used to be called Appalachian Power Co. (see story onits name changes this issue), said four of its smaller transmission linesin the Virginias--one 138-kV line and three 69-kV lines--lost serviceduring the storm, but no customers were affected because power wasautomatically rerouted through other lines.   A total of about 15,000 customers elsewhere on the AEP system inVirginia, West Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky lost power for a timebecause of downed distribution lines, a spokesman said. Power was restoredto most within hours.   Virginia Power, meanwhile, said as many as 30,000 customers lost powerduring the storm, including 2,400 mostly commercial customers in downtownNorfolk midday Sunday, Jan. 7, due to a conduit fault in an underground11-kV circuit.   A spokesman said the utility quickly replaced some 3,000 linear feet ofconduit so it could restore service to all but a few customers by earlyMonday. The cause of the fault is still under investigation.   The bulk of the outages on the Virginia Power system, however, were inthe Northern Neck and Gloucester area south of Washington, D.C., and on thewestern shore of the Chesapeake Bay.   Duke Power, in turn, said that as many as 34,000--or about 2%--of its1.7 million North and South Carolina customers were without power at thesame time during the storm, mostly because of ice-related distribution-lineproblems in and near Charlotte, N.C., and Greenville and Clemson, S.C.   About 8,000 customers remained cut off Monday morning, a spokesman said,but service was restored to most of them later that day.   Carolina Power & Light, whose North and South Carolina serviceterritories experienced a mix of snow, sleet and rain, said it experiencedonly one significant outage--affecting about 5,000 customers in theSanford, N.C., area, south of Raleigh.   And Monongahela Power, whose West Virginia service territory wasblanketed with two feet of snow, said only a few dozen customers lost powerduring the storm. A spokeswoman noted that while cold temperaturesincreased residential demand over the weekend and on Monday, demand fromindustrial and commercial customers was off sharply as businesses closedbecause of the snow.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENERGY INITIATIVES WINS FIRST ROUND ON FIRM CAPACITY PAYMENTS IN FLORIDALake Cogen, a 112-MW project developed by Energy Initiatives, won a partialsummary judgment Jan. 4 in a case filed against Florida Power in statecircuit court in Lake County (No. 94354 CA-01, Division 8).   The case revolves around whether firm capacity payments should be madebased on a model used by Florida Power, or a separate method the developersof the gas-fired cogeneration facility said was specified in the contract.Florida Power pays NUGs both capacity and energy payments when thetheoretically avoided generating unit would operate, but only as-availableor energy payments if the avoided unit would have been off-line.   Florida Power claimed the theoretically avoided 500-MW pulverized coalplant equipped with a scrubber, which was used to determine capacity andenergy payments, would be used by the utility based on four criteria todetermine when the plant would be dispatched on an economic basis. The fourparameters were the cost of variable operations and maintenance, the priceof coal, the heat rate of the unit, and a fuel multiplier of 1.   In its motion, Lake Cogen contended other factors, such as environmentalcompliance, should be used in determining economic dispatchability of agenerating unit. It said an actual, operating plant should be used forcomparison, namely Florida Power's coal-fired Crystal River units Nos.1-2.   Judge Don Briggs ruled the parameters for dispatchability should bebased on a real unit and not only the four Florida Power was using. Heordered that a more accurate model be developed to determine how much LakeCogen should be paid. That cost information will be compared to actualpayments, which could be used to determine an award at a later date,assuming the model shows Lake Cogen was underpaid. A schedule for furtherproceedings had not be set.   Fama confirmed that two other NUGs, Pasco Cogen and Orlando Cogen, havesimilar court actions pending.   Lake Cogen is located in Umatilla, Fla., and sells steam to Golden GemGrowers. Partners in the project along with Energy Initiatives are LakeInvestment Holdings and NCP Lake Power Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PANDA ENERGY, FLORIDA POWER CONTINUE FIGHT OVER PROJECT IN POLK COUNTYPanda Energy and Florida Power have traded lawsuits in a dispute overPanda's proposed project in Polk County.   Panda was allowed to voluntarily withdraw without prejudice a$345-million federal suit it had filed against Florida Power (SPR, 1l Aug'95, 1), but Florida Power has since filed suit against Panda. In addition,the state Public Service Commission denied two requests made by Panda in arelated action.   The anti-trust suit Panda withdrew in U.S. District Court for the MiddleDistrict of Florida, Tampa Division (Case No. 95-992-CIV-T-24 C), allegedFlorida Power unfairly interfered with its construction of a cogenerationplant which was to have supplied Florida Power with 74.9 MW of firm powerunder a standard offer contract.   Panda's general counsel Bill Nordlund said the withdrawal was astrategic move, ``and we still plan to prosecute this matter and moveforward on it.'' He would not specify when or in what venue.   The countersuit filed by Florida Power at the end of December soughtdeclaratory judgments answering the allegations included in Panda's suit,in case Panda refiled the case, according to Florida Power attorney JimFama (95-2145-CIV-T-25-B).   Florida Power asked the court to rule that:Panda did not have a superior legal right to negotiate for a natural gastransmission contract with the city of Lakeland, and that the utility didnot interfere with Panda's rights with the city;  -- Panda is not entitled to a standard-offer contract if it builds a unitlarger than 75 MW;  -- Panda is not entitled to payments under a standard-offer contractbeyond December 2016; and  -- Panda has breached its contract by failing to begin construction onthe unit.   The suit also sought relief from the court.   On Jan. 3, the PSC refused to reconsider a decision the PSC made on Dec.5, which said the PSC did have jurisdiction over standard-offer contractsand the Florida Power/Panda dispute. It also refused to grant Panda a90-day extension beyond Jan. 5 to file testimony in that case (Docket No.950110-EI). As a result, a hearing at the PSC was scheduled for Feb. 19, astaff recommendation was due April 18, and the commission was scheduled tovote on April 30.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NCEMPA-1 TO USE NEW METERING EQUIPMENT TO EASE ENTRY INTO WHOLESALE MARKETNorth Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1 said it is gearing up to enterthe Southeast wholesale power market over the next few months, and isinstalling new wholesale delivery point metering equipment that will enableit to predict with considerable accuracy how much surplus non-firm energyit has to sell.   NCMPA-1, part of Raleigh-based ElectriCities of North Carolina Inc.,arranges wholesale power for 19 municipal utilities in the western part ofthe state, including larger munis like those in High Point and Gastonia andsmaller ones like those in Lincolnton, Cherryville and Pineville.   Through plant co-ownership and exchange agreements it signed with DukePower more than a decade ago, the agency is entitled to 850 MW from Duke's2,200-MW Catawba nuclear power station in Clover, S.C. The investor-ownedutility agreed to buy back a significant portion of NCMPA-1's entitlementinitially, then decreasing amounts until the buy-back period ends aroundthe turn of the century.   In part because Duke also agreed to buy back--at a relatively lowprice--any surplus energy NCMPA-1 may have, and because of afirst-right-of-refusal clause that enabled Duke to match any offer anotherpotential buyer might make for that surplus, the agency made no real effortin the 1980s and first half of the 1990s to market its surplus to others.   Recently, however, NCMPA-1 and Duke reached an agreement that resolvesthe first-right-of-refusal issue, and the agency decided to install specialmetering equipment at key wholesale delivery points to its member munis toprovide it with real-time information about muni demand.   That data also will enable NCMPA-1 to predict how much surplus energy itwill have available for sale, said Woody Adams, NCMPA-1's power-supplymanager.   Adams told Southeast Power Report that while his agency always has hadthe right to sell surplus energy, ``we didn't havethe ability to know on atimely basis how much surplus energy we had'' available for sale.   He predicted that in 1996 NCMPA-1 will have at least 500 GWh andpossibly as much as 600 GWh of surplus energy for sale either through theAutomated Interchange Matching System (AIMS) or through bilateral deals,and that that amount would grow to at least 1,000 GWh by 2000.   ``The surplus will be available primarily in the off-peak hours,'' Adamssaid, with more--including, perhaps, some peak-hour energy--available innon-summer months, but at least some available at night and on weekends all12 months of the year. He said summer-peaking NCMPA-1 sees particularpromise in ``seasonal diversity'' deals with winter-peaking entities to itsnorth and west, as well as daily or even seasonal ``energy swaps.''   The cost of producing the energy in question, he noted, is``characteristic of typical generation costs for a well-run nuclear unit,''but he declined to provide specifics. Duke is generally considered to beone of the nation's premier operators of nuclear facilities.   ``What we intend to do initially,'' Adams said, ``is to market thesurplus energy on AIMS'' beginning later this winter, ``as well as to enterinto exchange agreements with power marketers and with utilities that areeither directly connected to Duke or that have ready access'' to theinvestor-owned utility.   Duke would have ``as much right as anyone'' to buy power through AIMS,he said, adding that NCMPA-1 already has signed exchange agreements withseveral marketers, including Citizens Lehman Power, Enron Power Marketing,and LG&E Power Marketing.   The major advantages of participating in the market, Adams said, ``willbe to give us the contacts and experience we'll need to be active in thosemarkets as they evolve.''   The impact of surplus energy sales on NCMPA-1's balance sheet, ``whilesignificant, will not be a make-or-break thing for us. We see it more as aninitial step toward becoming competitive in deregulated power markets,'' hesaid.   Meanwhile, NCMPA-1 also is installing equipment to monitor the loads of``well over 50'' of its munis' largest retail customers. That equipment,said Mark Otersen, the agency's supervisor of demand-side operations, willlet NCMPA-1 gather information on customer demand and chart customer load``shapes''--or patterns of demand.   That load-shape data, in turn, should help NCMPA-1 design newdemand-side management-related rates for industries with common loadshapes, and help its member munis convince large energy users of thebenefits of using such rates, Otersen said.   He noted that relatively few of the large retail customers served bymunis in western North Carolina currently participate in load-managementprograms that provide incentives to those who agree to let their utilitycurtail or interrupt power during peak periods, or who agree to runpeak-shaving standby generators.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LG&E POWER MARKETING SEEKS TO BROKER POWER SALES AND PURCHASES BY TVALG&E Power Marketing Inc. (LPM) has asked the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission to approve changes in its accounting practices to cover acontract under which the marketer will broker power sales and purchases bythe Tennessee Valley Authority and assign all gains and losses to itsaffiliate Louisville Gas & Electric.   In a Dec. 15 filing to FERC, LPM said that it was about to enter into aninterchange agreement with TVA under which it would sell energy to TVA andbuy energy for resale to third parties (Doc. No. ER94-1188-000).   While it will take title to energy received from TVA, it will pass allbenefits from the transactions on to LG&E, thereby maintaining its brokerstatus in the deals.   LPM officials said they already perform this non-exclusive brokeringfunction for LG&E with other energy sellers based on existing generalarrangements with LG&E on file at FERC.   In the TVA case, however, the two parties will change a system underwhich the marketer pays a fee to LG&E for dispatching and transmissionservices. Instead of a straight fee, LPM will use the dispatching fee as a``true up'' mechanism to insure that LG&E receives the full benefit of anydeal involving TVA energy.   It asked FERC to approve this new arrangement now so that questionsabout accounting procedures will not arise later which might hinder LPM'smarketer status and ability to use market-based pricing under FERCregulations.   In its filing, LPM also asserted that it was entitled to enter aninterchange agreement with TVA despite a Congressional ban on TVA salesoutside its own territory, because its affiliated franchise, LG&E, wasgrandfathered under the 1957 TVA ``fence'' law.   It also noted that its arrangement with LG&E was not exclusive since anyof its competitors with similar rights could carry out the same servicesfor LG&E. It said the deal did not in any way increase its market power orresult in undue discrimination or preference and would not be detrimentalto LG&E ratepayers.   FERC asked for comment by Jan. 12. It appears likely that some utilitiesin the region may raise questions about the ``fence issue.''   Already, in September, when the issue of an interchange between LPM andTVA first arose, members of Congress asked for an explanation of its legalaspects. At that time, TVA sent a letter to Sen. Lauch Faircloth (R-NC)assuring him that the arrangement could be done under current fence rules(SPR, 22 Sept '95, 1).   At the same time, industry sources said it is possible TVA will attemptto attach a last-minute amendment to the current budget bill to create amore explicit permission to allow such interchanges with affiliates of the14 grandfathered utilities.   Last summer, TVA publicly pulled back from a plan to introducelegislation to bring down the fence, and it remains to be seen if it nowwill take a piecemeal approach, starting with energy sales to marketers andenergy pools which have immediate applications in the region.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WTU TO SUPPLY CO-OP WITH 11.7 MW, INCLUDING NEW COTTON SPINNING PLANTCentral and South West unit West Texas Utilities has signed a 10-year dealto supply a total of 11.7-MW to Midwest Electric Cooperative of Roby,Texas.   The pact takes effect in two stages. On Sept. 1, 1997, WTU will beginsupplying 5 MW to Midwest to serve the Lortex Industries cotton spinningplant in Snyder, Texas. The plant represents new load and the entry of anew industry to that part of Texas.   On June 1, 1998, it will begin supplying another 6.7 MW. That capacityhas been supplied by TU Electric.   The contract also has an extended terms provision, meaning that WTU alsowill supply any load growth that Midwest experiences at the Lortexfacility.   WTU said the pact would have a non-fuel revenue impact of $1.4 millionannually when fully implemented. To supply Midwest, WTU will build 39 milesof 69-kV line and two substations.   Midwest serves 5,640 members in 10 Texas counties.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LG&E AND LG&E MARKETER MAKE DEALWITH OHIO ED SWAPPING COAL FOR POWERAn unusual agreement is in the works among Louisville Gas & Electric, LG&EPower Marketing and Ohio Edison under which LG&E would supply high-sulfurcoal to Ohio Ed and LPM would receive 300 MW of electricity for one yearfrom Ohio Ed's Burger power plant.   An Ohio Ed spokesman confirmed that negotiations are under way but saida final agreement has not been reached. An LPM spokeswoman said she couldnot comment on the proposed arrangement until it is finalized.   A source familiar with the pending deal said the talks are beinggoverned by ``very strict confidentiality agreements.'' Apparently, here ishow the transaction would work: LG&E would supply up to 1 million tons ofhigh-sulfur coal, reportedly from West Virginia, this year to the Burgerplant, located at Shadyside, Ohio.   In return, LPM would have access to 300 MW of electricity from Burger tosupply its own customers.   Another Ohio Ed spokesman said he could not comment on the proposed bulkpower agreement because of the ``increasingly competitive'' bulk powermarket and electric utility industry.   The source told The McGraw-Hill Companies' Power Markets Week that sucharrangements may become more commonplace as competition and deregulationcome to the utility industry. ``With a dramatically changing industry suchas the power production industry, you're going to see unusual agreementsmore and more,'' she said.   LPM has been very aggressive since its formation last August. It andLG&E are subsidiaries of LG&E Energy Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NYMEX LOOKS TO TVA, SOUTHERN COMPANYAS POSSIBLE FUTURES CONTRACT SITESWith its two proposed electricity futures contracts on track to beeffective this spring, the New York Mercantile Exchange is consideringdelivery points in the East to launch further contracts. Among the systemsunder consideration in the Southeast are the Tennessee Valley Authority andthe Southern Company system.   Patrick Thompson, president of the New York Mercantile Exchange, lastweek predicted the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will act on theexchange's two proposed electricity futures contracts before the end of themonth, which could allow trading to begin by the end of March or early inthe second quarter of this year.   NYMEX filed supplemental information on its proposed futures contractswith the CFTC late last month. The material, responding to commissioninquiries concerning the deliverability of the commodity and potentialregulation of electricity futures by the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, was filed under a claim of confidentiality and was not madepublicly available.   The confidential filing cleared the way for CFTC staff to beginpreparing a memorandum for consideration by the commission. The foursitting commissioners likely will begin considering whether to approve thecontracts later this month, according to a CFTC source.   Assuming the supplemental filing from NYMEX answers all the questionsraised by the CFTC staff, the memorandum now being drafted could be sent tothe commission within two weeks, the CFTC source said.   ``I'm really confident now that the CFTC has had all of its questionsanswered--both technical and regulatory,'' NYMEX's Thompson said in atelephone interview last week. ``I expect the approval process to concludevery quickly.''   NYMEX is expected to launch both contracts at the same time. The twocontracts are virtually identical, except for the physical delivery pointsat the Palo Verde nuclear station switchyard and the California/Oregonborder intertie. The exchange plans to let the markets decide whether oneor both futures contracts will be sustained in the long term.   NYMEX's advisory group is also considering the Pennsylvania-NewJersey-Maryland Interconnection and American Electric Power's grid aspotential delivery points for further futures contracts in the East.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   GREENVILLE, N.C., MUNI USES COINCIDENTPEAK RATES TO CUT INDUSTRIAL COSTSOfficials of the Greenville Utilities Commission in North Carolina saidthat coincident-peak-based rates have not only allowed the muni's existingindustrial customers to cut electric bills, but are helping the muni tolure new business to the city.   John Chaffee, executive director of the Pitt County DevelopmentCommission, said industrials that are taking full advantage of the CP ratespay no more--and sometimes less--than they would for power from neighboringinvestor-owned utilities and electric cooperatives that serve areas aroundGreenville.   GUC buys all its wholesale power from the North Carolina EasternMunicipal Power Agency, which in turn buys most of its power from CarolinaPower & Light.   Because a significant portion of NCEMPA's and the muni's wholesale powercosts is based on their demand during CP&L's highest systemwide demand houreach month, the muni agency and Greenville have been working hard tominimize their monthly peaks through, among other things, aggressiveresidential load control programs, and programs to help industrials installpeak-shaving generation.   GUC general manager Roger Jones said the Greenville muni also inmid-1994 replaced its traditional industrial rate schedule with a new menuof CP-only rates that all customers with a demand of 750 kW or more mustchoose from.   The GUC typically notifies its industrial customers by automated signalwhen it expects a potential coincident-peak period to be approaching; atthat point, the rate agreement says, the customer ``may utilize any meansdeemed suitable to reduce its coincident peak demand,'' including, forinstance, temporary production cuts and/or the use of muni-approvedpeak-shaving generators.   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW-plus customers, who also include somelarge commercial and institutional accounts, together comprise aboutone-quarter of Greenville's total energy use. The CP rates have encouragedthem to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20% from what it typicallywould have been without the coincident-peak rates.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varies widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%.   For example, a large Proctor & Gamble manufacturing plant in Greenvillethat typically demands about 8 MW reduces its demand to between 1 and 1.5MW during coincident peaks, Jones noted, saving both P&G and the munithousands of dollars in monthly power costs.   Chaffee said P&G ``basically shuts down production [during forecasted CPhours] to achieve the maximum possible savings.'' To make the best use ofits down time, he noted, the manufacturer performs required maintenance onits production and other equipment.   Chaffee gave as an example the new automobile parts plant that Japan'sASMO Co. Ltd. in 1994 developed--and in 1995 expanded--in Greenville. Thecombined $50-million facility demands about 2.5 MW.   ``An important issue for ASMO in deciding where to site the [initial]plant was power costs,'' he said. ``We were able to demonstrate that byutilizing Greenville's CP rate and installing [a 1-MW peak-shavinggenerator to further reduce CP demand] that they would be paying ratescompetitive with'' industrial rates offered by Duke Power and otherlow-cost, investor-owned utilities in the Southeast.   Chaffee added, finally, that in his view the CP has been a significantfactor in enabling Greenville to draw increasing numbers of new industries.He noted that while industrial firms announced $20 million in newinvestments in the city in 1992 and $33 million the year after that,industrial investment jumped to $43 million in 1994 and $55 million in1995--the first two years the CP rates were mandated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TECO ROE CAPPED AT 12.5% IN AGREEMENTTIED TO 260-MW COAL GASIFICATION PLANTThe Florida Public Service Commission voted Jan. 3 to cap the 1996 rate ofreturn on equity for Tampa Electric at 12.5% and to determine at a futuretime how over-earnings might be distributed (Docket No. 950379-EI).   The action, coming after TECO earned about $45 million more than itsallowed ROE in 1995, will forestall a rate case that would have been filedin 1996 to pay for a new generating unit.   In an earlier stipulation with staff, TECO's 1995 earnings were cappedat 12.75% and about $45 million of over-earnings will be deferred until1997, after TECO's new $550-million, 260-MW integrated coal gasificationcombined cycle plant which is in Polk County goes on-line in late 1996(SPR, 19 May '95, 16). TECO's actual ROE for 1995 was expected to be about16%.   The deal between staff and TECO effectively replaced negotiations theutility was conducting with the Office of the Public Counsel, whichrepresents ratepayers at the Florida Public Service Commission, accordingto OPC attorney Roger Howe (SPR, 31 Dec '95, 11).   The PSC's action, which was the result of last-minute negotiationsbetween staff and TECO on 1996 earnings, could mean that any excessrevenues could be used for the plant, a refund, to offset regulatoryassets, or for depreciation in 1997 or later. The PSC will likely make adecision on disposition of 1996 excesses sometime in early 1997, accordingto Tim Devlin of the PSC's Auditing and Finance Division.   Under the arrangement for 1996, TECO will have an ROE range of 11.5% to13.5%. However, all of the earnings over 11.5% will be split, whicheffectively caps earnings at 12.5%. TECO estimated it will earn about13.27% in 1996.   The Polk unit will go into rate base in late 1996 and based on TECO'searnings projections, which are considered conservative, it will still earnin excess of its allowed ROE. The 1995 excess carried forward was alsoexpected to cover the additional cost of the new unit through 1997 and,possibly, beyond.   Howe said that, because interest rates were expected to further declineduring the next few years, it was likely the PSC would reduce TECO'sallowed ROE for 1997, which could mean additional excess earnings in thatyear, despite the new unit.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NEW GEORGIA POWER RESIDENTIAL DSMPROGRAM SHIFTS CONTROL TO CUSTOMERSGeorgia Power has proposed to state regulators a new residential loadcontrol program which it says will create 156 MW of savings over 10 years.   Under the plan, customers would buy the control equipment from GeorgiaPower at discounted prices. While this approach is expected to limitparticipation to about 10% of all homes, it will only cost the utility a$20.1-million investment during the 10-year period, meeting the new statepolicy limiting DSM spending.   Under the proposal, submitted to the Georgia Public Service Commissionin December, Georgia Power will give its residential users a choice ofthree approaches to carry out load control.   The most sophisticated will be a home control system based on ScientificAtlanta's ``SuperStat'' thermostat, which will adjust home power use inresponse to a ``critical price signal'' from the utility.   The second approach would use the SuperStat equipment to cycle airconditioners and other appliances at different times of day based onprearranged peak and off-peak demand periods. And the third approach willbe to simply offer time-of-use rates to customers with conventionalthermostat control equipment and encourage them to take advantage of pricedifferentials by voluntarily setting controls.   Georgia Power said it expects 11,000 customers to actively participatein this third approach over ten years with a potential savings of 33 MW.The three programs together would involve about 81,000 homes after 10years, representing about an 11.2% penetration of the Georgia Powercustomer base.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FLA. COMMISSION APPROVES DSM GOALSAND PLAN FOR LAKELAND ELECTRIC & WATERThe Florida Public Service Commission approved on Dec. 19 conservationgoals and plans for the Lakeland Electric & Water Dept., after themunicipal utility reached agreement with the state's Dept. of CommunityAffairs.   The conservation plan says that by the end of 2005 Lakeland mustguarantee 26.9 MW in winter and 33.5 MW in summer of savings fromresidential customers (Docket Nos. 930556-EG and 950445-EG). That sameyear, Lakeland plans to guarantee 3.2 MW in winter and 11.6 MW in summer ofsavings from commercial/industrial customers.   The PSC, however, rejected the muni's request to use demand and energysavings from one customer class to make up shortfalls in another customerclass. The PSC said a ruling on that issue was premature and that Lakelandshould not ask unless the situation occurred.   Plans for nine other of the state's largest muni's and cooperatives wereapproved by the PSC in late November, while plans for the state's fourlargest investor-owned utilities received commission approval in May (SPR,1 Dec., 11; 2 May, 11). Only two utilities required to submit plans remain:Tallahassee Electric Dept. (Docket No. 930559-EG) and Florida PublicUtilities (Docket No. 930552-EG), which is a small investor-owned utility.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ALABAMAPublic Service CommissionRobert Duxbury, supervisor--electricity(205) 242-586822943; Proceeding on Section 111 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, whichdeals with integrated resource planning; meetings expected sometime towardthe end of the yearCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ARKANSASPublic Service CommissionDavid Rhodes(501) 682-5661  95-396-U; Application by Entergy Power Inc. for waiver of requirement forapproval of individual power sales agreements within Arkansas  95-326-U; The Carroll Electric Cooperative asks the PSC for permission tooffer a 5% reduction in wholesale rate charges to its 16 membercooperatives; approved by PSC  94-387-P; Interruptible power contract offered by Arkansas Power & Lightto Arkansas Steel Associates; approved by PSC  94-346-P; Discount rate for Eastman Chemical Co. proposed by ArkansasPower & Light; approved by PSCCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   DELAWAREPublic Service CommissionMelinda Carl, public information officer(302) 739-4333  92-103; Request by Delmarva Power & Light to approve contracts with twonon-utility generators totaling nearly 200 MWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FLORIDAPublic Service Commission(904) 488-8501  951273-EI; Petition by City of Tampa, Hillsborough County and CitizensCoalition for Responsible Power to block Florida Power's proposed 115-kVHiggins-Griffin line because of concerns over EMFs; PSC staff finds utilityis not required to seek a determination of need certificate  951255-EM; Request by Fort Pierce Utilities Authority for permission tonegotiate individual deals with industrial customers without PSC approval;approved by PSC  951161-EI; Request by Gulf Power for permission to negotiate individualrate deals with industrials without PSC approval  951002-EI; Request by Tampa Electric for permission to negotiateindividual rate deals with industrials without PSC approval  951001-EI; Request by Florida Power & Light for confidentiality of powersales data  950532-EU; Territorial dispute between City of Quincy and the TalquinElectric Cooperative  950379-EI; Investigation of earnings of Tampa Electric for 1995 and 1996;PSC on Jan. 3, 1996 caps TECO 1996 rate of return at 12.5% with futuredetermination of how over-earnings might be distributed  950307-EU; Dispute between Florida P&L and Jacksonville ElectricAuthority  950270-EI; Plan by Florida Power to improve reliability of transmissionsystem in Pinellas County by reactivating th e114-kV Higgins-Griffin line  950110-EI; Dispute between Florida Power and Panda Energy over length ofpower-purchase contract for Lakeland project; legal staff asserts PSC hasjurisdiction; litigants trade lawsuits  950007-EI; Environmental compliance cost recovery for investor-ownedutilities  950001-EI; FP&L general fuel proceeding; utility asks that powertransaction data be kept confidential  950002-EG; Assessment of investor-owned utility expenditures on DSM  94354 CA-01, Division 8; Energy Initiatives wins partial judgment againstFlorida Power in case to decide whether firm capacity payments should bemade using Florida Power model  941232-EG; The PSC is scheduled to vote on on a request by Florida Powerto eliminate or reduce credits for participation in the utility's loadcontrol program  941170-EG, 941171-EG and 941173-EG; PSC staff recommends eightcommercial/industrial programs submitted by Florida Power & Light,Florida Power and Tampa Electric could be used to compete with natural gasutilities with money that could be recovered from ratepayers; the PSCapproved Florida Power program to curtail or interrupt power to industrialcustomers during peak periods  941165-PU; Complaint by Peoples Gas that Tampa Electric is marketingelectric heaters in its territory in an effort to cut into its gas salesbusiness  941155-EQ; Request to modify a standard offer contract between Ark Energyand Tampa Electric  941101-EQ; Florida Power plan for curtailment of purchases from NUGsduring minimimum load emergencies; agreement reached between Fla. Power andAir Products's Orlando Cogen Ltd. project; PSC approves Aug. 16  940797-EQ; Florida Power asks to obtain modifications of NUG contracts;PSC issues order in late April delineating which changes must be submittedfor PSC approval  940771-EQ; Florida Power request for declaratory statement that iteliminate some capacity payments for some non-utility generators  940759-EQ; Request by Gulf Power to reduce capacity payments made tonon-utility generators because of projected 19.2% decline in costs ofbuilding a combustion turbine; staff recommends in favor of Gulf Power  940656-EU; The PSC approves a new territorial agreement between FloridaPower and the Orlando Utilities Commission  940569-EQ; Change in Florida Power & Light standard-offer contractsrequested by U.S. Generating/Flo-Sun to take advantage of purchase ofportion of KES Dade project output; PSC staff recommended approval  940565-EU; Request by Orlando Utilities Commission for enforcement ofterritorial agreement with Florida Power as resolution of dispute over whoshould serve growing section of Orange County, Fla.  940546-EU; Territorial dispute between Florida Power & Light and SouthFlorida Cogeneration Associates over who shall serve Metropolitan DadeCounty office buildings  940423-EQ; Florida Power & LIght real-time pricing proposal forindustrialcustomers; staff recommends approval, PSC complies  940357-EQ; Power purchase contract between Florida Power and 120-MWOrlando CoGen project developed by Air Products and Chemicals; disputeongoing over requirement for back-up fuels, with utility trying to get outof contract; an interim agreement on payments is in place until the case isresolved  940378-EQ; Request by Mission Energy to transfer capacity totaling 17 MWfrom two standard-offer contracts between wood-waste generating units andFlorida Power to Mission's Auburndale and U.S. Generating/Flo-Energy'sOsceoloa projects; PSC approved both transfers  940001-EI; Request by Florida Power & Light for fuel cost recovery  931230-EG; Request by Florida Power & Light to increase by 50% the amountof time the utility can control residential heating and air conditioning  931219-EG/940423-EG; Florida Power & Light plan to launch ``real-time''pricing for its large industrial customers; Utility requests hearings inadvance of staff review  931218-EG; Tampa Electric request to suspend its standard offer contractfor firm power purchase from NUGs; New standard offer submitted Jan. 26(Doc. 94-0094-EQ); Staff recommended TECO request be granted  931186-EQ; Commission attempt to coordinate rules governing cogenerationwith competitive bidding regime; staff recommends standard offers ofunlimited size be offered to cogeneration projects deemed sociallybeneficial; rulemaking procedure underway  931011-EI; Proceeding to consider incentives to encourage supply-sideenergy efficiency by investor-owned utilities  930929-EI; FP&L request to stop offering interruptible standby andsupplemental service to some QFs and NUGs that sell it power; PSC agreed toconsider the request  93-0655-EU; Service territory dispute between Clay Electric Cooperativeand City of Alachua; Legal and technical PSC staffs issue conflictingrecommendations; input from Gainesville Regional Utilities and FloridaPower required  930613-EI; Gulf Power request to recover $8.6-million cost for Clean AirAct compliance; Pending  930553-EG, -554, -555, -556, -557, -558, -560, -561, -562, -563, -564,-828, -922; Demand-side management goals of public utilities GainesvilleRegional Utilities, Jacksonville Electric Dept., Kissimmee UtilityAuthority, Lakeland Electric & Water Dept., Ocala Electric Dept., OrlandoUtilities Commission, Clay Electric Cooperative, Lee County Electric Co-op,Sumter Electric Copop, Talquin Electric Co-op, Withlacoochee River ElectricCo-op, Vero Beach Electric Dept., and Florida Keys Electric Cooperative;PSC approves on Dec. 19, 1995 DSM plans for Lakeland Electric & WaterDept..  93-0490-EQ; Dispute between Dade County and South Florida CogenerationAssociates over what constitutes illegal retail power sales and what is apublic utility; developer partnership forms municipal utility along withMetropolitan Dade County to serve Downtown Government Center in Miami;settlement objected to by FP&L  93-0444-EI; Florida Power revenue decoupling plan for DSM cost recovery;PSC approves but staff is instructed to hold utility to higher standardthan usual for judging DSM results  93-0424-EI; Florida Power shareholder incentive proposal for DSM costrecovery; Technical and legal staffs issue split recommendations  930405; Florida Public Service Commission increases Florida Power &Light's annual contribution to its storm fund from $7.1 million to $10.1million  93-0165-EU; Florida PSC approves plan which will allow state utilities torecover funds spent on economic development  93-0055-EU; Investigation into how much stockholders should share inprofits earned from off-system sales; PSC decided against acting on staffobjections to bulk profit-sharing by stockholders  92-0420-EU/92-0421-EU/92-0731-EU; Service territorial disputes betweenFlorida Power & Light, Jacksonville Electric Authority and Okefenokee RuralElectric Cooperative; FP&L withdrew request for approvals when itdiscovered preexisting and contradictory agreements between Okefenokee andJEA; parties to meet to attempt resolutionCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   GEORGIAPublic Service CommissionHarriet Van Norte, director, Consumer Affairs Division, (404) 656-4501  6501-U; Proposal by the Office of Consumer Counsel and industrials to endGeorgia Power demand-side management programs that are subsidized by rates;approved by commission  5602-U; Savannah Electric & Power integrated resource plan  5601-U; Georgia Power integrated resource plan, calling forshort-term-only RFP; PSC staff recommends that Ga. Power be made to signcontract with Energy Initiatives by Sept. 1 or buy from anotherindependent  5090-U; City of Calhoun complaint of violations of the GeorgiaTerritorial Electric Service Act; Assigned to hearing officer 5/17/94  4911-U; Georgia Power real time pricing tariff RTP-DA-1; commissionapproved tariff, awaiting compliance filing from the utility  4900-U; Power purchase agreement between Energy Iniatives and GeorgiaPower for output of a 200-MW cogeneration facility in Kathleen, Ga.,selling steam to a Frito-Lay factory  4895-U; Georgia Power/Florida Power application for certification ofsupply-side addition; PSC approves deals July 19  4822-U; Generic PSC investigation into avoided costs for capacity andenergy for Georgia Power and Savannah Electric & Power; PSC orders that theutilities must pay QFs avoided capacity costs and raise avoided energy costpayments  4821-U; IRP rules amendment regarding solicitation of purchased power  4697-U; Re economic development incentive policy; Established to developuniform state policy for economic development incentives for all utilitiesunder PSC jurisdiction  4311-U; Georgia Power construction of two 80-MW combustion turbines atRobbins Air Force Base near Macon, Ga.; Staff is monitoring construction,last site visit was 6/94, found construction ahead of schedule, underbudget  4229-U; Investigation into decoupling of electric sales and profits andthe treatment of lost revenues resulting from DSM; Staff report expected6/15/94  4133 & 4136-U; Georgia Power and Savannah Electric & Power request forcertification of McIntosh combustion turbines; Approved 12/15/92; Staff ismonitoring construction, next site visit was 6/94, found construction onschedule, under budget. SEPCO customers being retargetedCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   KENTUCKYPublic Service CommissionMatt Rhody(502) 564-3940  95-427; Plan by American Electric Power's Kentucky Power unit forapproval of its DSM plan; approval gra ted  94-078; Kentucky Public Service Commission denies the request of EastKentucky Power Cooperative and Big Rivers Electric Corp. to construct a32.4- mile, 161-kV transmission line to interconnect their systems; thusfar the two utilities have been using a third party to wheel backup powerto each other  94-341; Big Rivers Electric integrated resource plan  04-336; East Kentucky Electric Co-op rate case, including proposal to cutwholesale rates 10%, retail rates 7%; state attorney general calls for$25-million wholesale rate reduction  94-105; Application by East Kentucky Power Cooperative for approval ofthe use of a bond-based financing in the amount of $20.5 million formodifications to its Spurlock Power station in Mason County, related toInland Container facility  94-032; Big Rivers Electric notice of intent to file plan for Clean AirAct compliance and to impose an environmental surcharge in connection withamendments of contracts between Big Rivers and the City of Henderson, Ky.  93-347; Kentucky Power interest in the review of integrated resource planof Big Rivers Electric  93-163; Big Rivers Electric contract to sell 170 MW to Hoosier Energy;Suspended until impacts of the sale of Big Rivers can be determinedCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LOUISIANAPublic Service CommissionRoy Edwards(504) 342-1405  U-20925; Intervenors filed a request with FERC to reject the SouthernCompnay's plan for a two-zone transmission tariff  U-20805; Application of Louisiana Power & Light for authority to acquirenatural gas storage cavern owned by Pontchartrain Natural Gas System,subject to conditions; last hearing scheduled 6/22  U-20178; Louisiana Power & Light integrated resource plan; commissionallows LP&L to withdraw IRP and develop new DSM programs by end of 194  U-17735; Investigation of decision of Cajun Electric Power Cooperative tobuy 30% interest in the River Bend nuclear generating facility owned byGulf States UtilitiesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MARYLANDPublic Service CommissionFrank Fulton, director of office of consumer assistance(410) 767-8022  Case 8678; Commission initiative on new electric industry regulation;industrial advocate rull retail competition  Case 8520K, Part 2; Maryland Office of Peoples Counsel asks PSC to denyBaltimore Gas & Electric's $400-million refund for replacement powerpurchases  Case 8489; Delmarva Power & Light request to construct 300 MW ofcoal-fired generation  Case 8488; Panda Energy application for CPCN for 230-MW plantCase 8452; PEPCO request to collect its costs under CAA, relying onconservation, fuel changes and co-firing  Case 8413; Request by PEPCO to purchase 315 MW from Destec Energy and 230MW from Panda Energy; Reconsideration sought by PatowmackCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MISSISSIPPIPublic Service CommissionWilliam Wilkerson, executive director of PSC staff(601) 961-5493  94-N-0228; Proceeding initiated by Mississippi Power and light to recovercosts incurred by the utility to restore electric service after Februarystorm  94-UA-0115; Review of promotional practices of electric and gasutilitiesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NORTH CAROLINAUtilities Commission(919) 733-3969  E-100 Sub 77; Industrial custoemr group's request that North CarolinaUtilities Commission initiate investigation into retail wheeling; rejected  E-100, Sub 74; Proceeding on cost of power from non-utility generators;Carolina Power & LIght, Duke Power and North Carolina Power advocatecutting payments to small projects  E-100, Sub 73; Investigation into mechanisms to retain industrial loadfor native utilities; Duke Power favors tariff approach, while CarolinaPower & Light wants to negotiate with individual customers  E-100, Sub 69; Consideration of certain standards for electric utilitiesrelating to integrated resource planning  E-100-Sub 64A, and E-100, Sub 71; Investigation of the effect of DukePower integrated resource planning and DSM programs on competition betweenelectric and gas utilities; hearing scheduled 9/20/94  E-22 Sub 350; Agreement between North Carolina Power and Weyerhaeuser Co.to defer cogeneration; Commission staff criticized a proposal by theutility to provide a self-generation deferral rate on incremental load at aWeyerhaeuser Co. pulp and paper millCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   Oklahoma Corporation CommissionOklahoma Corporation Commission  (405) 521-3593  RM 95000004; Proceeding to set new standards for utility response tounplanned outages  RM 950000003; Proceeding on rules covering cogenerators and small powerproducers  PUD 940000473, 940000474; Discount rate deals between Oklahoma Gas &Electric and Tyson Foods and J.P. Emco; ALJ rules allowingconfidentiality; rural electric co-ops, state representative vow to appeal  PUD 940000466; Initiative by the commission to streamline regulation ofutilities; utilities request right to negotiate deal with large customerswho might otherwise seek other supplies  PUD 940000456; PS Oklahoma proposal to offer customers contract rates;OCC allows, but on more limited scale than utility requested  PUD 940000306; Expedited generic investigation into economic developmentrates  PUD 940000301; Public Service Oklahoma industrial real time pricing pilotprogram; Commenced May 1 with 20 industrials under Order No. 382997Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINAPublic Service CommissionCharles Ballentine, executive director(803) 737-5115  95-1000-E, Order No. 96-15; Request by South Carolina Electric & Gas totransfer $257 million in depreciation reserves from the utility'stransmission and distribution assets to its nuclear generation assets;approved by commission  94-469-E; Consideration of third party power purchases by electricutilities; South Carolina Electric & Gas requests additional time in orderto comply with the various components of the workshop  93-748-E; Encouragement of investments in conservation and energyefficiency by electric utilities (Energy Policy Act of 1992 section 111);stipulation reached for commission's considerationCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TEXASPublic Utility CommissionStacy Hernandez(512) 458-0141  14584; Request by power marketers that utilities in the ElectricReliability Council of Texas be requrired to provide wheeling services toall market players on the same terms that they provide service to oneanother; granted Sept. 1  14570; TU Electric notices of intent to build new facilities  14045; Rulemaking proceeding to address transmission and wheeling issuesin the Electric Reliability Council of Texas; commission adopts hybrid ofpostage stamp and distance-sensitive pricing  13943; Application from Power Connect to allow self-generation to bewheeled between Exxon sites; withdrawn  13896; Southwestern Public Service files a settlement agreement with thePUC in which all intervenors agree to support its acquisition of propertiesowned by Texas-New Mexico Power   13932; Application from Power Connect to allow power line to connect twoAmoco sites  13827; Permission given to Southwestern Public Service to build a 203-MWcogeneration plant at a Phillips Petroleum facility near Borger, Texas, anda 103-MW gas combustion turbine. RFP for bids to compare to utility-buildoption forthcoming.  13820; Response by TU Electric to commission order in last general ratecase; utility objects to use of coincident peaks as DSM incentives  13749; Cost recovery of demand-side programs implemented by TU Electric  13587; Demand-side management program of TU Electric; approved by PUC inJanuary with proviso that utility would make amendments by Sept. 1; TexasROSE and the Environmental Defense Fund call for PUC to impose $5,000/dayfines for alleged failure to comply  13575; Procedures governing notice of intent to build new facilities byTU Electric; utility told to issue all-source solicitation  13444; Golden Spread Electric Cooperative notice of intent to build a400-MW gas-fired power plant on line in 1998; approved by PUC  13139; Application for certification of cogeneration agreement betweenBrazos Electric Power Co-op and Tenaska Power  11319-P; Report on Southwestern Electric Power plan to rebuild to 138-kVspecifications its Rock Hill-to-Blocker ``tap'' 69-kV transmission line  13126; Investigation of operation and management of South Texas NuclearProject; City of Austin wins intervenor status; HL&P role settled, CL&Prole still to be reviewed  13118-P; Report on Southwestern Electric Power plan to add a secondconductor to existing North Mineola-to-Perdue 138-kV transmission line; noCPCN necessary  13106-P; Report on Houston Lighting and Power plan to relocate a 138-kVtransmission line for construction of First Colony Mall; no CPCN necessary  13102; Request by Cap Rock Electric for approval of 140-mile 138-kVtransmission line connecting it to new wholesale supplier, SouthwesternPublic Service  13100; Package of strategic rates filed by Texas Utilities Electric toforestall departure of customers in favor of cheaper alternative powersupplies; TU withdraws entire rate package 1/6/95, claiming PUC hasweakened it beyond usefulness  12957; HL&P rate case; utility wants to negotiate special rates withindustrial customers, but commission judge recommends it be allowed to doso only if it offers open access to its transmission system  12852; The PUC ordered a $37-million or 6% rate cut for Gulf StateUtilities Texas customers, revising an order that called for a $57-millionrate reduction  12820; Central Power & Light plan to refund customers $65 million in fuelcosts connected to outages at South Texas Project  12793; PUC seeks comments on whether its rules should be modified toencourage utilities to develop plants using renewable fuels  12700; Assessment of impacts of proposed merger of El Paso Electric withCentral and South West; CSW says merger as it now stands would not bring itsufficienct revenue to be worthwhile  12592; Application by Cap Rock Electric Cooperative for certificate ofconvenience and necessity to build a transmission line within Midland,Glasscock, Reagan, Upton, Howard and Mitchell Counties; At issue is whetherthe proceeding should be expanded to include evidence on the underlyingeconomic basis for an offer by Texas Utilities for a proposed rate ofwholesale service; Hearing examiner allowed 6/14/94 presentation ofevidence relating to TU Electric's proposed rate application (13020) and acomparison of Cap rock's power supply costs based on the proposed rate  12456; Application by East Texas Electric Cooperative for approval of a138-kV line connecting Tex-La Electric Cooperative to Southwestern ElectricPower's system in Louisiana; approved by Texas PUC  12362; Complaint against Texas Utilities Electric involving allegedoverbillings occuring since 1/93 and the availability of 27.6 MW of demandcredits brought by Tex-La Electric Cooperative; similar complaint byRayburn County Electric Cooperative; Parties close to agreement as Tex-Lahas settled with TU and has withdrawn PUC complaint; Rayburn reportssettlement pact is near; Hearing scheduled for October 4  12298; Request by Destec Enegy ro fource Houston Lighting & Power tonegotiate a new contract for purchased power; PUC rejects, favoring utilityclaim that power is not needed  12065; PUC directive that Houston Lighting & Power prove its rates arejust and reasonable; HL&P and City of Houston reach an agreement to cutcity's rates by $367 million; also, utility will give city $145-millionone-time refund, and freeze rates at settlement level through 1997;settlement reached with most parties Feb. 6; PUC finalizes agreements Aug.30  11892; Purchased power issues investigation required by National EnergyPolicy Act of 1992; Pending, procedural change requested by CompetitiveEnergy Options  11735; Texas Utilities rate case to put Comanche Peak No. 2 in rate base,with plant costs proposed to go to demand charge and risk adjustment factoron purchased power included; TU granted a 8.7% increase, with more than$100-million in disallowances  11365; Proposal to institute integrated resource planning amonginvestor-owned utilities; After refusal by PUC to publish proposed rulesfor public comment, action is exptected in next session of Legislature,beginning in January 1995  11259; Farmers Electric Cooperative and City of Garland application toamend certificated service area boundaries and an application for sale,transfer or merger; In prehearingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   VIRGINIAState Corporation CommissionAndrea Leeman, information resources specialist(804) 371-9141  PUE950089; Investigation into industry restructuring  PUE950017; Planned municipalization of city of Falls Church; commissionrules that city must win approval before condeming Virginia Power property  PUE950015; Settlement between Appalachian Power and Bedford MunicipalElectric Dept. over power supply for Georgia-Pacific Corp.  PUE940080; Virginia Power real-time pricing experiment; endorsed bycommission  PUE940059; Virginia Power request for $25 million fuel factor increase tocover outages and refueling at nuclear power plants; SCC ruled Octo. 28that the utility should get only $9.9 million  PU940057; Virginia Power standby generation control system under whichthe utility would control customer generators during peak periods; SCCapproves for up to 15 customers  PUE940051; Virginia Power dispute with DRI over management of utility;consultant advocates continues independence of Virginia Power from DRI  PUE940022; Application by Central Virginia Electric Co-op for certificateto build 138-kV transmission line  PUE930066; Application by Potomac Edison to revise cogeneration tariff  PUE930046; Virginia Power's request to develop 10 non-rate-basecogeneration facilities at industrial sites; denied by SCC  PUE930024; Virginia Power application to establish rates and charges forcogeneration and small power producers  PUE910081; Siemens Power Ventures proposal to build a 185-MW gas-firedmerchant plant in northern Virginia; SCC finds there is no public need forthe project, denies permit  PUE910050; Interim order on improving service area in Appalachian Power2-state areaCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WEST VIRGINIAPublic Service Commission  (304) 3400392  94-0040; Dispute between Dominion Resources Inc. and Virginia Power overcontrol of Va. Power operations  93-1152-E-T; PSC investigation as to whether Wheeling Power should modifyits contract with Ohio Power; Ongoing  93-1016-E-C; Energy America complaint against Wheeling Power for refusingto negotiate a contract for a 40-MW unit in Moundsville; PSC rulesdeveloper should be paid what utility pays its primary supplier, OhioPower  92-0636-E-CN; Application from Appalachian Power to build 765-kVtransmission line  91-987-E-C; Petition by Barbour County L.P. to force Monongahela Powerand Potomac Edison to purchase NUG power; PSC said Mon Power should wheelunneeded power to Potomac Ed and denied utility request for rehearing  89-783-E-C; Petition by MidAtlantic Energy Group and Destec Energy toforce Potomac Edison to purchase electricity from a 230-MWcoal-gasification project; PSC said Mon Power should wheel unneeded powerto Potomac Ed and denied utility request for rehearingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHEAST POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   Federal Energy Regulatory CommissionFederal Energy Regulatory Commission  EC94-7-000, 94-898-000; Proceeding considering proposed merger of Centraland South West and El Paso Electric; judge finds that merger would savecustomers at least $202 million and is in the public interest  EF94-3021-000; Request by Southeastern Power Administration for approvalof preference rates offered to TVA for power from SEPA's Cumberland dams;objections of unfairness raised by Municipal Energy Agency of Mississippi  EL96-31; Request by Santee Cooper of Monck's Corner, S.C., for approvalof an open-access transmission tariff  EL95-33-000; Louisiana regulators file complaint to FERC asking thecommission to amend the Entergy system agreement to reallocate theinterruptible and time-of-use charges from Louisiana Power & Light to otherEntergy affiliates  EL95-31-000; Eight municipal utilities--from Concord, Dallas, Forest Cityand Kings Mountain in North Carolina, and from Due West, Greenwood,Propserity and Seneca in South Carolina--file complaint asking FERC tolower the wholesale rates they pay Duke Power  EL95-17-000; New transmission tariffs for network and point-to-pointservice proposed by Entergy; hearings expected in coming months; FERCrejected tariff which would have charged users the cost of transmissionplus redispatch and new facilities costs  EL94-5-000; Southern Company transmission tariff filing; staff disputesutility claim for a 14% return on equity  EL93-498-000, EL93-33-0000; Application by St. Martinville, La., forapproval of power contract with Central Louisiana Electric; LouisianaElectric and Power Authority has complained that CLECO used "predatorypricing" to win RFP; FERC staff favors approval of pact  ER96-108, ER96-109, ER96-110; Power marketing licenses for Duke EnergyMarketing and Duke/Louis Dreyfus; approved  ER96-85-000; New Florida Power ``cost-based'' wholesale rates  ER95-1042; Request by Entergy for $65.5 million rate increase to Entergyaffiliates for power from the Grand Gulf plant  ER95-1020; Sale by Louisville Gas & Electric to Enron Power Marketing ofbetween 7 MW and 19 MW on April 26 for $16.68/MWh  ER95-1011; Entergy Power, and NorAm Energy Services reached a purchaseand sale agreement which will cover short-term capacity and/or energysales  ER95-976; Open access tariff filed by Southern Company to help winfederal approval for its subsidiary, Southern Energy Marketing, to sellpower at market-based rates; rejected by FERC June 27  ER95-969; Zoned transmission tariff filed by Southern Company to offernetwork and point-to-point service in a) Georgia, and b)Alabama/Florida/Mississippi; rejected by FERC June 27; withdrawm in favorof a new single system filing  ER95-933; Notice of membership in Western Systems Power Pool byAssociated Power Services  ER95-927; Power sales agreement between Southwestern Electric Power andthe City of Minden, La.  ER95-887; Power sales agreement between Old Dominion Electric Cooperativeand Delmarva Power & Light for sale of portion of ODEC committment toPublic Service Electric & Gas  ER95-852; Wholesale power agreement between Tampa Electric and ReedyCreek Improvement District; Florida Power requests FERC investigation  ER95-768; Southern Company power sales agreement with InterCoast PowerMarketing  ER95-767; Southern Company power sales agreement with NorAm EnergyServices  ER95-760; Duke Power files application to establish a comparable-accesstransmission tariff, and to sell up to 2,500 MW of capacity and energy fromits generating system at negotiated market-based rates  ER95-756; Duke Energy Marketing Inc., a subsidiary of the utility's DukeEnergy Corp., files an application for power marketer status  ER95-694; Louisville Gas & Electric power sales agreement with NorAmEnergy  ER95-610; Virginia Power filed service agreement between it and RainbowEnergy Marketing Corp.  ER95-609; Florida Power and Enron file a contract for ``interchangeservice'' under which both parties will exchange capacity or energy witheach other  ER95-581; Former AES Power Marketing executive files application to winmarketer status for Tennessee Power  ER95-277; Louisville Gas & Electric power sales agreement with CNG PowerServices for 15 MW per hour of non-displacement energy from Jan. 1 throughJan. 31  ER95-112; Entergy transmission tariff; attacked as discriminatory againstpower marketers by AES Power and Noram Energy  ER94-1348; Request by AES Power for Section 211 wheeling order that TVAmove 200 MW of power across its system to consummate brokered sale  ER94-1188-008; Request by LGE Power Marketing for approval of changes inits accounting practices involving sales of energy purchased from TennesseeValley Authority  ER94-1022; Filing of Virginia Power's rate schedule with Wholesale PowerServices, which will market excess power the utility buys from HoosierEnergy's Merom generating plant; Pending  ER94-898-000 and EC94-7-000; Central and South West plan to take over ElPaso Electric; CSW challenges FERC authority in ordering system-widetransmission rates, then tells EPE it must renegotiate merger price; Texasregulators, other utilities in the region complain that merger tariff isnot comparable  Doc. No. 93465, 93922; FERC consolidates consideration of FP&L petitionson rates, terms and conditions for transmission and sale of wholesale andpartial power sales  Proj. Nos. 11499-000 and 11500-000; Application by Armstrong EnergyResources for permission to conduct feasibility study to build a 2,500-MWtwo-unit pumped storage power complex in Dunlap, Tenn.; permission granted  RM94-7-000; Call for comments on stranded investment by electricutilities in transmission facilities  TX95-5-000; Southeastern Power Administration asks FERC to order theSouthern Company to give it single-system network transmission service;Southern Company asks FERC to dismiss a demand by Southeastern Power for330 MW of Southern transmission capacity on a single-system networkingbasisCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B36-18IA086-000616-B015-112http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey13.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001832 text/html 64893HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:16:32 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:59 GMTContent-length: 64706Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey13.html Sample Issue Copyright UK GAS REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DTI RAISES POSSIBILITY OF SHIPPERS' LEVY FOR TAKE-OR-PAY COSTS (1616 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BG RANKED SIXTH IN SURVEY OF OVERALL GAS COMPANY PROFITABILITY (635 words) NEWS SOME GAS PRICES LINKED TO PRICE OF ELECTRICITY (122 words) KINETICA PURCHASES BRISTOL AND WEST GAS (33 words) UK ENERGY PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION (176 words) BRITISH GAS TO DRILL OFF THE LANCASHIRE COAST (138 words) CONFERENCE REPORT OFGAS SEMINAR ON PREPAYMENT METERS (173 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW BG TRANSCO PROPOSES HIGHER RANGE FOR COST OF CAPITAL ESTIMATES (351 words) DECEMBER 1995 FIRM GAS PRICES NEARLY 30% LOWER THAN YEAR BEFORE (419 words) IRISH INTERCONNECTORS FACE FLAK ON SAFETY AND ECONOMIC GROUNDS (756 words) BG FACES CLAIMS FROM SERVICE CONTRACT CUSTOMERS LEFT IN COLD (350 words) REGULATORS GIVEN DISCLOSURE GUIDELINES AS REVIEWS CONTINUE (522 words) CONTRACTING ACTIVITY IN DECEMBER STIRS UP JHA MARKET SHARE FIGURES (377 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPTS ENERGY POLICY WHITE PAPER (429 words) ONSET OF WINTER SEES N.SEA GAS OUTPUT SURGE IN NOVEMBER 1995 (253 words) ROUND TABLE CALLS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ENERGY LIBERALISATION (189 words) EUROGAS SLAMS COMMISSION DIRECTIVE ON INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLANNING (385 words) NEWS NIE LOOKING FOR GENERATING OPPORTUNITIES IN SOUTHERN IRELAND (54 words) POWERGEN CHP CONTRACT TO SUPPLY CONOCO'S HUMBER REFINERY (158 words) STATOIL CONSIDERING SELLING ESTUARY FUELS (158 words) NESTE TO SELL ITS 50% SHARE IN SOVEREIGN (154 words) IRISH BOTTLED GAS COMPANY TRADING PROFITABLY (152 words) TAKEOVER OF SEEBOARD CLEARED BY IAN LANG (108 words) CEDRIC BROWN UNDER FIRE AGAIN (80 words) BRISTOL CITY COUNCIL TENANTS TO BENEFIT FROM NEW CHP SYSTEM (180 words) CAMPAIGN TO WIN SUPPORT FOR DISPOSAL OF OFFSHORE INSTALLATIONS (221 words) WYBREW LEADING CONTENDER FOR APPOINTMENT TO BRITISH GAS (85 words) BRITISH GAS ANNOUNCES APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR (115 words) NEW CHAIRMAN OF NATIONAL CONSUMER COUNCIL (75 words) NEW SENSOR FOR DETECTION OF FLAMMABLE HYDROCARBONS (71 words) BORD GAIS OFFERING GRANT TO SWITCH TO NATURAL GAS (130 words) HOUSEHOLD BILLS COULD RISE BY ONE THIRD (107 words) CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DTI RAISES POSSIBILITY OF SHIPPERS' LEVY FOR TAKE-OR-PAY COSTSThe take or pay liabilities faced by British Gas continue to tax mindsand stir emotions in the industry.  While BG has taken on a chiefnegotiator to "lead and direct the renegotiation of gas purchasecontracts", the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has dropped apotential timebomb in the shape of a possible levy on shippers to coverthe extra cost of high-priced take-or-pay gas.  In addition, delays inthe drafting of licences for shippers and public gas transporters andthe associated transfer documents and special licence conditions havemeant the Appointed Day has slipped from 1 February to 1 March.  Thishas raised concerns over a potential delay to the domestic competitionpilot scheme, due to start in the south-west on 1 April.At a high-level panel meeting between shippers, BG TransCo and Ofgaslast Saturday (6 January), DTI head of oil and gas John Michelloutlined verbally a new Condition 12 for the shippers' licence,currently being redrafted for release "very soon".  This would allowthe Secretary of State to impose a levy on shippers, via thetransportation charge, to financially benefit suppliers with long-termtake-or-pay obligations.  The size of this levy is not certain,although 1p or 2p a therm has been mooted.  It is uncertain also quitehow this levy would be passed from TransCo to the appropriate supplierand whether the recipient will be just British Gas Supply.While everyone in the industry is waiting to see a written version ofthe proposal before giving a considered response, this "Top Gas" typescheme, similar to that used in Canada, raised initial alarm with bothshippers, who questioned why they should pay for BG's problems, andwith the Gas Consumers Council which feared customers would pick up thetab.  The last minute nature of the addition of condition 12 meansthere will be little time to consider its full implications.  BG saidit remained keen to reach agreement with producers over renegotiatedcontracts, but it considered the levy proposal to be a usefulcontingency plan.British Gas has indicated that the first producers to agree torenegotiate contracts with BG will get best terms.  So far North Seaproducers have shown no inclination to revamp long term take-or-paycontracts to supply BG at prices well above current competitive marketlevels.  The job of BG's new chief negotiator Kenneth Gardener, adirector of Charterhouse Bank, is to persuade producers to come to thetable.  Gardener, who took on his new post on 1 January, has given upexecutive duties at Charterhouse but remains a director.On his appointment last month he acknowledged producers would bereluctant to re-open legally binding contracts but said he believed a"win win" position could emerge from negotiations.  He has agreed togive at least two years to the problem.  BG also underlined theincreased significance of legal issues in its affairs with theappointment of William Friedrich, formerly with international law firmShearman & Sterling, as its general counsel.Levy proposalThe DTI is maintaining that its levy proposal is still underconsideration and would be included in the licence on a contingencybasis only.  No decision has been made as to whether the conditionwould be invoked.  The government may be using it as a threat toproducers to encourage them to sit down with BG to renegotiatecontracts.  However, this could backfire if producers feel they riskbeing hit with a "double whammy" whereby they accept a lower price forgas from BG and are then hit by a levy because other producers havebeen unwilling to renegotiate.  Thus the messages coming from the DTIappear somewhat confusing.The Gas Consumers Council is concerned that a levy will keep prices fordomestic customers higher than a free market would otherwise deliver.Council director Ian Powe said: "Contingency provision for a levy onall shippers would, if implemented, be passed on to consumers in priceshigher than they would otherwise pay.  It must not be seen as anythingmore than an insurance policy against British Gas' failure to sort outits own problems.  Customers can accept no blame for this predicament.We would need to have very different information than we have now inorder to concede that any of British Gas' contractual liabilitiesshould be passed on to its own and other suppliers' customers".  TheCouncil has asked for full disclosure of all facts before any levy isimposed and on 12 December proposed that the House of Commons Trade andIndustry Committee should conduct an enquiry into public interestissues arising from BG's take-or-pay commitments.BG is now working on the transferal of its supply contracts (and therelated take-or-pay obligations) to a new subsidiary.  Under the newGas Act the same company is not allowed to act as a public gastransporter and gas supplier.  This restructuring will take place onthe Appointed Day.  During debate of the Gas Bill, producers expressedconcern that BG would be able to offload its take-or-pay liabilitiesinto a number of subsidiaries without proper guarantees.  Amendments tothe Act mean there will be a single trading subsidiary, but somequestions still remain over the fact that this subsidiary will have noparent guarantee.  How will the DTI ensure the long-term funding andsolvency of the subsidiary to make sure it is not allowed to fall intobankruptcy to avoid take-or-pay commitments?Appointed DayAnother important issue discussed at the panel meeting was the timingof the Appointed Day for licences and introduction of the Network Code. DTI confirmed that while a final draft of the suppliers' licence hadbeen issued, the shippers' licence still needed completion of thecontroversial condition 12.  Michell said the public gas transporters'licence, the transfer scheme and special licence conditions had slippedbadly in the drafting timetable, due to the time required to turnpolicy into legal drafting, as opposed to policy difficulties.Slaughter and May was working on the special conditions, but he was notentirely confident that all the licence documentation would be in placeby 1 February, the proposed Appointed Day.  Accordingly it was agreedthat the Appointed Day should be moved to 1 March, with a panel meetingon 2 February to confirm this date.  Energy balancing will beintroduced from 1 September.The big question is how this delay will affect the proposed 1 Aprildate for the introduction of the domestic competition pilot scheme.While it is the job of the Domestic Competition Steering Group, chairedby Clare Spottiswoode, to discuss this issue, it was agreed at thepanel meeting that TransCo should continue with its current timetablefor systems implementation and testing.  SPA is already under trial,and nomination and confirmation of all sites by shippers will utilisethe SPA system from 1 February.  The Gti system would not be used for astart date of supply beyond 1 February, but would be retained forinvoicing purposes.  While some shippers were still concerned over theaccuracy of their sites and meters portfolios, most felt they wereworkable and were not a reason for delay, as long as a suitablereconciliation process for disputes was established.  Dual billing ofsites was being tackled among the shippers themselves, but some sitesremained without any nomination.The running and testing of SPA is seen by many shippers as one of themost important systems steps for the domestic trial, and suppliers suchas Amerada Hess and Total, who are committed to participating in thefirst trial, remain optimistic that the 1 April date can be maintained. However, TransCo itself has been giving conflicting messages over itsattitude to the timing of the pilot.  Having originally requested sixmonths between the implementation of the Network Code and the domesticcompetition pilot, in order to test systems thoroughly, TransCo hadreluctantly agreed to first a four-month and then a two-month gap.  Theshift from 1 February to 1 March for Network Code implementation meansthe gap will narrow to one month, although systems testing will beunderway before the official start date.Systems failureWhile some in TransCo appear to have indicated a willingness toconsider this option, managing director Harry Moulson came out verystrongly in favour of delaying the pilot in a Times interview thisweek.  He suggested the introduction of domestic competition should bedelayed until June because the computer system is untried and couldfail.  He said it would be "ludicrous" to press ahead with the trial inApril, as there were significant risks, including the worst outcomewhere a breakdown left TransCo unable to maintain pipeline pressure.  Amore likely risk, he suggested, would be an inability for TransCo toconfirm meter readings if too many customers wished to switch supplier. He also admitted that TransCo's service to its customers had been"bloody awful" last year, and although it was improving he felt therewas a way to go.Ofgas has indicated there should be "a searching review to determinewhy the 1 April date cannot be retained for the introduction of thedomestic market".  Chris Rees from Touche Ross has been taken on as a"troubleshooter" reporting to Ofgas, to examine whether the 1 Aprildeadline is feasible or whether the start-up date should be delayed bya month or two.  He is currently visiting interested parties and isexpected to make his recommendation in late February.  It is likely theintroduction will be on a quota or rationed basis, with say a maximumof 1,000 confirmations per day in the early days to minimise systemstrain.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG RANKED SIXTH IN SURVEY OF OVERALL GAS COMPANY PROFITABILITYBritish Gas ranks sixth in terms of overall composite profitability incomparison with 159 gas companies surveyed worldwide in 1994, accordingto a survey* compiled by the Sheffield Energy & Resources InformationServices (SERIS).  Based on 1992-1994 information, the survey usesoperating and financial data to rank the upstream and downstreamactivities of gas companies in 48 countries, according to 25competition and performance indicators.  The information is also usedto compile a profitability index, headed in 1994 by Statoil as the topperforming company, against which the remaining companies are measured(see table).  In the index the company's absolute profit, profit marginand rate of return on assets are combined and given equal weight.However, SERIS points out that the accuracy of the information isdependent on the operations of each company and on its willingness todisclose such data.In compiling the survey, SERIS considered each company's upstreamoperations and downstream gas pipeline and marketing segments, and usedthe information to rank the following companies:* top five gas production companies in 1994: Russia's Gazprom with20,150.7 billion cubic feet (Bcf), Algeria's Sonatrach (4,569.8 Bcf),Indonesia's Pertamina (2,661.0 Bcf), the UK's Royal Dutch/Shell Group(2,574.0 Bcf) and Saudi Arabia's Saudi Aramco (2,479.1 Bcf);* top five companies for gas pipeline sales in 1994: Dutch companyNederlandse Gasunie with 2,899.4 Bcf, Germany's Ruhrgas (2,006.1 Bcf),Italy's ENI subsidiary SNAM (1,707.9 Bcf), France's Gaz de France(1,329.5 Bcf) and the US's Tenneco (870.5 Bcf).  British Gas, in secondplace in SERIS's 1993 ranking, declined to disclose a figure for gassales because of "the commercial sensitivity of the data in the run upto competition in the gas market".  Similarly, British Gas's marketrivals were equally unwilling to disclose figures to SERIS;* top five companies for total gas pipeline throughput volume in 1994(gas pipeline sales plus gas transported for third parties): Canada'sNova Corp with 4,089.0 Bcf, the US's Tenneco (3,328.0 Bcf), NederlandseGasunie (3,164.2 Bcf), Slovakia's Slovak Gas Industry (SPP) (2,765.0Bcf) and the US's Panhandle Eastern Corporation (2,498.0 Bcf).  BritishGas's figures for throughput volume (2,197 Bcf) put the company intoeighth place in 1994 compared with fifth place in 1993;* top five companies for gas marketing sales in 1994 (sales of bought-in third party gas by marketing subsidiaries): US company Enron Corpwith 2,489.6 Bcf, the US's Natural Gas Clearinghouse (1,286.0 Bcf),Canada's Transcanada Pipelines Ltd (1,171.3 Bcf), the US's PanhandleEastern Corp (1,134.6 Bcf) and the US's Coastal Corp (989.0 Bcf);* top five most profitable gas companies in absolute terms in 1994:Italy's SNAM, with an operating profit of US$1,920m, British Gas with$1,356m, Gaz de France with $872.8m, Transcanada Pipelines with $733.9mand Norway's Statoil with $603.4m.* Natural Gas Companies Worldwide, is available on diskette from:SERIS, 103 Carter Knowle Road, Sheffield S7 2DY, tel/fax: 0114 2580448.1994 Composite Profitability Index: Top 20                                                         Composite                                            Country      Index (%)Statoil                                     Norway       100*Slovak Gas Industry (SPP)                   Slovakia      96.4ENI                                         Italy         88.5Transportadora de Gas del Sur               Argentina     81.9Pipeline Authority                          Australia     71.7British Gas plc                             UK            59.5Transportadora de Gas del Norte             Argentina     58.2Neste Oy                                    Finland       56.3Nova Corp                                   Canada        52.8Transcanada Pipelines Ltd                   Canada        51.6Gas & Fuel Corp of Victoria                 Australia     50.6Gas Natural SDG                             Spain         42.9Bord Gais Eireann                           Ireland       42.6Williams Companies                          US            42.6Dansk Olie og Naturgas AS                   Denmark       40.6Gaz de France                               France        40.5Tenneco Inc                                 US            40.4El Paso Natural Gas Company                 US            40.2Noverco Inc (Gaz Metropolitain)             Canada        39.3Pipelines Authority of S.Australia          Australia     38.6* The top performing company is designated as 100 with theprofitability of all other companies expressed as a percentage ofthe performance of the top company.Source: SERISBack to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOME GAS PRICES LINKED TO PRICE OF ELECTRICITYIt appears some companies supplying gas to power plants have beenoffering contracts where the gas price is linked to the price ofelectricity in the pool, thus protecting generators from a pricesqueeze following changes in the electricity price.This is seen as a marketing tool to secure sales in a market underpressure from falling gas prices and surplus supplies.  It carriesrisks of large losses for the gas supplier and such deals may beoffered at a premium.Scottish Hydro is one generator that is believed to have agreed a gascontract with around 40% linked to the electricity pool price.Gas prices are more usually linked to an indicator such as the retailprice index.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996KINETICA PURCHASES BRISTOL AND WEST GASKinetica is believed to have purchased Bristol and West Gas.Based in Bristol, this small marketing company has a few hundred siteswhich offer Kinetica a useful addition to its existing portfolio.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996UK ENERGY PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTIONProvisional statistics showing energy production and consumption in thethree months September to November 1995, published by the Department ofTrade and Industry, show that production of indigenous primary fuels,at 67.9 million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe) was 5.4% higher than inthe corresponding period a year ago.Production of coal, natural gas, primary electricity and petroleum roseby 12.0%, 7.8%, 4.3% and 3.2% respectively.  Deep-mined coal was 21.0%higher than in the same period a year ago as the newly privatisedcompanies increased production.Total inland consumption of primary fuels, which includes deliveriesinto consumption, during the three months September to November 1995,at 52.9 mtoe was 0.6% less than in the same period a year ago.Consumption of natural gas increased by 9.0% largely due to lowconsumption in November 1994 because of exceptionally mild weather, anda significant increase in use for electricity generation in Septemberto November 1995, compared with the same period a year earlier.Consumption of petroleum and coal fell by 3.7% and 9.7% respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRITISH GAS TO DRILL OFF THE LANCASHIRE COASTBritish Gas Exploration and Production (E&P) is to drill an explorationwell some 11 kilometres southwest of Formby Point on the LancashireCoast.  This will be the fifth well it has drilled in exploration block110/14.A jack-up drilling rig, the Global Adriatic XI, will be towed tolocation and will drill to a depth of approximately 1,350 metresbeneath the seabed.  Drilling will last about two weeks.The target reservoir is the same as the Morecambe fields, alreadydeveloped by British Gas.  An extensive survey of the area wasundertaken before the decision was made to drill, said BGE&P.British Gas is the main acreage holder in the Irish Sea, currentlyoperating 19 blocks in the East Irish Sea, North Channel and CaernarvonBay, and participating in four others in the East Irish Sea.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OFGAS SEMINAR ON PREPAYMENT METERSOfgas held another seminar last month at the Church House ConferenceCentre, this time to discuss and seek views on the thorny issue ofaccess by future domestic gas suppliers to prepayment meters.Suppliers need access to prepayment technology to be able to meet theirlicence obligations. The current Quantum System is viewed as the onlyrealistic technology for the competitive market, however it is a systemfirmly stamped with the BG logo.The aim of the seminar was to discuss and get agreement on what hasbeen called a short term solution to allow prepayment  supply from thestart of a competitive gas market, but which is not necessarily thelong term solution.The main thrust appears to suggest suppliers will need to agree amongthemselves a series of prices for gas supplied through a prepaymentmeter.Data constraints in the Quantum System, which was originally designedfor an integrated supplier, mean that it would be difficult and costlyfor each supplier to have its own individual price.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG TRANSCO PROPOSES HIGHER RANGE FOR COST OF CAPITAL ESTIMATESBG TransCo has published a paper on its cost of capital, the first in aseries that will consider specific elements of the current pricecontrol formula review.  The paper has been made public to stimulatedebate and add transparency to the process, said TransCo.  It concludesthat the range for TransCo's cost of capital, or allowed rate ofreturn, is now 7.4%-8.9%, with the actual cost towards the upper end ofthis range.  This compares with the Monopolies and Mergers Commission1993 enquiry which estimated the range for TransCo's cost of capitalwas 6.5%-7.5% pre-tax.In a letter to Ofgas director general Clare Spottiswoode, TransComanaging director Harry Moulson said the change in estimate is partlydue to factors exogenous to TransCo including the MMC's revised figuresfor the equity risk premium and changes to the advance corporation tax. However, he suggests a more specific reason is a change in theriskiness of TransCo relative to the stock market as a whole.  He saidthe beta coefficient had become more volatile and had risen to a valuein the range 0.83-0.93, compared with the MMC beta estimate of 0.86.Moulson suggests this increase reflects changing market and regulatoryconditions and is likely to continue over the next few years.Separation of transportation and trading and the introduction ofcompetition have increased the market-related risk of transportation.The report suggests "the systematic risk that TransCo faces iscomparatively high in relation to other utilities.  On a qualitativeassessment of the market risk facing utility companies, TransCo rankshigher than the water and electricity companies, but lower thantelecommunications".  TransCo argues that the company should thereforehave a higher cost of capital, towards the upper end of the range of7.4%-8.9%.  It suggests "failure to provide this will be to thedetriment of the financial viability of the business and will undermineincentives to invest".TransCo is organising a seminar early this year, to which it willinvite Ofgas, shippers and academics to discuss its analysis.  Itintends to publish a second paper on the asset base for consideration.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996DECEMBER 1995 FIRM GAS PRICES NEARLY 30% LOWER THAN YEAR BEFOREA sample of prices from clients of energy specialists John HallAssociates showed that for customers using more than 25,000 therms peryear, the volume weighted average firm gas price in December 1995 of18.72 pence per therm was down 3.01 ppt on the previous month (21.73ppt) and 3.25 ppt below October's average price.  This December pricewas down 7.81 ppt (29.4%) compared with the same month the year before(December 1994, 26.53 ppt).  However, JHA points out that prices forcurrently renewable firm gas contracts are significantly lower ataround 11.5 to 12.0 ppt for customers with good volume and load factor,a little below the levels in November.The December 1995 volume weighted price of firm gas in the marketsbelow 25,000 therms was 23.97 ppt, according to Hall sample figures.This is 7.95 ppt (24.9%) below the price in the same month the yearbefore (December 1994, 31.92 ppt), and 1.45 ppt lower than the previousmonth's figure (November 1995, 25.42 ppt).  New contracts are beingquoted as low as 15 ppt, or even lower if attached to above 25,000therm volumes, according to JHA.At 15.11 pence per therm (ppt), the volume weighted average price ofinterruptible gas in December 1995 was down 0.36 ppt on the price themonth before (15.47 ppt) and 0.43 ppt less than the average price inOctober (15.54 ppt).  This average December 1995 price is 4.40 pptbelow the average price in the same month in 1994 (19.51 ppt) - areduction of 22.6%.   As with firm gas prices, the best interruptibleprices for new contract business are considerably lower at between 10and 11 ppt, with prices having stabilised over the last few months of1995.Having remained steady at around 9.05 to 9.10 ppt during late Octoberand early November, spot gas prices rose sharply in the last half ofNovember to break through the 10.00 ppt barrier, based on Bactonprices.  Prices have since stabilised around 9.95 to 10.15 ppt, withsome increases seen during the period of cold weather.The discount for supplies from St Fergus compared with Bacton wasaround 0.20 to 0.25 ppt until around mid November, when it increased toover 0.30 ppt.  During December, the discount tended to be around 0.2ppt.  Prices for the first quarter of 1996, based on Bacton, werearound 10.2 ppt in late December, with the differential between StFergus and Bacton ranging between 0.45 and 0.65 ppt during the month.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IRISH INTERCONNECTORS FACE FLAK ON SAFETY AND ECONOMIC GROUNDSFollowing a demand from George Foulkes MP for a public enquiry intosafety aspects of the construction by British Gas of the Scotland-Northern Ireland gas pipeline, the Scottish Office has released resultsof its preliminary underwater survey.  Concern had been expressed thatrecent pipelaying work had disturbed Second World War explosives dumpedin and around Beaufort's Dyke in the Irish Sea.Phosphorus flares have been washed up along the south-west Scottishcoast, and the British Geological Survey reported underwater explosionsin this area of the Irish Sea.  The Scottish Office report shows thatmunitions were strewn in and around Beaufort's Dyke, sometimes inrelatively shallow water, but concluded there was no risk to the publicor marine life.Offshore pipelaying work by Premier Transco, a wholly-owned subsidiaryof British Gas, was halted briefly in late October, but the prohibitionorder was lifted by the Health and Safety Executive after five days (UKGas Report, issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 4), allowing the company tofinish laying, trenching and pressure testing of the complete offshoresection of the pipe.A Premier Transco spokesman told UK Gas Report 42 kms of 24 inch pipehad been laid and some work had been completed on the onshore sectionin Scotland.  This work had been suspended during the winter forenvironmental reasons, to reduce land damage, and would resume in thespring, together with work on the 3km onshore link to the Ballylumfordpower plant in Northern Ireland.He said the project was on schedule for completion in October thisyear.  Planning permission had also been given for a pipeline toCarrickfergus to allow the development of a downstream gas market inNorthern Ireland (UK Gas Report, issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 12).He anticipated the first customers could be supplied with natural gasby the end of the year.  It is believed that competition in supply forindustrial and commercial customers will be introduced three yearsafter the start of operations, with full competition after eight years.Premier Transco has always claimed its offshore pipelaying work posedno threat to safety or health and had been carried out in accordancewith government safety procedures.  The Scottish Office suggested moreresearch was needed to see if there was a conclusive link between workon the pipeline and the emergence of up to 4,000 incendiary bombs onlocal beaches.  Commissioning and operation of the pipeline will bediscussed by Premier Transco, the Scottish Office and the Health andSafety Executive, and Transco says it will continue to act inaccordance with procedures agreed with the DTI, HSE and Ministry ofDefence.  Foulkes and environmental groups have condemned the survey asbeing held too late and in the wrong place.Meanwhile, Ireland's Department of Energy (DoE) has been criticised forits role in the completed Scotland-Southern Ireland gas interconnectorpipeline, with claims by the country's Comptroller and Auditor Generalthat the department got its figures wrong in its estimates for the$373.5m line.  The comptroller, in a report to the government on thepipeline, says the DoE made serious blunders in its calculations at theplanning stage of the interconnector.  Administration and design cost$41.2m, some 45% more than budgeted for, while entire costs overran by$16.5m.  This the comptroller says, was reasonable.  "The $16.5mrepresents a reasonable overrun because the scale and complexity of theproject made cost estimation particularly difficult and also becauseextra work above that envisaged had to be undertaken."However, the DoE is blamed for faulty estimates on its rate of returnto the Irish economy, initially estimated at between 23% and 39% buteventually found to be only around 15% by the EU which assessed theproject for grant aid.  The comptroller found the rate of return to theeconomy to be even lower at only 11%.  The department based its rate ofreturn calculations on costs of $300m at 1990 prices but soughtgovernment approval for the project based on costs of $360m.  Inaddition, no provision was made in estimates of project returns for theforeseeable costs of developing and upgrading existing natural gasinfrastructure, estimated at $240m.Controversy continues in Ireland over this interconnector, with criticsclaiming it is unnecessary and that had Southern Ireland been patientit could have taken an overland spur from the British Gasinterconnector at a modest cost of around $45m or less.  However,others argue that the separate pipeline provides valuable security inalternative supply options.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BG FACES CLAIMS FROM SERVICE CONTRACT CUSTOMERS LEFT IN COLDBritish Gas has confirmed that it will compensate domestic customerscovered under its Three Star Service contracts, after repair serviceswere severely disrupted by freezing weather conditions over theChristmas period.  The company faced widespread criticism after anestimated 150,000 of the 3m customers covered by the #104 contract -the most expensive and popular of four service agreements offered byBritish Gas - were left without heating for up to four days.  Under theterms of the agreement, British Gas pledges to send an engineer torepair a faulty system within 24 hours if the fault is reported before7.30am and depending on demand.According to a spokesman, British Gas plans to "consider each case onits individual merit" but will award #10 for each day after the 24 hourcall-out period that a contract customer awaited an engineer.  Thecompany added that it will consider paying costs incurred by customerscovered by the service who were forced to use another company to carryout repairs.The Gas Consumers Council criticised British Gas for the delays whichit said were due to the company's redundancy and restructuringprogramme.  The Council added that British Gas had failed to makecontingency plans to cope with the cold period after the Council hadwarned the company in early December of potential disruption toservices due to staff shortages.  Ian Powe, director of the Council,said the problem was "fundamental" rather than seasonal, withcomplaints about British Gas service contracts trebling in the yearending November 1995.  He suggested BG should amend the terms of itsthree-star contracts or take on more engineers to provide a betterservice to justify the high cost.Responding to the criticism, British Gas said the number of engineersoperating in 1995 (7,500) was the same as in 1993, and that allbusinesses had been affected by the extreme weather conditions.  A BGspokesman added that during the disruptions, priority had been given to"customers most in need, particularly the elderly and families withyoung children and households suffering from a complete central heatingbreakdown".Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996REGULATORS GIVEN DISCLOSURE GUIDELINES AS REVIEWS CONTINUEUtility regulation is under the spotlight once again as the LondonStock Exchange issues guidelines for regulators releasing sensitiveinformation and the Labour Party sets up its policy review of energyregulation.  In addition, it appears the Committee on Standards inPublic Life, chaired by Lord Nolan, may include utility regulation inits wide-ranging remit.The London Stock Exchange guidelines conclude a review of the controlof information which could affect the share prices of companies underthe supervision of privatised utility regulators.  Last summer, a rowerupted when information on price controls provided by electricitydirector general Professor Stephen Littlechild to regional electricitycompanies was leaked, causing a crash in electricity share prices.  Thenew guidelines have been drawn up with the agreement of regulators inthe fields of gas, electricity, water, telecommunications, rail,aviation, environment, television, gaming, and the Lottery.  The Officeof Fair Trading, although not an industry regulator in the same sense,has agreed to the same guidelines.The guidelines include:* a minimum period - not normally more than 24 hours - between givingsensitive information to a company and its advisers and releasing itpublicly;* limitation of access to information on a need-to-know basis;* advice to be given to other parties on the confidential nature ofinformation;* lists to be kept of people to whom information has been shown inadvance;* notification to the Stock Exchange and companies simultaneously;* consultation with the exchange in the case of a leak, and ifappropriate, immediate release of information.However, the voluntary guidelines have a get-out clause in that theexchange recognises that regulators may not always be able to stick "tothe strict letter of these guidelines".  Critics have also suggestedthat the guidelines would not have stopped the electricity pricecontrol leak last year, as Offer officials claim they were already pre-releasing sensitive information no more than 24 hours beforepublication.  Some suggest that only simultaneous release ofinformation to companies and to the exchange could really guard againstthat kind of price manipulation.Richard Kilsby, director of market services at the exchange, said thenew guidelines would "help to prevent disorderly markets and potentialinsider dealing in shares of regulated companies before the officialrelease of sensitive information by the regulators".Meanwhile, the Labour Party has begun work on its review of energyregulation, headed by shadow energy minister John Battle.  He believesthe current structure of regulation has failed the customer in terms ofservice and prices and is lacking in transparency and consistency.Labour is thought to favour a single energy regulator served by a panelof advisers.  A group of industry specialists is being recruited by theParty to draft a new regulatory framework.  The subject may also comeunder further scrutiny by the current government if Lord Nolan decidesto include utility regulation in this year's programme for thestandards in public life committee.  The recent row over the behaviourof the Lottery watchdog chief has raised again questions ofaccountability and standards for regulators.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONTRACTING ACTIVITY IN DECEMBER STIRS UP JHA MARKET SHARE FIGURESFigures provided during December to John Hall Associates (JHA) by firmgas clients using more than 25,000 therms/yr show some significantchanges in market share, reflecting an increase in activity in Decemberwhen many of the contracts on the database were due for renewal.Mobil remains the market leader in this sector, although it lost 1% tohold a 22% share.  Kinetica gained 1% to 16%, taking over second placein the sample from Alliance which dropped 6% to 13%.  Eastern Gas(eGas) saw its recent aggressive marketing pay dividends with a 6% risein share to 11%.  AGAS and Quadrant each gained 1% to 8% and 5%respectively, while Amerada Hess lost 2% to reach 7% of this market inDecember.  The "others" category also fell back 1% on the database.Similarly, within the sub-25,000 therm sector, there was some movementin market share figures during December.  Alliance remains the majorplayer, although its share fell 4% to 30% of the non-BG market in theJHA sample.  Quadrant (including Gas Direct) maintained its overall 22%on the database, while eGas gained 1% to 10%.  The "others" categoryrose 3% to 10%.A breakdown of figures provided to JHA by interruptible customersduring December shows a sharp increase in eGas' market share, gaining4% to reach 17% of the total in the sample database.  Using the JHAdatabase that now excludes single sites of over 100m therms per yearconsumption, Business Gas' (BG Supply's) share of the interruptiblemarket stayed at 25% in December, while Amerada Hess increased by 1%.Alliance Gas remains a dominant force in this sector, although it lost4% to register a 24% share in the December JHA sample.  Alliance showedfalls in all market sectors on the database, reflecting JHA'sperception that the company had been much less prominent during thelatest contracting round.  Alliance told UK Gas Report it had beenconsidering each renewal carefully in the light of tightening margins,but it had not changed its policy and was not withdrawing from anymarkets.  Other significant players in the interruptible gas marketinclude United Gas (7%), Accord (6%) and Quadrant (5%).  AGAS, Mobiland Amerada Hess each have a 4% share on the JHA interruptibledatabase.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPTS ENERGY POLICY WHITE PAPERAt a meeting on 19 December, the European Commission adopted energycommissioner Christos Papoustis' proposal for a white paper, entitled"An energy policy for the European Union", which lays down guidelinesfor EU energy policy into the next decade.  However, Papoustis raisedthe question of whether it will be possible to achieve the whitepaper's objectives without the addition of an Energy Chapter to theEuropean Treaty - currently the subject of ongoing discussions.The white paper is the outcome of detailed discussions andconsultations held on the EC's green paper, which was published inJanuary 1995.  It sets out three strategic objectives for EU energypolicy: overall competitiveness; security of energy supply; andenvironmental protection.  To achieve its objectives, the white paperhas established a number of policy guidelines, the first of which isintegration of energy markets.  Liberalisation of the internal marketfor electricity and for natural gas is considered to be the key factorin market integration.The second policy guideline deals with concerns over the increasingenergy dependency of the EU.  However, the Commission feels thatdespite the political risks in some important supplier countries andgrowing world energy consumption, security of supply does not atpresent warrant crisis measures.  Instead, the Commission will aim toencourage fuel diversification, energy efficiency and renewable energysources as a means of helping to preserve security of supply.The Commission sees no inherent conflict between improvingcompetitiveness and protecting the environment and recognises that theinternalisation of environmental costs and benefits offers a way tointegrate environmental concerns by working with the market rather thanagainst it.  The need to promote sustainable development means theCommission will seek to encourage energy efficiency and the use ofrenewables via a range of policy instruments.  The Commission alsoagreed that the role of local authorities should be given morerecognition in national and Community energy policies, as many aspectsof energy policy affect local communities.Speaking at the meeting where the white paper was adopted, CommissionerPapoustis said: "A sound and sustainable energy policy is critical forour future economic development.  This white paper will be our blue-print for action into the 21st century".  Papoustis outlined theimportance of the paper's objectives to achieve environmentalprotection, secure energy supplies, job creation, industrialcompetitiveness and balanced regional development.  However, he said:"If we are to achieve all these objectives, the Commission must raisethe question of whether a modification of the Treaty is necessary, asCommunity action is now limited by the absence of clear provisions".Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ONSET OF WINTER SEES N.SEA GAS OUTPUT SURGE IN NOVEMBER 1995British gas production was up 51% in November over the month before,and 25% higher than in November 1994, according to the latest RoyalBank of Scotland Oil and Gas Index.  Production reached 8,551 millioncubic feet per day (MMcfd), taking the bank's gas index to 251.6.  Gassales were helped not only by the colder weather but also increasingdemand for electricity generation, said the bank.  Gas revenues wereestimated to have risen by #5.17 million a day to #15.86 million a dayduring November last year, about 28% higher than in the same month in1994.  Gas production was at its highest level since March last year.British Gas' Morecambe field saw the largest increase in output, up 754MMcfd to 1,325 MMcfd in November.  BP's Bruce field was up by 195 MMcfdto 667 MMcfd.  Hamilton's Ravenspurn field increased by 194 MMcfd to291 MMcfd, Marathon's East Brae was up 150 MMcfd to 438 MMcfd, Shell'sSole Pit field output rose by 136 MMcfd to 339 MMcfd and Shell andAmoco's Indefatigable field produced 311 MMcfd, up 70 MMcfd on October. BP's Cleeton field came back into strong production, rising from just1 MMcfd to 197 MMcfd.There were few falls in production, but Mobil's Beryl and Conoco'sMurdoch fields fell by 43 MMcfd to 372 MMcfd and by 41 MMcfd to 38MMcfd respectively.  At the terminals higher production saw Bacton andBarrow increase throughput by 752 MMcfd and 754 MMcfd respectively.Easington increased by 483 MMcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ROUND TABLE CALLS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ENERGY LIBERALISATIONThe UK Round Table on Sustainable Development will shortly publish areport giving broad support for energy market liberalisation, butcalling on the government to set a framework which ensures that energymarkets operate in a way that is consistent with sustainabledevelopment.The round table is a government appointed committee, set up to provideadvice to the government on sustainable development in the wake of theRio environmental conference.  It is chaired by secretary of state forthe environment, John Gummer, and includes representatives frombusiness, environmental organisations and academics.At its meeting on 11 December, the round table suggested thedevelopment of competitive markets should increase efficiency ofproduction and supply and generally provide benefits of reduced pricesand better services for customers.  However, it felt that the marketwould not of itself meet all the environmental and social objectives ofa sustainable energy policy.For this reason the round table concluded that the government shouldset objectives and be prepared to use economic instruments, incentivesand regulation where necessary, to ensure that liberalisation isachieved in the context of a sustainable energy policy.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EUROGAS SLAMS COMMISSION DIRECTIVE ON INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLANNINGThe proposed European Commission directive on integrated resourceplanning (IRP), aiming to introduce rational planning techniques in theelectricity and gas distribution sectors, is "unnecessary, potentiallyharmful and discriminatory, as far as gas is concerned" according tothe European Union of the Natural Gas Industry, Eurogas.The group calls for the directive to be withdrawn and for EU policy tofocus on developing economic conditions, to encourage energy efficiencythrough a competitive, commercial market structure.Eurogas' main objection to the IRP directive proposal, which coversrational planning activities in both the gas and electricity sectors,is that it fails to take account of recent efforts by the gas industryto increase efficient, economic and environmentally acceptable energysupply and consumption.These include end-user instruction on efficient energy use, thepromotion of energy audits, R&D into and increased use of energyefficient appliances and plant, and cooperation with the constructionindustry to encourage energy efficient housing, according to Eurogas.Eurogas also believes an IRP directive is "potentially harmful" sinceit threatens to intervene in market conditions where the need foradditional regulation is "not explained or documented".  In particular,Eurogas says, commercial competition encourages the development ofefficient energy services, especially where companies must competeagainst other energies to offer "best economic conditions to theircustomers' needs, which includes energy efficiency and low cost, andwhich applies to gas as much as to the alternative fuels".Furthermore, the proposal is unfairly biased towards gas and excludesother energies which compete in the same market and on balance"contribute for each unit of energy produced more to greenhouse gasemissions", said Eurogas.  Bearing in mind that the objective of theIRP directive proposal is to reduce emissions, Eurogas feels that theenergy efficient merits of gas over other energies such as oil shouldbe given greater consideration.Finally, the group points out that the directive "ignores andmisrepresents the actual situation in the European energy market" byreferring to out-of-date studies relating to electricity.Instead, Eurogas calls on the Commission to compile a comprehensivestudy of Europe's energy market needs and of possible initiatives to"support existing policies and practices promoting energy efficiency inthe market place", with a view to publishing the findings as aCommission Communication or Recommendation.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NIE LOOKING FOR GENERATING OPPORTUNITIES IN SOUTHERN IRELANDNorthern Ireland Electricity is believed to be looking for newelectricity generating opportunities in Southern Ireland, using naturalgas.The company made a profit of #47.5m. last year and so far has beenimmune from the takeover activity affecting UK utilities.It is exclusively a distribution/sales company, with no currentgeneration capacity.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996POWERGEN CHP CONTRACT TO SUPPLY CONOCO'S HUMBER REFINERYPowerGen CHP Ltd has been awarded a contract to supply the electricityand steam requirements of Conoco Ltd's Humber Refinery.The contract, which reflects a long-term commercial relationshipbetween the companies, will involve the construction of a new gas-firedcombined heat and power plant rated at 24 megawatts electrical and over90 megawatts thermal.The CHP plant - with capital costs of almost #23 million - will featurefour independent gas turbines with back-up systems to ensure continuousrunning even when the primary gas supply is unavailable.To coincide with the plant construction, a connection between therefinery and the existing Theddlethorpe to Killingholme gas pipelinewill be installed by Kinetica, the PowerGen/Conoco joint venture.PowerGen CHP managing director Bob Kennett said: "We have broken newground in meeting the requirements of Conoco for efficient but flexibleplant.  Both parties can be confident that the energy supply willsupport the refinery's demands in future."Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996STATOIL CONSIDERING SELLING ESTUARY FUELSStatoil is thought to be considering selling its Irish oil and gas oilimporter, Estuary Fuels Ltd, which it acquired recently when it tookover Aran Energy, the Dublin explorer.Estuary is 80% owned by Statoil, with the remainder held by Irishfarmer co-ops who are thought to be keen to liquidate their holdingsand diversify into CHP.Estuary leases 44 petrol filling stations in the south and south westof Ireland and owns a further two.Two potential buyers are thought to have considered Estuary prior tothe successful Statoil bid for Aran, and Bord na Mona, the state peatproducer, is considered a likely buyer.Bord na Mona is keen to diversify into other energy markets, includinggas.  The peat company was recently freed of most of its debt mountainby the Irish government, and is managed by Dr. Eddie O'Connor, formerlyhead of energy supply purchasing at state electricity company, ESB.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NESTE TO SELL ITS 50% SHARE IN SOVEREIGNFollowing the completion of the sale of Neste's UK oil assets to SandsPetroleum AB, Neste Oy, the Finnish oil, energy and chemicals company,has agreed to sell its 50% share in Sovereign Exploration Ltd toNorthgas Ltd, a subsidiary of Northern Electric plc.In January 1994 Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gascompany based on Neste's Southern Gas Basin interests, including theVictor gas field (UK Gas Report, issue 4, 28 January 1994, page 1).In addition to Victor, Sovereign Exploration has holdings in theSchooner field which starts production at the end of 1996 and in theWindermere development.Neste has stated its intention to focus its upstream activities onNorway, the Middle East and Russia.  Coinciding with the sale of its UKactivities, Neste is relocating its international business unit (whichis responsible for activities in the Middle East) from London to newoffices in Dubai.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996IRISH BOTTLED GAS COMPANY TRADING PROFITABLYBlugas plc, the Irish bottled gas company that fell into surprise halfyear losses of Ir.#400,000 to the end of September last, now says it istrading profitably, having shed top management and drafted inaccountants to manage the company short term.However, part or the entire equity of this company may be sold.  Around70% of the equity is Swiss controlled, through Jones group plc ofDublin, with the remainder held by Irish interests.Some of this equity may be taken up by Irish state peat board, Bord naMona, already selling peat and coal to households, and keen to expandinto other energy products.Blugas has around 15% of the local bottled gas market, a fiercelycompetitive market dominated by Calor and Flogas.Calor and Flogas combined last year with Temp Technology of Dublin foran assault on the local LPG-CHP market, but Blugas was excluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996TAKEOVER OF SEEBOARD CLEARED BY IAN LANGThe takeover of Seeboard, the southeast electricity company, by Centraland South West Corporation, the US utility, has been cleared by IanLang, president of the board of trade.Lang last year surprised the City with the referral of bids fromgenerators National Power and PowerGen for regional electricitycompanies to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.He passed the #1.6 billion agreed bid for Seeboard after theelectricity regulator and the director general of Fair Trading saidthey had no objections.Seeboard recently announced a joint venture with Amoco to supply gas todomestic consumers (UK Gas Report, Issue 47, 3 November 1995, page 8).Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CEDRIC BROWN UNDER FIRE AGAINBritish Gas chief executive Cedric Brown is under fire again, this timefor the size of his pension package.It is believed he could receive a pension worth between #3.4m and#5.5m, following his substantial salary increase last year.Following a survey by actuaries Lane Clark and Peacock on pensions fortop executives in the utilities sector, the Labour Party called on thegovernment to implement the Greenbury Committee recommendations on fulldisclosure of pension costs and  entitlements.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRISTOL CITY COUNCIL TENANTS TO BENEFIT FROM NEW CHP SYSTEMBristol City Council and its tenants are to benefit from lower energybills and better heating following the installation of a new, highefficiency combined heat and power (CHP) system at the City's BartonHill estate.The project, according to the CHP Association, was supported by a grantof #75,000 from the Association's Residential CHP Programme.The new CHP system generates heating for the 715 homes on the estate,and power to offset the City Council's electricity costs.CHPA said that tenants across the city will benefit from the energycost savings which CHP's inherently high efficiency delivers to thecouncil - a proportion of the savings will be invested in furtherinitiatives by the City's Energy Efficiency Unit. Meanwhile electricitybills for the City's Council House will be reduced by an estimated#43,000 a year.The new system, opened on 7 December by CHPA vice president Peter Rost,is the latest in a series to be supported under the #2 millionResidential CHP Programme, created and managed by the CHPA for theEnergy Saving Trust.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CAMPAIGN TO WIN SUPPORT FOR DISPOSAL OF OFFSHORE INSTALLATIONSThe oil and gas industry has launched a campaign to win over publicsupport for a wide range of disposable strategies for its redundantoffshore  installations.The industry has refused to rule out deep sea dumping as an option forthe future, despite the Greenpeace Campaign which forced Shell toabandon its plans to dump the Brent Spar facility. However, playershave acknowledged the need to be more transparent and open whenconsidering options."Events of the past few months have persuaded the industry that we needto do more to understand better public concerns and to encouragepositive participation on the issue," said Dr Harold Hughes, directorgeneral of the UK Offshore Operations Association (UKOOA).With over 300 oil and gas installations due for decommissioning in theNorth Sea and North Atlantic, Hughes estimated about 50 installationscould be decommissioned in the next decade at a cost of #1.5 billion.As much as half of that cost would be met by the taxpayer.UKOOA has suggested at least 75% of the installations will be disposedof on land.The European Commission will be reviewing the "economic andenvironmental aspects" of the dumping of platforms in its review thisyear.However, no decision has been made in Brussels on whether to ban deepsea dumping.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WYBREW LEADING CONTENDER FOR APPOINTMENT TO BRITISH GASWe understand John Wybrew is the leading contender for appointment tothe main board of British Gas as director of communications strategyand planning.The appointment is seen as an attempt by BG to improve its public imagefollowing a disastrous year in terms of public relations, includingchief executive Cedric Brown's salary increase.Wybrew is currently on the board of Shell UK as corporate affairsdirector.It appears Peter Sanguinetti, the current head of corporatecommunications, will remain with the company.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BRITISH GAS ANNOUNCES APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORBritish Gas has announced the appointment of Patricia Mann as a non-executive director of the company.She is currently a vice president international of J Walker Thompson CoLtd, which she joined in 1959, and director of public affairs for itsUK Group. She has wide experience of consumer affairs, competition andregulatory issues, and corporate governance.Mann has had previous involvement with the gas industry, pre and postprivatisation, having served as a member of the Gas Consumers Councilfrom 1981 -1990.She also has a wide knowledge of competition and regulatory issues,having been a member of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for nineyears from 1984-1993, said BG.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NEW CHAIRMAN OF NATIONAL CONSUMER COUNCILDavid Hatch became chairman of the National Consumer Council (NCC) on 1January.Hatch's appointment is for a term of three years, requiring acommitment of two days a week at a salary of #21,000.He takes over from Lady Judith Wilcox, whose recent appointment to theHouse of Lords was thought to conflict with her role at NCC.Hatch has been involved in the television and radio industry since the1960s.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NEW SENSOR FOR DETECTION OF FLAMMABLE HYDROCARBONSAMG Systems has developed a new sensor for the detection andmeasurement of flammable hydrocarbons.AMG says the sensor is intrinsically safe as it uses a patentedinfrared light emitting diode (LED), in place of the usual heatedfilament bulbs which themselves present an explosion hazard.The research programme received a support award from the Department ofTrade and Industry and has attracted interest and support in the US.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BORD GAIS OFFERING GRANT TO SWITCH TO NATURAL GASIrish state gas distributor, Bord Gais, is offering households a grantof Ir.#800 to switch heating systems to natural gas.This scheme is believed to be annoying the local LPG, electricity andcoal industries,who see it as an abuse of the state company's monopoly position.There is also independent criticism from builders, who claim theynotice in the course of renovation of homes that owners wastefullyleave on their central heating, even in summer.It is claimed householders are trying to use sufficient units to reachtargets set by Board Gais that bring qualification for company bonusschemes.Other critics suggest Ireland is giving little thought to likely gasprices in the decades to come, assuming a never ending era of low gasprices.Back to Headline List CopyrightUK GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996HOUSEHOLD BILLS COULD RISE BY ONE THIRDCharity Age Concern has estimated that the average household bill couldrise by almost one third this winter because of the bitterly coldweather and the addition of 8% VAT to domestic gas bills.The government has a system of cold weather payments for householdswhich are payable when the temperature falls to freezing for sevenconsecutive days.However, only certain people are eligible for the #8.50 allowance.To qualify for the payment, recipients must be claiming income supportand either 60 or over and claiming the basic state pension, disabled orliving with a disabled person, or with a dependent child under five.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-19IA086-000616-B015-130http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey55.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001844 text/html 16390HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:16:53 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:52 GMTContent-length: 16203Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey55.html Sample Issue Copyright U.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TESORO RE-ASSURES JOBBERS FOLLOWING BOARD OVERTHROW THREAT (260 words) GREENS SLAM ELECTRIC CAR DELAY (222 words) DEALERS ASK COURT TO STOP BELOW-COST (276 words) SUWANNEE SWIFTY EXITS ALA. (171 words) ALTERNATE FUELS MAY GET VASTLY CHEAPER COMPETITOR (507 words) GULF NABS 60 MM GAL. DEAL (59 words) TOP CHEMIST, JOBBER: CLEAN ENGINE BEATS ALTERNATE FUEL (540 words) NEWS BRIEFS (94 words) CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TESORO RE-ASSURES JOBBERS FOLLOWING BOARD OVERTHROW THREATDissident shareholders may push Tesoro to sell refiningdivision, following move to oust entire board of directors.Bid, led by Lafayette, La.-based Stone Energy Corp. chairmanJames H. Stone, seeks to improve company value through increasedstock price.To reach that goal, group would install handpicked board andlikely sell off Tesoro's refinery business to focus instead onexploration and production, according to papers filed withSecurities & Exchange Commission Dec. 26.Shareholder action comes on heels of company decision to pullout of California market (OW 12/25).Company shuts down terminals at Sacramento, Calif., (172,000barrels) and Stockton (57,000 bbl.) by mid-January.Meantime, Tesoro's branded push in Pacific Northwest (OW 7/3)shouldn't be affected by legal swirl.Several Tesoro jobbers in Oregon told Oil Week last week thatcompany has assured them Tesoro flags will continue to flyregardless of shareholder suit outcome and shut-down ofCalifornia terminals."We're not concerned by news" after talking with marketing rep,jobber said.Other jobbers report sales have picked up since they rebrandedto Tesoro.Portland-area jobber Johnson Oil rebranded Astoria station inJune and followed with Seaview and Knappa sites in Fall."The brand's working," jobber said.  Johnson will rebrand fourthstation in Manzanita when it gets signage approval from citycouncil.Tesoro spokesman declined to comment on dissident shareholdersuit.Stone spokesman also declined comment.  However, Stone Energyissued statement last week saying move was part of ChairmanStone's personal investment strategy and not a company action.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREENS SLAM ELECTRIC CAR DELAYCalifornia Air Resource Board staff report recommends axing 2%electric car sales in 1998, delaying "zero-emission vehicle"mandate until at least 2003.CARB would vote on final plan in March following publichearings.Agency earlier told staff to come up with a new plan because E-car technology is too primitive, expensive and consumer-unfriendly (OW 11/27).ZEV Environmental Alliance, a "green" group favoring electriccars, fears latest CARB delay may be prelude to yet another E-car delay when 2003 deadline for 10% ZEV sales approaches.Massachusetts and New York may also delay any ZEV mandatebecause they're following whatever California does.Anti-ZEV group, Californians Against Hidden Taxes (CAHT),praises CARB staff report for axing 1998 deadline.But group says it's dismayed that CARB plan would eventuallymandate electric cars, since that would only result in a 1% airquality improvement at a cost in excess of $20 billion.CAHT spokesperson Anita Mangels says it's time for CARB to lookfor other, more cost-effective measures to clean up the air.CARB might "chicken out" on costly, consumer-unfriendly ZEVmandate as 2003 approaches, but Mangels says consumers have noassurance that.Many observers feel CARB can't mandate ZEVs in 1998 because ofgrowing voter/consumer revolt against costly, impracticalgovernment mandates and subsidies.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996DEALERS ASK COURT TO STOP BELOW-COSTBelow-cost sales fight in Southern Florida heats up, with ajobber filing a below-cost selling lawsuit against an Amocobranded retailer.Jobber, Maximo Investments, is joined by Mobil dealer JorgelinaLago, M & H Citgo, and Sunshine Gasoline Distributors in suitagainst ISJ Energy.Suit, filed in circuit court in Dade County, also names JayDavid Weinstock as defendant.Suit seeks damages in excess of $45,000 under state's Motor FuelMarketing Practices Act.Sunshine owns and manages Miami Palm Plaza Mobil with Lago as acontract operator.Sunshine also provides management services for a Miami-areaCitgo station owned by Maximo.M & H Citgo is a contract operator for Maximo's station.ISJ owns an Amoco branded station nearby, managed by Weinstock.Florida law prohibits below-cost sales where the effect injurescompetition.  Retailers are, however, allowed to sell belowtheir cost in order to meet competition.Suit alleges Amoco station has sold between 7-11 cents/gal.below cost on all grades since November 1.That's in a market where dealer laid-in cost was about$1.059/gallon for regular unleaded and retailers were sellingfor 99.9 cents/gal.Suit seeks actual damages in excess of $15,000, plus attorney'sfees.  Suit also seeks injunctive relief.ISJ signed consent decree with attorney general in 1992 forbelow-cost selling at another Amoco branded outlet.In light of alleged violation of consent decree, suit requestscourt treble actual damages.Retailers in Southern Florida complain Attorney General rarelyenforces below-cost law because it is unpopular politically.So, jobbers and dealers are taking matters into their own handsin the courts.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SUWANNEE SWIFTY EXITS ALA.Florida-based C-store chain Suwannee Swifty completes exit fromAlabama with sale of four stores to Griffin, Ga.-basedPetroSouth.PetroSouth, which operates about 135 units in Alabama andGeorgia, will rebrand the sites to Citgo or its own brand,company says.Sites will be rebranded first quarter 1996.Buy is part of PetroSouth's goal to grow by at least 50locations by end of 1996.Company plans to move into in Florida early 1996.Meantime, Suwannee Swifty's exit from Alabama is part ofcompany's plan to focus on core markets, company says.Company raised eyebrows in Tallahassee, Fla. this month when itclosed three stores overnight.One store still had help wanted sign in window, while anotherhad a happy holidays sign on reader board.Suwannee Swifty says closures were planned.Company says although it is consolidating now, it expects tostart growing in core markets early in 1996.Company now operates about 200 stores in South Georgia andNorthern Florida.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ALTERNATE FUELS MAY GET VASTLY CHEAPER COMPETITOREngine/heavy equipment giant Caterpillar takes another bigstride in quest to prove its "A-21" naptha/water/surfactantemulsion as a clean, cheap alternate fuel.Fuel has made headlines since Caterpillar's announcement lastyear of a scientific breakthrough with new fuel, invented byscientist Rudolph Gunnerman of A-55/Advanced Fuels of Reno,Nevada.Fuel is an emulsion of about half water and half petroleumnaptha; large-volume production eventually would cost about 35cents/gallon ex-tax at refinery gate.Plus, fuel would get about same mileage as conventional dieselor gasoline, according to company test results submitted toNevada Bureau of Air Quality.Fuel would require no changes to oil industry distributionstructure and only minor, relatively cheap changes to engines.Fuel also would save refiners from further costly upgrades torefineries and eliminate costlier alternate-fuel competitors.Few details about the fuel have emerged since initialannouncement.However, Nevada just certified A-21 fuel for use as a cleanalternative fuel, with a ringing endorsement from Gov. BobMiller.Now, Nevada State Energy Office says it's pushing fordemonstration of A-21-fueled power generator at a new alternate-fuels facility, formerly the nuclear Nevada Test Site.Still, Caterpillar has yet to register A-21 fuel with EPA or getit certified by federal Dept. of Energy as an "alternate fuel"that fleets could use to meet costly Energy Policy Act mandates.But company officials met with DOE Secretary Hazel O'Learyrecently, and a DOE policy office has begun to take a look atthe fuel, we've learned.Meantime, several demonstration test projects are underway, someinvolving stationary engines and some involving motor vehicles.Test results submitted to state of Nevada for designating A-21as an "alternate fuel" describe fuel as an emulsion of 52% water(by weight) and 48% hydrocarbon plus 0.5% hydrocarbon surfactantholding fuel in stable emulsion.Fuel could be used in either spark or compression-ignitionengines.Spokesman for Advanced Fuels, Caterpillar's joint-venturepartner in fuel, says water emulsion keeps engine temperaturedown, allowing slower, more complete combustion and much loweremissions.  Similar principle was used in World War IIairplanes.A nickel catalyst installed in cylinder, possibly employing asmall nickel plate or a nickel spark plug, might promotecombustion of hydrogen molecules in water-fuel emulsion, or sotheorizes fuel's inventor.In any case, water vapor is a major component of tailpipe gases,even if water molecules actually provide little or no energy.Test results submitted to Nevada Bureau of Air Quality show fuelpasses California's tough Phase 2 emission regs and EPA's toughnew regs for diesel engine emissions.Assuming fuel passes federal regulatory hurdles, marketing wouldinitially target diesel fleets, then any fleets in areasaffected by "alternate fuels" mandates.Fuel would require dedicated tank storage.  In extra-cold areas,fuel may require some ethanol blending to prevent icing.If demand grows enough, then shipping from naptharefiner/blenders via pipeline to terminals would become morefeasible, an Advanced Fuels spokesman says.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GULF NABS 60 MM GAL. DEALGulf Oil just inked a seven-year supply agreement with HarnedOil of Conneaut Lake, Pa., tied to station conversions of formerSunoco jobber GasOil, of Erie, Pa.Deal adds some 60 million gallons of Gulf brand gas to westernPennsylvania, including some 15 stations formerly controlled byGasOil, bought in a bankruptcy proceeding.  Harned plans moreacquisitions.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TOP CHEMIST, JOBBER: CLEAN ENGINE BEATS ALTERNATE FUELProperly-tuned cars with properly-maintained oil and fuelsystems do far more to prevent air pollution than multi-billion-dollar alternate fuels programs.That's what University of Denver chemistry professor DonStedman, inventor of increasingly-popular "remote sensingdevice" (RSD) pollution detector, has been telling EPA for years(OW 1/2/95, 2/21/94).But politicians have had more fun beating up on oil companies bymandating costly alternate-fuel programs, rather than insistingconsumers keep their vehicle systems clean, Stedman says.About 10% of cars on the road today cause most air pollution,studies show.So, detecting those "gross polluters" and then fixing them withgood maintenance would save U.S. consumers and taxpayersbillions of dollars wasted on alternate fuels and oxy-fuels.California jobber Steve Kludt heartily agrees with Stedman.That's why Kludt has been trying to get government agencies topromote good maintenance over alternate fuels.He's also prodded one local agency to test "Super Tune" oil andfuel system cleansing additive, a mixture of common, well-knownchemical solvents that he's marketed to fleet accounts foryears.Kludt agrees that well-tuned vehicles with good maintenance andregular oil changes don't necessarily need an extra dose ofcleaning solvents to cut air pollution.But some vehicles do need that extra shot of engine cleanserfrom time to time.Fleet vehicles can even extend oil change intervals, offsettingcost of the solvent additives, he says.Unlike goofy fuel-system magnets and other "secret formula"snake-oils, Super Tune is nothing more than toluene, methyl-ethyl-ketone, isopropyl alcohol and a lightweight mineralcarrying oil.Those are well-known, common oil/chemical industry solvents,Stedman confirms.While Stedman personally doesn't recommend any sort ofadditives, he concedes that perhaps 10% of vehicles mayoccasionally need something extra, such as solvents, to removepollution-causing dirt from engines.As Kludt explains, "you cannot properly tune an engine if it hascrankcase and fuel system deposits."Cleaning those systems, properly tuning vehicle and changing oilregularly will cut pollution dramatically.Ironically, auto manufacturers now push 50,000 mile tuneups andlengthy oil change intervals.  That not only causes pollution,but could ruin engines.Planned obsolescence could explain those automakerrecommendations, Kludt says.Meantime, consumer revolt against costly alternate fuelscontinues to grow, as evidenced by more states opting-out ofcostly RFG programs and California beginning to back-offelectric-car and natural-gas-car mandates.So now may be right time for oil industry to propose far-less-costly alternatives, such as better emissions inspections, tune-ups for dirty cars and proper oil/fuel system maintenance.While many automotive aftermarket bottlers target dirty fuelsystems, "nobody thinks about crankcase deposits," Kludt says.Those deposits can foul PCV valves, which in turn cause tailpipepollution.  Proper oil changes, plus a solvent treatment forespecially-dirty cars, could clean up crankcases that cause somuch pollution.At only about $3.75 per bottle with regular oil changes,solvents such as Super-Tune could fix pollution problems a lotcheaper than $40,000 electric cars, $30,000 CNG cars or RFGgasolines costing 10-25 cents/gal. more than ordinary gasoline,Kludt maintains.Kludt also says he hopes to get more jobbers interested inpromoting maintenance over alternate fuels.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. OIL WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NEWS BRIEFS*  Circle K Xmas gives 10 shares of stock to 1,700 storemanagers to reward longevity:  Stock now trades at $25/share, sobenefit cost Circle K about $425,000.  Managers need one year'sservice to qualify.*  Marketers report Texaco selling its fuel oil companies:Star/Texaco says deals aren't final, but Global Petroleumconfirms it will buy White Fuels (Boston).  Petroleum Heat &Power confirms it will buy Texaco Home Heat (Long Island).Santoro Oil has yet to confirm buying Kelleher Oil (Providence,R.I.).  Peterson Oil (Worcester, Mass.) has yet to confirmbuying Coughlin-Donaghue.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-20IA086-000616-B015-157http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey83.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001907 text/html 68074HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:17:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:46 GMTContent-length: 67887Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey83.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 10TH CIR.: WILLIAMS BOUND TO BUY GAS BEYOND 20-YEAR TERM OF 'TAKE-OR-PAY' PACT (486 words) DC CIR. VOIDS FERC'S INTERPRETATION OF 1968 GAS SALE CONTRACT (473 words) 5TH CIRCUIT VACATES APPOINTMENT OF CAJUN BANKRUPTCY TRUSTEE (603 words) CONVICTION REVERSED IN DESTRUCTION OF KY NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION TOWER (345 words) 11TH CIR.: GA PRISON OFFICIALS DUE IMMUNITY IN POWER CONTRACT BID SUIT (405 words) DEMAND EXCUSED BY MAJORITY HOLDER'S INFLUENCE ON BOARD MEMBER, SAYS DE CT. (717 words) CA CT. GRANTS JUDGMENT FOR DEFENSE IN OFFICE EMF EXPOSURE CASE (852 words) CA COURT VOIDS FRAUD, CONDEMNATION, NUISANCE CLAIMS AGAINST TANC (565 words) 9TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTH ASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTE REMOVAL OR RESPONSE (906 words) 9TH CIR. ASKED TO DECIDE NGA AND 'HINSHAW' STATUS OF MOJAVE'S CA EXPANSION (771 words) CALIFORNIA SUPREME COURT AFFIRMS $1.3M WRONGFUL DEMOTION AWARD (654 words) PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTH SEEKS EXPEDITED APPEAL OF CA DEFENSE VERDICT (694 words) CA SUP. CT. TO DECIDE MOBILE HOME SUBMETER SYSTEMS RATE DISPUTE (501 words) DC CIR. REVERSES FERC'S APPROVAL OF 'BLENDED RATE' FOR MICHCON GAS SERVICE (429 words) CA SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW REQUEST FOR GAS CONTRACT DATA (839 words) NC COURT OF APPEALS DENIES EASEMENT FOR UTILITY INSTALLATION (284 words) CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199610TH CIR.: WILLIAMS BOUNDTO BUY GAS BEYOND 20-YEARTERM OF 'TAKE-OR-PAY' PACT     The 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 5 that,under the terms of a 20-year "take-or-pay" natural gas purchasecontract forged in 1982, Williams Natural Gas Co. is obliged tocontinue buying gas beyond the contract period if the plaintiffsellers do not revise prices or contract terms.  Talus PropertiesLimited Partnership et al. v. Williams Natural Gas Co., No. 95-1056 (10th Cir.).     Seeking reversal of a U.S. District Court ruling affirmingthe validity of the contracts with plaintiffs Yuma County OilCo., Talus Properties Limited Partnership and others for naturalgas produced in Yuma County, CO, Williams argued that theagreements were ambiguous.  Williams said the U.S. District Courtfor the District of Colorado erred in rejecting its request toenter extrinsic evidence of the parties' intent to remedy theambiguity.  It also said the trial judge erred in not reachingits claim in favor of reformation of the agreements.     In a non-binding order and judgment, the 10th Circuit saidthe contracts were clear and unambiguous.  "The primary term ofeach of the contracts is twenty years.  Once the primary termexpires, the contract will remain in effect under the same termsand conditions, unless, during the allotted time periods, therespective plaintiffs offer to sell the defendant the gas underdifferent terms and conditions," the panel ruled.  "Because therelevant provisions are unambiguous, defendant cannot introduceextrinsic evidence to vary or contradict their terms."     The panel said Williams' purported extrinsic data is notpermitted because it is not evidence of additional contractterms.  "Under the plain language of the contracts, defendantcontinues to be obligated to purchase gas from plaintiffs afterthe expiration of the primary term unless plaintiffs offerdefendant a new price for the gas, which defendant rejects.Defendant, however, wants to introduce extrinsic evidence that itcontends establishes that defendant has no obligation to purchasegas from plaintiffs after the expiration of the primary term.Because the evidence would vary, rather than supplement, thewritten terms, it is not admissible under the guise of CO Rev.Stat. Sec. 4-2-202(b)."     The 10th Circuit's opinion, by Circuit Judge Deanell ReeceTacha, said there was no evidence to support Williams' claim thatthe contracts should be reformed because of the mutual mistake ofboth parties of not including provisions for a drop in naturalgas prices.     "The provisions at issue originated with defendant andbecame part of the final contracts without any discussion by theparties.  Nothing suggests that plaintiffs failed to consider thepossibility of future declining prices when they executed therespective contracts," concluded the court.  "To the contrary,the contracts work to plaintiffs' advantage in a decliningmarket.  Nor is there any evidence that plaintiffs knew at thetime they executed the contracts that defendant's assent to thecontracts was based on its mistaken belief that future gas priceswould not fall."Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DC CIR. VOIDS FERC'SINTERPRETATION OF 1968GAS SALE CONTRACT     The District of Columbia Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals onDec. 12 vacated a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission order thatsaid a 1975 gas sale contract between Jack Grynberg and RockyMountain Natural Gas Co. was illegal because the gas sold underthe pact was dedicated to interstate commerce in a 1968 contractbetween Grynberg and another interstate pipeline.  Grynberg etal. v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Nos. 94-1699 and 95-1134 (DC Cir.).     The court's ruling comes after both Grynberg and RockyMountain challenged the FERC's finding that since the Colorado-produced gas had been dedicated to interstate commerce, themaximum lawful price would be lower than the price paid by RockyMountain.  Grynberg contested the FERC's dedication to commerceruling, while Rocky Mountain challenged the Commission's refusalto order Grynberg to refund certain overpayments.     In an opinion by Judge A. Raymond Randolph, the DC Circuitsaid that, even in allowing jurisdictional deference, the FERC'sinterpretation of the 1968 agreement between Grynberg andMountain Fuel Co. was "not reasonable" because that contract didnot tie future production from those fields to interstatecommerce usage.  The panel remanded the case for further FERCreview without considering Rocky Mountain's petition.     "The Commission's reading of the contract is entitled tojudicial respect..., but here the Commission has gone beyond afair construction to reach a result it has not supported," saidthe DC Circuit.  "The Commission viewed the 1968 agreement ashaving dedicated all of the gas underlying the fields describedin the contract to Mountain Fuel."  The FERC, said the panel,improperly derived its finding from an introductory "Whereas"clause in the beginning of the 1968 contract which states:"WHEREAS, Seller owns or controls, and desires to sell and Buyerdesires to purchase Seller's share of gas underlying the landsand leaseholds (subject lands) described in Appendix 'A'...."     The DC Circuit said the FERC reached its conclusion based onthe introductory clause and "brush[ing] aside" a subsequent partof the contract (Article II-1) prohibiting application of the1968 contract to lands adjoining the pertinent wells.  "Ignoringthe rest of the contract, the Commission offers little more thanan assertion to support its idea that the prefatory Whereasclause defines the scope of the dedication," wrote JudgeRandolph.  "According to the Commission, Grynberg agreed to sellall of the gas underlying the subject lands to Mountain Fuel.But if the Whereas clause defines the extent of the obligation tosell and dedicates all of the gas to Mountain Fuel, what is therole of Article II-1?"     Nancy J. Skancke of Grammer, Kissel, Robbins & Skanckerepresents Grynberg.  The FERC is represented by CommissionAttorney Jill L. Hall and Solicitor Jerome M. Feit.  John T.Miller Jr. argued the cause for intervenor Rocky Mountain.  Allare located in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19965TH CIRCUIT VACATESAPPOINTMENT OF CAJUNBANKRUPTCY TRUSTEE     Holding that a trial court's appointment of a bankruptcytrustee for debtor Cajun Electric Cooperative is not in the bestinterest of the parties involved, as required under 11 U.S.C.Sec. 1104(a)(2), a divided Fifth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals onNov. 20 vacated the appointment at the request of Cajun andseveral of its creditors.  In re Cajun Electric PowerCooperative, Inc.; Cajun Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v.Central Louisiana Electric Co., Inc., No. 95-30760 (5th Cir.);see Utilities Industry LR, July 1995.     After making a threshold determination that the appointmentof a trustee by a district court sitting in bankruptcy is a finalappealable order, the Fifth Circuit ruled 2-1 that such anappointment here was wrong because it was based on the trialcourt's incorrect assumption that there was a conflict ofinterest in the makeup of Cajun's board of directors.     Cajun chose Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection aftersustaining major losses from investments in the ill-fated RiverBend Nuclear Power Facility and then being ordered to lower itsrates by the Louisiana Public Service Commission.  The courtbelow appointed a bankruptcy trustee for Cajun after boarddifficulty by board members in deciding whether to appeal the PSCorder.     Although the board voted to appeal the rate reductionruling, the trial judge said the decision was complicated by thefact that many Cajun board members were either managers or boardmembers of Cajun's 12 member companies, all of whom bought powerfrom Cajun.  A vote to appeal would mean they were attempting toraise rates for their subsidiary companies; not to appeal wouldmean added difficulty for Cajun to pay its debt obligation.  Atrustee was appointed at the request of Rural Utility Service(RUS), the federal agency from which Cajun received a $1.6billion loan to invest in River Bend.     On appeal, the Fifth Circuit majority said that theappointment of a trustee is an extraordinary remedy under Sec.1104(a)(1), one for which the moving parties failed to meet theirburden of proof.  The panel said that while the district courtoffered several reasons for its decision, they all stemmed fromthe inherent conflict between the interests of its member-customers and those of its creditors.     "However, because this inherent conflict results fromCajun's organizational structure " a structure that Congressencouraged it to adopt " the conflict is insufficient to justifythe appointment of a trustee," said the majority in an opinion byJudge Reynaldo G. Garza.  "The fact that Congress and the RUSencouraged " if not required Cajun to organize itself as acooperative leads us to believe that any conflict inherentlyarising from Cajun's organization as a cooperative isinsufficient to justify the appointment of a trustee."     "Further," the panel added, "holding that these inherentconflicts constitute cause for appointing a trustee would createa per se rule permitting the appointment of a trustee in any caseinvolving a cooperative."     Writing in dissent, Judge Emilio M. Garza disagreed with themajority's per se rule assumption, saying the trustee'sappointment should stand.     "The conflicts present in this case go beyond the 'inherent'conflicts under which all healthy cooperatives operate," he said."Presumably, healthy cooperatives do not fail to collect moniesowed by member-customers or attempt to deny member-customersaccess to information.  Nor do members in healthy cooperativesconsider strategies which seem designed to break-up and scavengethe assets of the debtor....  Once cooperative members beginworking at cross-purposes, to the extent Cajun's members have,the appointment of a trustee may be the only effective way topursue reorganization."Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONVICTION REVERSED INDESTRUCTION OF KY NATURALGAS TRANSMISSION TOWER     A divided Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 29reversed the conviction of a defendant who hired people whomistakenly destroyed an interstate transmission tower owned by anatural gas company.  United States v. Howard, No. 95-5433(6th Cir.).     The 2-1 majority said defendant Ricky Nelson Howard did notintend to destroy an interstate transmission facility but hadmistakenly targeted the wrong tower.     Howard, who owned a Kentucky cable television company,offered to pay a man $1,000 to destroy a tower operated by acompetitor, but mistakenly pointed out a nearby Columbia GasTransmission Corp. tower as the target.  That man recruited afriend to assist.  When Howard refused to pay the $1,000 feebecause the wrong tower had been destroyed, the disgruntledaccomplice contacted the FBI.     An Eastern District of Kentucky grand jury indicted allthree for conspiracy and aiding and abetting in the destructionof an interstate facility under the Natural Gas Pipeline SafetyAct (NGPSA).  The two men who carried out the destruction pleadedguilty.  A jury convicted Howard at trial before Judge Joseph M.Hood.     The Sixth Circuit reversed in an unpublished, 2-1 per curiamdecision.     Howard unsuccessfully argued the Columbia Gas tower was acommunication rather than transmission facility and was not apipeline facility under NGPSA; it had an electronic system toconvert pipeline pressures and flow rates into electrical signalsand to transmit the results to a central monitoring location.  Healso unsuccessfully argued the tower was exempt from protectionunder NGPSA because it was located in a rural area.     However, the majority said the conviction must be reversedbecause the conspirators lacked specific intent to cut down a gastower.  As a result, it said a jury could not reasonably concludethat the defendants knowingly and willfully destroyed a gaspipeline facility.     Dissenting, Judge Harry W. Wellford said the mistake as toownership of the Columbia Gas tower was insufficient forreversal.  Howard, in fact, did point out the Columbia Gas towerto a co-conspirator, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199611TH CIR.: GA PRISONOFFICIALS DUE IMMUNITY INPOWER CONTRACT BID SUIT               Although ruling that two low-bidding electric cooperativesheld a state-created property right in electrical servicecontracts granted to high-bidder Georgia Power Co. by Georgia'sDepartment of Corrections (DOC), the 11th Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals on Nov. 15 reversed a district court's denial ofqualified immunity for DOC officials and remanded the case forfurther state law action.  Flint Electrical Membership Corp. v.Whitworth et al.; Pataula Electric Membership Corp. v. Whitworthet al., Nos. 94-9199 and 94-9227 (11th Cir.).     The court's action came in the consolidated treatment ofseparate lawsuits by Flint Electrical Membership Corp. andPataula Electric Membership Corp. (the EMCs), which claimed theywere denied their due process rights to supply power to certainDOC facilities when DOC violated Georgia's State Purchasing Actand awarded the contracts to Georgia Power.     U.S. District Judge Horace T. Ward of the Northern Districtof Georgia originally dismissed the actions on the pleadings forfailure to state a claim under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 1983, holding thatthe EMCs had no federally protected property interest in thecontracts.  The 11th Circuit, in an earlier ruling, reversedJudge Ward on the grounds that Georgia law requires electricalservice contracts to be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder"whenever possible."     Holding that DOC officials should have known the arerequired to follow competitive bidding procedures, the 11thCircuit remanded the case to trial court, where DOC and GeorgiaPower, also a defendant, moved for summary judgment.  Upon thecourt's denial of all such motions, the DOC officials appealed tothe 11th Circuit.     In a per curiam opinion, the panel found that although theEMC's right to a property interest in the contracts remain, theDOC defendants are now entitled to qualified immunity due to achange in the law under the 11th Circuit's 1994 ruling inMcKinney v. Pate.  In that case, the 11th Circuit held that Sec.1983 substantive due process claims arising from nonlegislativedeprivations of state-created property interests are no longercognizable in the circuit.     The panel noted that the EMCs should have, but did not, filesuit against DOC in state court under Georgia law O.C.G.A. Sec.50-5-79, designed to challenge the issuance of improperly bidstate contracts.  "Because they failed to do so, and because therule of law announced in McKinney must be appliedretroactively..., their Sec. 1983 due process claims are notactionable," the court concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DEMAND EXCUSED BY MAJORITYHOLDER'S INFLUENCE ONBOARD MEMBER, SAYS DE CT.     A shareholder plaintiff was excused from making pre-suitdemand on the board of York Research Corp. by a Delaware statecourt judge who on Dec. 4 found that a majority of the boardlacked independence due to a dominant director/shareholder'sability to exert "considerable influence" over a swing votedirector.  Friedman v. Beningson et al., No. 12232 (DE Ch. Ct.).     In his memorandum opinion, Chancellor William T. Allenrejected a motion to dismiss breach of duty and insider tradingcharges from Delaware Chancery Court, finding that in order toallege lack of independence, it was not necessary to show thatthe swing vote director's continued employment and remunerationhinged solely on the whim of the controlling director.     At issue in the derivative suit by Irving Friedman was thedecision of York Research Corp. " a Delaware company thatdevelops, constructs and operates co-generation power plants " toissue interest-free loans to several of its directors andofficers so that they could buy large blocks of stock in thecompany.  According to the complaint, the directors and officersthen made false statements regarding revenue growth and futurebusiness prospects to inflate York's stock price and sold theirshares before announcing that revenues would be significantlybelow projections.     Friedman alleged that the defendant officers and directorsnot only misused corporate office but cost the company a $500,000settlement used to obtain the dismissal of shareholder securitiessuits in federal court in New York City.     After the suit was amended, defendants in July 1993 moved todismiss it for failure to make demand on the board beforeinitiating the action.  Friedman contended that he was excusedfrom making pre-suit demand because the majority of the threeboard members lacked both independence and disinterest.  He saiddefendant York director/president Robert Beningson was themastermind of the interest-free loan and insider trading schemeand that he exerted a controlling interest over board member JohnEllis through his control of his remuneration.     The court said it need only address the first prong of thetwo-prong test used in Aronson v. Lewis, DE Sup. 473 A.2d 805, 8(1984), i.e., whether plaintiff has alleged particularized factscreating a reasonable doubt whether those directors could, underthe circumstances, exercise a judgment on the suit and demandthat would qualify for the deference of the business judgmentrule.     "This inquiry may include the subject whether some or alldirectors are 'beholden' to or under the control, domination orstrong influence of a party with a material financial interest inthe transaction under attack, which interest is adverse to thatof the corporation," the court wrote.  "Such circumstances alonemay sometimes raise a reasonable doubt that directors in such asituation could exercise judgment on behalf of the corporationconcerning the transaction involving such dominant or influentialparty."     The court noted that the state Supreme Court held in Ralesv. Blasband, DE Sup. 634 A.2d 927, 936, that "although thedirector/officer's continued employment and remuneration did nothinge solely on his relations with the defendant directors, theofficial authority of the defendant directors 'placed them in aposition to exert considerable influence over the directorofficer.'"  Ellis's continued receipt of consulting fees,"...when considered in the context of the other facts alleged,represents a substantial interest subject to possible corporateretribution had he exercised judgment in a way displeasing to thefinancially interested shareholder/CEO," the court concluded.     The court also noted that Beningson's ties to York'sprincipal client empower him in relation to the other directors,"...since they must remain cognizant of and sensitive to hisability to affect York's business prospects."  The chancelloralso noted (1) the size of the loans " the loan to Beningson wasgreater than the company's net revenue that year; and (2) York'ssettlement of the federal class actions without any directorcontribution, despite the profits earned by Beningson.     Plaintiffs are represented by Joseph Rosenthal and John Dayof Rosenthal, Monhait, Gross & Goddess in Wilmington; and RonaldFutterman and Michael Behn of Futterman & Howard, Chtd. inChicago.     Defendants are represented by Richard Elliot Jr. and ThomasBeck of Richards, Layton & Finger in Wilmington; and RogerWaldman and Philip Zimmerman of Moses & Singer in New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA CT. GRANTS JUDGMENTFOR DEFENSE IN OFFICEEMF EXPOSURE CASE     Holding that the plaintiffs would be unable to submit causalevidence associating electromagnetic field exposure to thedevelopment of cancer in humans, a California Superior Courtjudge on Dec. 8 granted defendant Southern California Edison's(SCE) motion for summary judgment in a suit by office workers whosay they developed cancer due to the location of an SCEtransformer beneath their office.  Johsz et al. v. Koll Co. etal., No. 726765 (CA Super. Ct., Orange Cty.); see UtilitiesIndustry LR, October 1995.     Orange County Superior Court Judge H. Warren Siegel said heagreed with SCE's assertion that plaintiffs' proffered testimonywould not meet the Kelly-Frye admissibility test as laid out inthe California Supreme Court's 1976 ruling in People v. Kelly.Such testimony, which was to have been given at trial beginningthis month, he said, failed to conclusively say EMFs causedplaintiff's cancers.  The testimony expected from plaintiffs'experts Samuel Milham, M.D., M.P.H., and David Michael Ozonoff,M.D., suggested only that "there is a causal association; thatbased on statistics it 'may' be a cause," the judge ruled.     The judge added, "Statistics may lend credence to an opinionthat EMF caused plaintiff's cancers, but there is no expertopinion that it did in these cases and Ozonoff and Milham are theonly causation experts proposed by the plaintiffs on the EMFissue."     Co-defendants Koll Co. and Grubb & Ellis joined in theutility's summary judgment motion.     Plaintiffs Michael and Jill Johsz, James and ChristianneNichols, and Mary Ann Stewart voluntarily withdrew their causesof action for battery and fraudulent concealment and theirrequest for punitive damages after SCE moved for summary judgmenton Nov. 7.  Plaintiff attorney Annee Della Donna, who plans tofile a motion for a new trial this month, says the ruling doesnot affect companion cases Younkin v. Southern California Edison(see Utilities Industry LR, September 1995, P. 11,032), in whicha March settlement conference is slated, or Muir v. SouthernCalifornia Edison (see Utilities Industry LR, June 1995), whichis scheduled for trial on May 20, 1996.     The plaintiffs discounted SCE's summary judgment motionclaim that the Kelly-Frye test is inapplicable, arguing that itapplies only to admissibility of "new scientific methods, devicesor techniques" in criminal cases.  Instead, they said that theirconclusions and opinions should be judged, and are shownreliable, under the 35-year-old "Hill Criteria," developed inEngland.  The Hill Criteria, they argued, include strength,consistency, specificity, temporality, biological gradient,plausibility, coherence, experiment and analogy.     "Plaintiffs argue that the Kelly-Frye rule is not applicableto the scientific principle of whether EMF causes cancer, butrather is limited to novel scientific techniques, methods ortests," SCE responded.  "In support of this argument, plaintiffscite several California decisions which have held that the Kelly-Frye rule is not applicable to medical opinion testimony based onan examination of a particular physical or psychological injury."     "However," the utility continued, "the cases cited byplaintiffs on this point are inapposite in that the issue withrespect to Edison's motion for summary judgment is not theadmissibility of medical opinion testimony that EMF causedplaintiffs' specific cancers, but rather the admissibility ofscientific evidence on the threshold issue of whether EMF causescancer generally.  This distinction is highlighted by the factthat the expert declarations submitted to plaintiffs inopposition to Edison's motion for summary judgment do notindicate that either of the declarants have ever examined any ofthe plaintiffs in this action, but rather base their opinionssolely upon scientific literature and epidemiologic studiesregarding the health effects of EMF."     Opposing SCE's motion, the plaintiffs challenged thequalifications of defense experts Philip Cole, M.D., Chairman ofthe University of Alabama School of Public Health's Department ofEpidemiology; and Jack D. Sahl, M.S., M.P.H., Ph.D, an SCEresearch scientist since 1983.  Both men, the plaintiffs argued,"are so tied to the utility companies that their testimony is notcredible."     SCE replied, "in contrast to the declaration of Dr. Cole[that there is no causal relationship between human cancerdevelopment and EMF exposure], the declarations submitted byplaintiffs are devoid of any reference to general acceptancewithin the scientific community of the principle that EMF causescancer.  Rather than addressing the consensus of the scientificcommunity, Dr. Milham simply states that there are a number ofbiological mechanisms by which EMF 'may' cause cancer, that EMF'may' affect and compromise the immune system, and that, in hisopinion, EMF exposure promotes a number of cancers."     The plaintiffs are represented by Della Donna and Wylie A.Aitken of the Law Offices of Wylie A. Aitken in Santa Ana, CA.SCE is represented by Duncan Barr and Joel C. Lamp of O'Connor,Cohn, Dillon & Barr in San Francisco; Frank C. Rothrock andD. Susan Wiens of Palmieri, Tyler, Wiener, Wilhelm & Waldron inIrvine, CA; and corporate attorneys John Tinker and Sumner Kochof Rosemead, CA.  Koll is represented by Elliot Olson, GaryKwasniewski and Steven Di Saia of Sedgwick, Detert, Moran &Arnold in Los Angeles.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA COURT VOIDS FRAUD,CONDEMNATION, NUISANCECLAIMS AGAINST TANC     A California Superior Court judge ruled Nov. 21 that theplaintiffs failed to meet their burden of proving that theTransmission Agency of Northern California (TANC) committed fraudin refusing to disclose the potential dangers of electromagneticfields when it acquired a 200-foot-wide right-of-way across their100-acre farm in 1991.  Jess et al. v. Transmission Agency ofNorthern California et al., No. V-0072568 (CA Super. Ct., AlamedaCty.); see Utilities Industry LR, Feb. 15, 1994.     Judge Richard A. Hodge said that although TANC had a duty toinform John Jess Jr. and his wife, Nell Jess, of the "existenceof a public controversy" concerning the effects of EMF on humanhealth, TANC did not defraud the couple when TANC right-of-wayagent Robert Gray negotiated a deal to purchase the 11.4-acrestrip of land for $80,960.  Claims for reasonably foreseeablehealth hazards resulting from the placement of the 500kVtransmission line, the court added, are moot under a waivercontained in the right-of-way contract.     The fraud, inverse condemnation and nuisance suit chargedTANC with failure to reveal that the operation of the line atfull capacity would result in a 1 milligauss (mG) EMF or moreover an area of up to 600 feet from the center of thetransmission line.  The complainants said there was a diminutionof the value of their property as a result of the EMF and thatthere was an interference with their use and enjoyment of theirproperty.     Weighing the testimony of opposing property appraisers,Judge Hodge said the estimated valuation drop suggested byclaimants' appraiser Arthur Gimmy was inconclusive because itfailed to differentiate between the loss attributed to EMF fearand that due to the general installation of a high voltage lineacross a rural property.     "The court...was not persuaded that Mr. Gimmy had adequatelydistinguished loss of value from perceived health problems fromloss of value attributed to the manifold negatives otherwiseassociated with transmission lines," Judge Hodge wrote.  "In thisregard, it is important to observe that the plaintiffs negotiatedtheir easement and right-of-way contracts with full appreciationof the visual, aural, and 'convenience' negatives.  Presumably,the plaintiffs calculated these negatives in their acceptance ofthe $80,960 contract price."     The court ruled, "The fact that EMF MAY engender biologicaleffects of unknown consequence is not sufficient to establish abasis for damages.  Plaintiffs' proof of actual harm derived fromasserted biological effects of EMF has been singularly lacking inpersuasive force."     Judge Hodge concluded, "Plaintiffs have failed to meet theirburden of proof to establish fraud, inverse condemnation ornuisance.  Plaintiffs have failed to establish any damages.There is no established nexus between EMF exposure and any knownhealth hazard.  While a diminution in property value may beexpected from the proximity to EMF transmission lines, hereplaintiffs have been unable to demonstrate any diminution invalue attributable specifically  to the fear of health hazards asopposed to other of the known detriments.  Plaintiffs negotiatedand accepted a price for the easement which accurately reflectedthe damage to their property."     TANC is represented by Ivor E. Samson of Sonnenschein Nath &Rosenthal and by Valerie Smith Boyd of Marron, Reid & Sheehy,both of San Francisco.  The plaintiffs are represented by Paul N.McCloskey Jr. and John J. Keating of the Law Office of JohnKeating in Woodside, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19969TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTHASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTEREMOVAL OR RESPONSE     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 7 affirmed aWashington federal court's dismissal of a citizens' group's bidto compel the Agency for Toxic Research and Disease Registry(ATSDR) to initiate a health assessment program in the region ofthe Hanford Nuclear Reservation.  Hanford Downwinders Coalitionet al. v. Dowdle et al., No. 94-35100 (9th Cir.).     (The opinion is available from Andrews Document AccessService.)     The panel agreed that no federal court jurisdiction existedover the claim and concluded that the ATSDR's ongoing healthassessment activity in the region constituted a removal orremedial action for the purposes of CERCLA's Timing of Reviewprovision.     The litigation stems from ongoing cleanup efforts at theHanford facility in Richland, WA, which for some 30 yearsproduced plutonium for the Department of Defense.  The facilitygenerated releases of radioactive iodine and other hazardoussubstances into the atmosphere, soil and water of the region.     In 1988, the EPA proposed adding the Hanford site to theNational Priorities List (NPL).  The following year, the EPA,Department of Energy and Washington Department of Ecologyoutlined their response.  The ATSDR was assigned specificresponsibilities under the response plan to prepare preliminaryhealth assessments, and was given the discretion to expand themto full health assessments if warranted.     The Hanford site has remained the subject of continuedresearch by the ATSDR.  In 1993, the ATSDR declared the site tobe among the Superfund sites posing the greatest threat to publichealth, and has applied the results of the Centers for DiseaseControl's 1994 study to its criteria for determining whethermedical monitoring would be appropriate.     Plaintiffs Hanford Downwinders Coalition Inc. (HDC) broughtthe instant litigation in July 1993, alleging that the ATSDR hasa mandatory duty under CERCLA Sec. 9604(i)(9) to commence ahealth surveillance program in the region, including medicaltesting and monitoring for individuals exposed to radioactiveiodine.  The Eastern District of Washington granted the defense'sdismissal motion, concluding that the ATSDR's health-relatedactivities at Hanford constituted ongoing removal or responseactivity, and that the plaintiffs' claim was therefore animpermissible challenge.     Affirming, the Ninth Circuit first rejected the plaintiffs'contentions that the language of the statute supported theirconstruction of the statute.  The HDC asserted that when Congressinstructed the ATSDR to "effectuate and implement [CERCLA's]health-related authorities" in Sec. 9604(i)(1) of the statute, itmeant to distinguish these health-related authorities from"response authorities" as defined under Sec. 9604.  "There is noindication that Congress' characterization of ATSDR authoritiesas 'health related' was intended to render the Sec. 9604'response authorities' section superfluous as to ATSDR actions,"the panel rejoined.     The panel found that the language of Sec. 9604(i)(1) "shouldbe read narrowly as a means to distinguish between differenttypes of response authorities, rather than interpreted broadly asan effort to differentiate ATSDR health assessment andsurveillance activity from response actions protected by theTiming of Review provision."     Cautioning that not all Sec. 9604 "response authorities" areto be considered removal or remedial actions per se, the NinthCircuit engaged in an analysis of whether the ATSDR's conductcould be shown to be removal or remedial activity.  "The ATSDRhealth assessment and surveillance activities challenged by theHDC," the panel wrote, "are a necessary part of the government'sefforts to safeguard the public health at NPL sites....  [TheATDSR] is an integral part of Congress' effort to protect thehealth of those exposed to hazardous releases from facilitieslisted on the NPL."     The court reconciled the instant case with its holdings inDurfey v. E.I. DuPont (1995) and Price v. U.S. Navy (1994), whichdeclared that independent private actions for medical monitoringwere not removal or remedial actions.  "The reasoning in Durfeyand Price does not apply to health assessment and surveillanceactions engaged in by a governmental agency pursuant to explicitCERCLA provisions," wrote the panel.     The plaintiffs pointed to the structure of CERCLA, notingthat Sec. 9607(a)(4)(A), which provides for the government torecover "all costs of removal or remedial action," is separatefrom Sec. 9607(a)(4)(D), which provides for the recovery of "thecosts of any health assessment" made by the ATSDR.  The panelrejoined that Sec. 9607(a)(4)(D) was in fact part of the 1986SARA amendments, and "decline[d] to read the failure of Congressto accomplish the seamless integration of ATSDR provisions withthe other authorities found under subsection 9607(a)(4)(A) ascompelling proof of Congress' intent to distinguish ATSDRactivities from removal and remedial actions."     The plaintiffs also pointed to the separate treatment ofresponse costs and ATSDR costs in CERCLA Sec. Sec. 9611(a) and9611(c).  Noting the fact that the legislative history was silentas to why the distinction was made, the panel stated itsobligation "to choose the interpretation that is most consistentwith the remainder of the Act."     Having established that the ATSDR's conduct constitutedremoval or remedial action, the Ninth Circuit disposed of HDC'sassertions that the requirements of the Timing of Reviewprovision were otherwise unsatisfied.  The panel looked to its1995 holdings in MESS v. Perry and Razore v. Tulalip Tribes inconcluding that the HDC's suit was a "challenge" to the ongoingremoval or remediation.     Tom H. Foulds, Seattle, represents the appellants.     Elizabeth Ann Peterson of the U.S. Department of Justice,Environment and Natural Resources Division, Washington, DC,represents the appellees.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19969TH CIR. ASKED TO DECIDENGA AND 'HINSHAW' STATUSOF MOJAVE'S CA EXPANSION     In an intervenor's brief filed Dec. 18, Process GasConsumers Group (PGCG) told the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals to reject the California Public Utilities Commission'spetition to vacate two Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionorders asserting regulatory authority over Mojave Pipeline Co.'splanned 400-mile-plus "Northward Expansion" gas transmission linefrom Sycamore, CA to the San Francisco Bay area.  PublicUtilities Commission of the State of California v. Federal EnergyRegulatory Commission, No. 95-70611 (9th Cir.); see relatedstory, Pacific Gas & Electric v. Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission, Utilities Industry LR, June 1995.     PGCG sided with Mojave's Dec. 13 intervenor brief, whichurged the court to affirm FERC authority over the project basedon the FERC's finding that Mojave will neither be (1) engaged inlocal gas distribution and subject to state jurisdiction underNatural Gas Act (NGA) Sec. 717(b); nor (2) under PUC rule throughthe NGA's "Hinshaw Amendment" exemption.     In November, the PUC asked the Ninth Circuit to vacate theFERC orders (No. 61,194, Feb. 15, 1994; No. 61,167, Aug. 4, 1995)that rendered void a 1993 PUC order asserting PUC jurisdictionover the high-pressure line.  The FERC said it holds authorityover the line because it is designed to provide directtransportation-only service to end-users, not local distributionretail sales.     The PUC, however, says the project meets the criteria forHinshaw Amendment exemption from NGA rule, which are that,"(1) the person or facilities must either transport or be legallyauthorized to transport gas which is 'received by such personfrom another person within or at the boundary of a State';(2) 'all the natural gas so received [must be] consumed withinsuch State'; and (3) 'the rates and services of such person andfacilities [must] be subject to regulation by a Statecommission.'"     The PUC argued that "[i]f Mojave's Northward Expansionapplication were granted, both Mojave " the 'person' " and the'facilities' used by Mojave to transport gas received by Mojavein California and ultimately consumed in California, would beexempted from FERC jurisdiction by the plain language of theHinshaw Amendment.  The FERC is therefore, without jurisdictionto grant the expansion certificate requested by Mojave.  Such acertificate can only be granted by the PUC, which has certifiedto the FERC that 'it has regulatory jurisdiction over the ratesand services of the Mojave Pipeline Co. and the facilities usedby Mojave to transport gas received by Mojave in California andultimately consumed in California and that it is exercising suchjurisdiction.'"     On Nov. 14, a joint intervening brief was filed on the PUC'sbehalf by Associated Gas Distributors (AGD), the NationalAssociation of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, Pacific Gas &Electric Co., San Diego Gas & Electric Co. and Toward UtilityRate Normalization, a consumer action agency that saysresidential and small business customers have experiencedsignificant rate hikes in recent years due to interstate pipelinebypass.     AGD and the joint intervenors say the record "amplydemonstrates that Mojave's Northward Expansion project willengage in the local distribution of natural gas and is thereforeexempt from FERC regulation."  The FERC's assertion of authority,they add, is "inconsistent with the statutory language,legislative history, and case law of Sec. 1(b)."     The PGCG added on the FERC's behalf, "The proposedfacilities are not Hinshaw facilities exempt from the NGA.Mojave's pipeline crosses the Arizona-California border,and...Mojave's integrated pipeline transports gas as part of acontinuous stream of interstate commerce.  The fact that some gasmight potentially also be received from Kern River [GasTransmission Co.] in California does not change the interstatecharacter of the transportation.  In order to qualify as aHinshaw pipeline, a pipeline must operate exclusively in onestate; Mojave does not.  The mere existence of an extension orbranch located within a state does not render an integratedinterstate pipeline company a Hinshaw pipeline.  Nor wouldreceipt of gas from another interstate pipeline within the statealter the multi-state pipeline's interstate character."     The PUC brief was filed by PUC attorneys Mark Fogelman,Peter Arth Jr. and Edward W. O'Neill of San Francisco.  Mojave isrepresented by corporate attorney Michael D. Ferguson ofBakersfield, CA, and by Mary Anne Mason, Kenneth L. Wiseman, andKenneth M. Minesinger of Andrews & Kurth L.L.P., in Washington,DC.     The AGD intervenor brief was filed by Frederick Moring andAnn H. Kim of Crowell & Moring in Washington, DC.  PGCG isrepresented by Edward J. Grenier Jr., William H. Penniman, GlenS. Howard and Daniel E. Frank of Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan.All are located in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALIFORNIA SUPREME COURTAFFIRMS $1.3M WRONGFULDEMOTION AWARD     A company that demoted two employees without following theprocedures outlined in its personnel manual was ordered to pay$1.3 million in damages to those workers by the CaliforniaSupreme Court on Nov. 13.  Scott et al. v. Pacific Gas andElectric, No. S042601 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Utilities Industry LR,April 19, 1994.     In a unanimous decision on an issue of first impression, thecourt said that there was no reason why an employer's policy thatits employees not be demoted except for good cause could notbecome an implied term of an employment contract.     Plaintiffs C. Byron Scott and Al Johnson were engineers withdefendant Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E)'s technical andecological services unit when they were demoted in 1988.  Justprior to the demotion, PG&E's internal auditing department beganan investigation into Scott's and Johnson's supervisory practicesand outside business interests.  According to court documents,both men were partners in an outside consulting firm, and PG&Ehad been informed of this involvement from the outset.     As a result of the investigation, Scott and Johnson wereaccused of being negligent supervisors and of resolving againstPG&E any conflicts of interest that arose from their dualpositions as proprietors of an outside business and employees ofPG&E.  They were suspended with only a brief explanation of thecharges against them and were denied copies of the report.  Theirresponse to the report was submitted in three days, and containedextensive documentary support for their denials that they favoredvendors or employees of their outside business while employed byPG&E.     Scott and Johnson filed suit, claiming that PG&E breached animplied contract term not to demote employees without good cause.Their theory was based on the company's detailed personnelpolicies, and there was evidence at trial that PG&E intended tobind itself to those disciplinary policies.  There was alsotestimony that neither Scott nor Johnson had shown anyfavoritism.     The jury found in favor of the employees and awarded them$1.325 million in economic damages and $75,000 each for emotionaldistress.  A divided state Court of Appeal reversed, finding acontract action for "wrongful demotion" inherently vague.  Thecourt also concluded that judicial involvement in employmentdecisions short of termination would constitute an unacceptableintrusion into the employer-employee relationship.     The California high court reversed, agreeing with theplaintiffs' argument that their breach of an implied-in-factagreement with PG&E not to be demoted without good cause issubstantially similar to an action for breach of an implied-in-fact contract not to be discharged without good cause.  Thelatter cause of action was held to be enforceable in Foley v.Interactive Data Corp., 47 Cal.3d 654 (1988), noted JusticeStanley Mosk, who delivered the opinion of the court.     The principle that implied contract terms may arise from anemployer's official and unofficial policies and practices is onethat pre-dates Foley, and has not been confined to the area ofwrongful termination, said Justice Mosk.  Where an employerpromises to confer a significant benefit on an employee " such asa promise to restrict termination or provide for severance pay "it is a question of fact whether that promise was reasonablyunderstood by the employee to create a contractual obligation,said the court.  Here the jury resolved that issue in favor ofScott and Johnson.     Turning to the evidence of an implied contract adduced inthe instant case, Justice Mosk concluded that that evidence was"not merely substantial, but compelling."  He cited the companydetailed "positive discipline" and testimony from PG&E's ownhuman resources managers to support the jury's conclusion thatthere was an implied contract, and that its terms were not toovague to enforce.     Scott and Johnson are represented by Christopher Platten ofWylie, McBride, Jesinger, Sure & Platten in San Jose.  Counselfor PG&E is corporate attorney Maureen Fries in San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTHSEEKS EXPEDITED APPEALOF CA DEFENSE VERDICT     The plaintiff in a personal injury suit against the ownersand operators of the St. Onofre Nuclear Generating Station(SONGS) will petition the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsthis week for an expedited appeal of a jury verdict in favor ofthe defense after losing a bid for a retrial on Dec. 5, accordingto his attorney, Don Howarth.   James v. Southern CaliforniaEdison Co., No. 94-1085 (SD CA).     Howarth filed a notice of appeal on Dec. 22.  He said thathis client, Glen James, 63, who is suffering from chronicmyelogenous leukemia, is in rapidly deteriorating health and thathe wants to expedite the appeal on James' behalf "while it maystill do him some good."  James, an engineer, worked at SONGS inthe mid-1980s.     Howarth moved for a new trial after the eight-person juryreturned a verdict in favor of defendants Southern CaliforniaEdison and Combustion Engineering Inc. on Oct. 12.  He arguedthat the jury was improperly influenced by the O.J. Simpson trialand by juror misconduct.     Howarth argued that the verdict was against the weight ofthe evidence, that it was the product of improper passion andprejudice and that the jury improperly considered extraneous,prejudicial information.     According to the motion, one of the jurors, GenevieveFitzwater, told the others that she had received radiationtherapy for thyroid cancer and that "it had saved my life."  Inaddition, after the jurors were allowed to watch the verdict inthe O.J. Simpson case, Fitzwater also allegedly told the othersthat they must apply the same "reasonable doubt" standard used inthe Simpson murder case to the evidence in this case.     James also alleged that a second juror told a post-verdictgathering that he had made his mind up for the defense early inthe trial before all of the evidence had been presented and thathe had never wavered in his belief.     Southern District of California Judge Napoleon Jones Jr.rejected all of those arguments, finding that under the FederalRules of Evidence, most of juror Gregory Hafen's declarationsupporting the allegations of juror misconduct is inadmissible.     According to Rule 606(b), a juror may not testify toanything that may have influenced his decision duringdeliberations except on the question of whether extraneousprejudicial information was improperly brought to the jury'sattention.     Under that rule, only Fitzwater's statements about herradiation treatment and applying the reasonable doubt standardmay be admissible if they can be shown to be extraneousinformation and prejudicial by a preponderance of the evidence,Judge Jones said.     He ruled, however, that Fitzwater's alleged statements abouther radiation treatment are not prejudicial extraneousinformation but "are best classified as personal experienceapplied to the evidence in the case...."     Citing to Hard v. Burlington Northern Railroad Co., 870 F.2d61 (9th Cir. 1989), Judge Jones said, "The type of after-acquiredinformation that potentially taints a jury verdict should becarefully distinguished from the general knowledge, opinions,feelings and bias that every juror carries into the jury room."     In Hard, he said, the Ninth Circuit found that it isacceptable for a juror to use his own personal experience tointerpret the evidence in a case.  In addition, even ifFitzwater's statements did constitute impermissible extraneousinformation, the plaintiff failed to show prejudice by apreponderance of the evidence.     On the reasonable doubt issue, Judge Jones found that suchallegations are not admissible because they constitute testimonyon the mental processes of the jury.  He found no Ninth Circuitprecedence on the issue, but he cited two Fifth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals cases that hold that once a verdict is rendered,the court may not inquire into the jury's deliberative process todetermine if the jury properly followed the court's instructions(United States v. D'Angelo, 598 F.2d 1002 [1979] and Robles v.Exxon Corp., 862 F.2d 1201 [1989]).     In addition to Howarth, the Jameses are represented bySuzelle M. Smith of Howarth & Smith in Los Angeles.  SouthernCalifornia Edison is represented by Jack Reding of Crosby,Heafey, Roach & May in Oakland, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA SUP. CT. TO DECIDEMOBILE HOME SUBMETERSYSTEMS RATE DISPUTE     A consortium of California mobilehome park owners on Sept.12 asked the California Supreme Court to decide if the statePublic Utilities Commission misinterpreted the public utilitiescode in barring park owners from recovering the unreimbursedcosts of operating their submeter utility systems.  WesternMobilehome Parkowners Association et al. v. Public UtilitiesCommission of the State of California, No. S048893 (CA Sup. Ct.).     Western Mobilehome Parkowners Association (WMA) sought thecourt's review after the PUC refused WMA's motion to rehear theissue in August (Decision Nos. 95-02-090 and 95-08-056).  Thegroup, whose members operate 5,780 master-meter/submeter electricand gas distribution systems, says they have been disadvantagedby the PUC's refusal to let them recover, via rent increases,system operation costs above the discounted rate provided bytheir local utility.     WMA says that since Public Utility Code Sec. 739.5(a) doesnot expressly prohibit parkowners from recovering unreimbursedcosts, the PUC has overstepped its authority and has illegallyengaged in rent control by forcing them to make up the differenceout of their pockets.  The PUC issued the ruling after mobilehomepark residents complained they were, in some cases, being double-billed for park system maintenance costs, once in the rates theypaid and again in landlord-imposed rent increases.     The Supreme Court petition maintains that since theimplementation of Sec. 729.5(a), the submetering discountprovided parkowners "has been set based on utility comparablecosts which have been determined to be substantially lower thanthe reasonable costs of master-metered mobilehome park owners ofproviding submetered service."  It adds that "the PSC in D.95-02-090 has now decided that as between owners of mobilehome parksand residents in mobilehome parks, mobilehome park owners mustunderwrite all those reimbursed costs, that is losses incurred inowning, operating and maintaining submetered systems, WITHOUT ANYRECOURSE."     In an Oct. 16 answering brief, the PUC says the issue wasappropriately decided because Sec. 739.5 bars subsystem operatorsfrom recovery of costs above the submetering discount.  The PUCsays the legislative intent of the section was not to allow fullcompensation for subsystem operations, but to give a "sufficientdifferential to cover the reasonable average costs to master-meter customers of providing submeter service."     "Moreover," the PUC added, "the regulation may serve alegitimate public purpose in preventing the potential for thedouble recovery of costs by park owner.  The double recovery mayexist if the leases provide for rents that include the capitalcosts related to the submetered system, and these same costs arefactored into the discount received by the park owner, and thetenants do not receive a credit.  Thus, this double recoverywould be a windfall for the park owner.  The elimination of sucha windfall is a legitimate public interest."     WMA is represented by Richard L. Hamilton and James E. Youngof the Law Office of Richard L. Hamilton in Sacramento.  Theanswer was filed by PUC attorneys Peter Arth Jr. and Helen W. Yeeof San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DC CIR. REVERSES FERC'SAPPROVAL OF 'BLENDED RATE'FOR MICHCON GAS SERVICE     Siding with an ANR Pipeline Co. petition that alleged theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission arbitrarily and capriciouslyallowed Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. (MichCon) to employ a"blended rate" schedule for natural gas transport services, theDistrict of Columbia Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 12reversed the FERC ruling and remanded it for further review.  ANRPipeline Co. v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, No. 94-1705(DC Cir.).     ANR asked the court to review the FERC's decision,complaining that it violated the Commission's own anti-rateblending edict in Order No. 636.  In that order, the FERCmandated use of a straight fixed-variable (SFV) rate plan forintrastate or "Hinshaw" pipelines operating in cooperation withinterstate lines under Sec. 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of1978 (NGPA).     The panel noted that ANR opposed MichCon's use of blendedrates as an intervenor in FERC proceedings and that theCommission approved the rate plan despite ANR's insistence thatthe approach would provide MichCon the anticompetitive ability toprovide a discount in its rates under Michigan law, which isunavailable to federally ruled interstate lines.     "The reasons given by FERC fail to explain why MichCon'sblended rates would not present the ills that FERC concluded inOrder No. 636 would result from continued authority to blendrates," said the DC Circuit in an opinion written by Judge JudithW. Rogers.  On remand, said the panel, the FERC must addressANR's concerns about MichCon's use of blended rates and"...provide a reasonable justification for excluding MichCon fromthe SFV requirements, in view of FERC's conclusions about rateblending and about the necessity of the SFV rate method topromoting congressional directives for a natural gas market."     The court added that the FERC "missed the point" when itanswered ANR's rate-blending concerns by holding that ANR andother interstate pipelines can remain competitive by discountingtheir rates.  "A pipeline that cannot blend rates is unable torecover fixed costs foregone as a result of discounting itsdemand charges.  Conversely, a pipeline with the ability to blendrates can recover such fixed costs by shifting them from thedemand charge to the usage charge."     Daniel F. Collins, G. Mark Cook and Christine R. Pembroke ofThe Coastal Corp. represent ANR.  The FERC is represented byCommission Attorney Katherine Waldbauer, Solicitor Jerome M.Feit, and Deputy Solicitor Joseph S. Davies.  All are located inWashington, DC.  Intervenor MichCon is represented by corporateattorney Dennis R. O'Connell of Detroit and Steven H. Neinast ofJenner & Block in Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CA SUP. CT. ASKED TOREVIEW REQUEST FORGAS CONTRACT DATA     The California Supreme Court has been asked by two utilityconsortiums to issue a writ of mandate compelling the statePublic Utilities Commission to open its files on four SouthernCalifornia Gas Co. (SoCalGas) natural gas transmission contractsfor inspection under the provisions of the California PublicRecords Act.  Southern California Utility Power Pool et al. v.Public Utilities Commission of the State of California; SouthernCalifornia Gas Co., real party in interest, No. S049667 (CASup. Ct.).               Southern California Utility Power Pool (SCUPP) and ImperialIrrigation District (IID) comprise publicly owned utilities thatsay the PUC violated the public access provision of Sec. 6250-65when it denied their access requests as contrary to the publicinterest.  The PUC conceded that while California Public UtilityCode Sec. 489 charges utilities with the responsibility of filingand keeping "open to public inspection," rate schedules andcontracts that affect rates, SCUPP and IID, as potential SoCalGascompetitors, are not entitled to view the unredacted contracts.     Allowing the petitioners access to the proprietaryinformation on rates charged by SoCalGas under the agreements,said the PUC, would be unfair because neither SCUPP nor IID areunder PUC regulation, thus denying SoCalGas any opportunity ofrequesting inspection of their transmission agreements.  Each ofthe pacts at issue was approved under the PUC's "ExpeditedApplication Docket" (EAD) process, which allows transmissioncompanies to provide discounts for customers threatening to"bypass" the utility for another power source.     The PUC's reciprocity argument, says SCUPP/IID, is"misplaced" because "neither the members of SCUPP nor IID competewith SoCalGas to provide gas transmission service.  They operatepublicly owned electric utility systems that consume gas togenerate electricity for their retail electric customers."  SCUPPincludes the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and thecities of Burbank, Glendale and Pasadena.     The petitioners told the Supreme Court that the PUC deniedthe request despite the fact that it knew the contracts were noteligible for exemption from public inspection under the Act."For an agency to properly apply the law that it is empowered toenforce, it must first look to the language of the statute todetermine if it is clear.  If the language is clear, the agencymust apply that language," argued SCUPP and IID.  "It is notwithin the discretion of the agency to rewrite the provisions ofthe relevant statute to fit its goals.  Any actions that areinconsistent with the clear pronouncement of the legislature mustbe overturned."     In a Dec. 1 answer, the PUC said its actions were warrantedunder Public Records Act Sec. 6255, which holds that "the agencyshall justify withholding any record by demonstrating that therecord in question is exempt under express provisions of thischapter or that on the facts of the particular case the publicinterest served by not making the record public clearly outweighsthe public interest served by disclosure of the record."     The PUC contended that "SCUPP/IID can ignore Commissionorders to disclose records while demanding (as it does here) thatthe Commission order SoCalGas to disclose the very same type ofdocument.  The legislature did not intend to create unfaircompetition.  That is exactly what will happen under SCUPP/IID'sversion of the law in this case in that SoCalGas would be placedin an unfair competitive position in negotiations with SCUPP/IIDand other entities if disclosure of its similar gas contracts isrequired.  On these facts, the conclusion that non-disclosureoutweighs disclosure was lawful."     On Nov. 21, SoCalGas, as real party in interest, filed aSupreme Court brief opposing the writ petition.  It said the PUCproperly based its denial of the contract access requests on theincreasingly competitive California natural gas market.  "TheCommission's EAD decision noted that in light of the imminentthreat of bypass of historic public utility facilities (two majornew interstate pipelines have commenced service in Californiasince 1990, providing service to customers previously served bySoCalGas), the Commission determined to prevent public disclosureof the information in arrangements which could be detrimental tothe competitive position of the public utility company and itsremaining ratepayers during the period such bypass threatscontinue.     SoCalGas says the Records Act, based on the federal Freedomof Information Act, "was enacted with the clear intent to exemptfrom disclosure those documents on file with the governmentwhich, if made available, would result in business disadvantageto a company vis-a-vis its competition."  SCUPP and IID'sdiscussion of the Act, it adds, "fails to comment specifically onthe long-standing exception to disclosure for BOTH corporatetrade secrets and commercial information likely to causecompetitive harm."     The petitioners are represented by Norman A. Pederson andKirstin Porter-Whitley of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue in LosAngeles.  The PUC is represented by agency attorneys Peter ArthJr., William N. Foley and Lawrence Q. Garcia of San Francisco.The SoCalGas response was filed by corporate attorneys Daniel G.Clement and Norman J. Provost.  All are located in Los Angeles.Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITIES INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NC COURT OF APPEALSDENIES EASEMENT FORUTILITY INSTALLATION     An easement that does not expressly permit access forutilities cannot be judicially expanded to authorize installationof underground utility and telephone lines, the North CarolinaCourt of Appeals ruled Nov. 21 in a 2-1 decision.  Swaim v.Simpson et al., No. COA94-1205 (NC Ct. App.).     The majority said the easement holder is bound by theexpress and limited language of the conveyance.     Rickey Swaim was granted a recorded easement to hisresidential lot for a "right of way for ingress and egress" overa lot owned by Elmer and Joan Simpson in Yadkin County, NC.After the Simpsons refused him permission to install undergroundutility and phone lines along the easement, Swaim filed adeclaratory judgment complaint in Yadkin County District Court,where Judge Samuel L. Osborne granted summary judgment in favorof Swaim.     The Court of Appeals reversed in a majority opinion by ChiefJudge Gerald Arnold.  Once an easement is established, theeasement holder cannot change the use for which it was created ina way that increases the burden on the subservient land, said thepanel.  Allowing the location, installation and maintenance offacilities for domestic utilities on the Simpsons' property wouldincrease that burden, it said, and the easement cannot bejudicially expanded.     Dissenting, Judge Clifton E. Johnson said Swaim'sunderground utilities would not encumber the Simpsons' propertyor use of the easement.  He also said it is reasonable tointerpret the easement language as including the right to installutilities to a residential lot.     C.R. "Skip" Long Jr. of Morrow, Alexander, Tash & Longrepresented the Simpsons.  N. Lawrence Hudspeth III and DouglasP. Mayo of Shore Hudspeth & Harding appeared for Swaim.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-21IA086-000616-B015-177http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122001926 text/html 53836HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:17:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:59 GMTContent-length: 53649Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey12.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT; UTILITY REVENUES AND RATES * CONSEQUENCES OF FEDERAL UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) LEGISLATION TO UTILITIES (307 words) UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS: 1989 THROUGH 1998 (308 words) IMPACT EVALUATION OF UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS (220 words) IMPACTS OF ELECTRIC UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS ON ELECTRICITY PRICE (282 words) STUDY OF NET LOSS REVENUE ADJUSTMENTS FOR UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMS (255 words) A SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT MODEL FOR STUDYING THE DEMOGRAPHIC IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVE UTILITY RATE DESIGNS (229 words) ELECTRIC AND GAS RATES FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL SECTORS IN 1994 FOR 45 U.S. CITIES (191 words) ** ELECTRICITY; ELECTRIC UTILITIES; POWER PLANTS ** STUDY OF THE EXTENT OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN THE PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY (176 words) INVENTORY OF POWER PLANTS IN THE U.S. (102 words) ELECTRIC UTILITIES' ROLE IN BUILDING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (NII) (310 words) ANALYSIS OF THE NET ENERGY DIFFERENCES FROM DIFFERENT ELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEMS (118 words) THE WHEELING OF COGENERATED POWER (103 words) ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELD LEVELS FROM HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINES VERSUS THEIR DESIGN OPTIONS AND COST (159 words) SUPERCONDUCTIVITY FOR ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS (184 words) CONCERNS REGARDING ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFICIENCY IN COMPETITIVE POWER MARKETS (245 words) ELECTRICITY REGULATION IN GERMANY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE EUROPEAN MARKET (330 words) HOW A SMALL ENVIRONMENTAL GROUP HELPED REFORM ELECTRIC UTILITY REGULATION (163 words) ** HEATING; COOLING; HEAT TRANSFER; COMBUSTION ** INDUSTRIAL MICROWAVE HEATING AND EQUIPMENT (134 words) THERMAL BARRIER COATINGS (172 words) ** TRANSPORTATION ENERGY ** THE TRANSPORTATION ENERGY DATA BOOK (167 words) FLEET DEMONSTRATION OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS FOR VEHICLES (107 words) INTERNATIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE PROGRAMS AND POLICIES AND THEIR LIKELY CONSEQUENCES (97 words) A NATURAL GAS CONVERSION VEHICLE PROJECT FOR MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (125 words) ** ALCOHOL AS A FUEL ** DIRECT CONVERSION OF METHANE TO METHANOL (129 words) THE NET ENERGY BALANCE OF CORN ETHANOL (130 words) ** SOLAR ENERGY ** SOLAR ENERGY STORAGE APPLIED TO PHOTOCHEMISTRY (149 words) REVIEW OF DOE'S SOLAR INDUSTRIAL PROGRAM (104 words) ** BATTERIES ** HIGH ENERGY DENSITY BATTERIES (224 words) DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATIONS OF ALUMINUM-AIR BATTERIES (161 words) OPPORTUNITIES FOR BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE IN UTILITY APPLICATIONS (86 words) POLYMERIC BATTERIES (128 words) MONITORING THE STATE OF CHARGE OF BATTERIES (103 words) ** NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPAN ** NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPAN (177 words) CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONSEQUENCES OF FEDERAL UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) LEGISLATION TO UTILITIESThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) paperreviews some of the potential consequences of recentfederal legislation on Demand-Side Management (DSM) toutilities.  It covers the 1992 Energy Policy Act(EPAct), the 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act, andFERC Order No. 636.  The paper: outlines the contentsof the federal legislation regarding utility DSMprograms; explains some of the impacts of these lawsand regulations on utility programs, particularly thelikely effects with respect to the emerging competitiveutility market; and seeks to understand where and howaction will be needed to carry out many of theprovisions of these laws in the most cost-effectivemanner.Examples of specific activities regarding DSM inPennsylvania are included for illustration.  Each ofthe federal laws under discussion is unique in terms oforigin, goals, and focus; nevertheless they all focuson the regulated energy industries in such a way thattheir effects tend to combine to force massive changes.In the regulated electric and natural gas industries,this synergy is compounding the complexity ofmanagement and, at least in the short term,contributing to increases in the cost of doingbusiness.  In the long term, these federal initiativesare likely to lead to a massive reassessment ofstate-regulated energy sources in production and enduse, and their environmental consequences.  The overalleffect of all three pieces of legislation is toincrease competition among the state-regulatedutilities.  The differences between competitive andregulated industries are also noted in an effort toexplain the effect of inducing competition among energyutilities.  This has particular relevance toutility-sponsored energy-efficiency programs such asDSM, and other customer-assistance activities.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960101; Mar. 1994,7 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS: 1989 THROUGH1998Over the pest five years, the Energy InformationAdministration (EIA) has been collecting data annuallyfrom U.S. electric utilities on their Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs, both current and projected.The latest data, presented in this (Oak Ridge NationalLaboratory) report, cover activities for 1993 andprojections for 1994 and 1998.In 1993, 991 utilities operated DSM programs and spent$2.8 billion, a 13% increase over 1992 expenditures.These and earlier DSM programs saved 44,000 GWh ofenergy and reduced potential peak demand by 40,000 MW,30% and 22% increases over the 1992 values,respectively.  While some people predict the demise ofelectric-utility DSM programs, the data do not paint asbleak a picture.  In most parts of the country, DSMprograms grew in 1993, and utilities (as of Spring1994) projected continued growth through 1998.Expenditures grew from 1.3% of revenues in 1992 to 1.5%in 1993, and are expected to grow 2.5% per year fasterthan inflation.  Thus, DSM spending is expected to stayconstant at 1.5% of revenues through 1998.Because of the cumulative effect of DSM programs,energy savings are expected to grow from 1.2% of salesin 1992 to 1.6% in 1993 and 3.0% in 1998.  Potentialpeak reductions are expected to increase from 5 9% ofpeak demand in 1992 to 6.8% in 1993 and 8.9% in 1998;however this growth in spending is not as rapid as the8% annual real growth projected a year earlier. Actualexpenditures in 1993 were 6.5% lower than projectedearly that year; while energy savings were the same asprojected earlier.  Potential peak reductions wereactually 9% higher than previously projected.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960102; Feb. 1995,47 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPACT EVALUATION OF UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) PROGRAMSOver the past several years, four of the largestinvestor-owned California utilities have completed morethan 50 evaluation studies designed to measure theenergy and demand impacts of their Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs.  The four utilities are:Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern CaliforniaEdison (SCE), Southern California Gas (SoCalGas), andSan Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).  These studiescover residential, commercial, industrial, andagricultural DSM programs and provide a wealth ofinformation on program impacts.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report summarizesthe results of these DSM evaluation studies in order todescribe what DSM has achieved in California.  Itassesses how well these achievements were forecast andcompares the effectiveness of the different types ofDSM programs.  It also documents the sizableinvestments made by the California utilities in their1990-1992 DSM programs.  Between 1990 and 1992, thefour utilities spent $772 million on energy-efficiencyand energy-conservation programs.  The reportsummarizes the realization rates estimated by the50+ evaluation studies.  Realization rates -- definedas ex-post net savings estimates divided by ex-ante netsavings estimates -- are summarized for 158 programsand program segments.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960103; Oct. 1994,84 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPACTS OF ELECTRIC UTILITY DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT(DSM) PROGRAMS ON ELECTRICITY PRICEAs competition in the electricity industry increases,utilities (and others) worry more about the upwardpressure on electricity prices that Demand-SideManagement (DSM) programs often impose.  Because ofthese concerns, several utilities have recently reducedthe scope of their DSM programs, or have focused themmore on customer service and peak-demand reductions andless on improving energy efficiency.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) study uses ORFIN(the Oak Ridge Financial Model) to calculate the rateimpacts of DSM.  ORFIN is used to examine the twofactors that contribute to DSM's upward pressure onprices: (1) the cost of the programs themselves; and(2) the loss of revenue associated with fixed-costrecovery.  The second factor reflects the reduction inrevenues caused by the DSM-induced energy and demandsavings that exceed the reduction in utility costs.The analysis examines DSM price impacts as functions ofthe following factors: (1) the DSM program itself,including: cost; conservation load factor; geographicfocus on deferral of transmission and distributioninvestments; and mix across customer classes; (2) theutility's cost and pricing structures, which includefactors at least partly under the utility's control,such as: retail tariffs; fixed vs. variable operatingcosts; and capital costs not related to kW or kWhgrowth; and (3) external economic and regulatoryfactors, including: the level and temporal pattern ofavoided energy and capacity costs; rate-basing vs.expensing of DSM-program costs; shareholder incentivesfor DSM programs; load growth; and the rates forincome, property, and revenue taxes.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960104; Nov. 1994,33 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996STUDY OF NET LOSS REVENUE ADJUSTMENTS FOR UTILITYDEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) PROGRAMSUtility shareholders can lose money on Demand-SideManagement (DSM) investments between rate cases.Several industry analysts argue that the revenues lostfrom utility DSM programs are an important financialdisincentive to utility DSM investment.  A key utilityregulatory reform undertaken since 1989 allowsutilities to recover the lost revenues incurred throughsuccessful operation of DSM programs.  Explicitlydefined net lost revenue adjustment (NLRA) mechanismsare the states' preferred approach to lost-revenuerecovery from DSM programs.This (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report examinesthe experiences that states and utilities are havingwith the NLRA approach.  The report: determines whetherNLRA is a feasible and successful approach to removingthe cost-revenue disincentive to utility operation ofDSM programs; identifies the conditions linked tosuccessful implementation of NLRA mechanisms indifferent states; assesses whether NLRA has changedutility investment behavior; suggests improvements toNLRA mechanisms; identifies states having NLRAmechanisms where utilities are recovering cost revenuesfrom DSM programs, through interviews of regulatoryagency staffs in these states and utility staffs infour states; analyzes regulatory agency ordersinvolving NLRA, as well as associated testimony,reports, and utility lost revenue recovery filings; anduses qualitative and quantitative indicators to assessNLRA's effectiveness. Contrary to the concerns raisedby some industry analysts, the results indicate thatNLRA is a feasible approach to the lost-revenuedisincentive.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960105; Jan. 1995,112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996A SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT MODEL FOR STUDYING THEDEMOGRAPHIC IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVE UTILITY RATE DESIGNSHistorically, utility customers have beendifferentiated into various customer classes based ontheir utility service demand characteristics.  This(Argonne National Laboratory) paper argues that greaterdifferentiation based on value and cost of service canbe justified on grounds of economic efficiency, and ifdone properly, can also promote economic equity.  Doingthis would require a break with traditional customerclassifications.  With this break, more detailedinformation on how and why certain utility services areconsumed would be required.In line with the issue of heterogeneity within theresidential customer class, is the differential impactthat different utility rates might have on differentpopulation groups.  The paper shows how differences inthe pattern of energy use may give rise to disparateeconomic impacts, depending on the rate structure, andhow more equitable and efficient outcomes might beachieved if these differences are taken into account.For this purpose, an analytical model has beendeveloped.  The Energy Policy Socioeconomic ImpactModel (EPSIM) is an econometric simulation model toassess the economic impact of utility rate designs andDemand-Side Management programs on various populationgroups.  The paper provides a conceptual description ofthe theoretical underpinnings associated with theEPSIM.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960106; 1994,11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC AND GAS RATES FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, ANDINDUSTRIAL SECTORS IN 1994 FOR 45 U.S. CITIESThis 2-volume report (by Casazza, Schultz andAssociates) contains electric and gas rates for theresidential, commercial, and industrial sectors in45 U.S. cities during 1994.  The rates were collectedfrom the utilities that serve the 45 cities involved inthe study.  These rates apply to the residential,commercial, and industrial sectors of service andinclude both general service and various innovativerate structures.  The information compiled from theutilities is compared to data from other sources toensure consistency.  Additional contacts were made withspecific utilities to resolve observed conflicts ofinformation.  The information is organized in severallengthy appendixes (A, B, and C in Volume 1, and D, E,F, and G in Volume 2) with introductory explanatorychapters in Volume 1.  Appendixes D and E provide rateabstracts for the South and West regions; Appendix Fprovides a list of known utility rate revisions; andAppendix G provides 1994 utility sales data.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960107; Mar. 1995,1011 pp. in 2 vols.  Price: $999.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996STUDY OF THE EXTENT OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN THEPRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITYThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) studyfocuses on technological change in electricityproduction.  The study is based on empirical economicresearch on production functions in the electricutility industry.  It advances a seldom used approach,called the engineering-production function, instead ofthe more common neoclassical approach used byeconomists.  Combined with this approach is a majordeparture from the type of data used to conducteconometric estimations of production parameters.  Theresearch draws upon a consistent set of ex-ante orblueprint data that better reflects planned technicalperformance and cost data elements, in contrast to themore customary expect-type of data from actual firmand/or plant operations.  The results from theexamination of coal-fired technologies indicate thepresence of technical change.  Using data for theperiod 1979 to 1989, it finds technical change to becapital-augmenting at the rate of 1.8% per year.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960108; Jan. 1995,26 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INVENTORY OF POWER PLANTS IN THE U.S.This (DOE) report provides 1993 year-end statisticsabout electric generating units operated by electricutilities in the U.S. (all 50 states and the Districtof Columbia).  It also provides a 10-year outlook offuture generating unit additions in the U.S.  The datasummarized in the report are useful to a wide audienceinvolved with governmental activities, privateindustry, personnel involved with the electric utilityindustry, and the general public.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960109; Dec. 1994,388 pp.  Price: $409.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC UTILITIES' ROLE IN BUILDING THE NATIONALINFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (NII)In two particular aspects, from a lawyer's perspective,that are briefly investigated in this (DOE) study ,electric utilities appear uniquely well-positioned tocontribute to the National Information Infrastructure(NII).One aspect concerns the legal powers that utilitieshave derived from their charters and operatingauthorities and confirmed in their rights-of-way, tocarry out activities and functions necessary fordelivering electric service.  These activities andfunctions include building telecommunicationsfacilities and undertaking information services thatare essential to manage electricity demand and supply.The economic value, to utilities and society, from theefficiencies made possible by telecommunications andinformation could be substantial.  How great remains tobe established, but by many estimates, electric utilityapplications could fund a significant share of thecapital costs of building the NII.  Although utilities'legal powers to pursue such efficiencies throughtelecommunications and information appear beyonddispute, it is likely that effort to do so will producesubstantial excess capacity.  Who will benefit fromthis excess capacity is a potentially contentiouspolitical question that demands early resolution.  Willthis windfall go to the utility, the customer, or noone because of political paralysis, or will there besome equitable and practical split.A second aspect, one of inquiry, points to anothercontemporary issue of very great societal importancethat could very well become the platform on which thefirst question can be resolved fortuitously: how toachieve universal telecommunications service.  In theeffort to fashion the NII that will now continue, waysand means to maximize the unique potential contributionof electric utilities to meet important social andeconomic needs -- in particular, universal service --merit priority attention.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960110; Nov. 1994,38 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ANALYSIS OF THE NET ENERGY DIFFERENCES FROM DIFFERENTELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEMSThis translation from Austria (the International AtomicEnergy Agency) is a report on the net energy analysisof nuclear power and other electricity generationsystems.  The report provides a comprehensive review ofthe state of knowledge on net energy analysis ofnuclear and other energy systems for electricitygeneration, and addresses traditional questions such aswhether nuclear power is a net energy producer or not.In addition, the report discusses work in progress onrenewed application of the net energy analysis methodto environmental issues.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960111; July 1994,107 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE WHEELING OF COGENERATED POWERThis (Engineering Research and Consulting Inc.) reportconcerns project considerations and design systems forthe wheeling of cogenerated power.  The term "wheelingelectric power" refers to utility transmission of powerthat it doesn't own.  The term "cogeneration" refers tosimultaneous production of electric and thermal powerfrom an energy source that, in many instances, is moreefficient and less expensive than separate productionof electricity and thermal power alone.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960112; Aug. 1994,94 pp.  Price: $119.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELD LEVELS FROM HIGH-VOLTAGETRANSMISSION LINES VERSUS THEIR DESIGN OPTIONS AND COSTThis (Argonne National Laboratory) report providesbackground information regarding electric and magneticfields (EMFs) of high-voltage transmission lines attypical voltages and line configurations and typicaltransmission line design-option costs, to assist withalternatives for environmental control of fieldstrengths.  EMF strengths up to 200 ft from atransmission-conductor centerline are calculated for:an ac overhead line; a 345-kV and a 230-kV acunderground line; and a (+ or -)450-kV dc overheadline.  Compacting and height sensitivity factors arecomputed for variation in EMFs when the line conductorsare moved closer or raised.  Estimated costs for thelines are presented and discussed, so that the impactof using alternative strategies for reducing EMFstrengths, and the implications of implementing thestrategies, can be better appreciated.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960113; Nov. 1994,74 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996SUPERCONDUCTIVITY FOR ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMSThis (NREL) report presents a program overview ofsuperconductivity for use in electric power systems.Largely due to government and private industrypartnerships, electric power applications based uponhigh-temperature superconductivity are now beingdesigned and tested, only 7 years after the discoveryof high-temperature superconductors.  Theseapplications offer many benefits to the nationalelectric system, including: increased energyefficiency; reduced equipment size; reduced emissions;increased stability/reliability; deferred expansion;and flexible electricity dispatch/load management.  Allof these benefits have a common outcome: lowerelectricity costs and improved environmental quality.The DOE sponsors research and development through itsSuperconductivity Program for Electric Power Systems,which will help develop the technology needed for U.S.industries to commercialize high-temperaturesuperconductive electric power applications.  The DOEenvisions that by the year 2010, the U.S. electricpower systems equipment industry will regain a majorshare of the global market by offering superconductingproducts that outperform the competition.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960114; Feb. 1995,12 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONCERNS REGARDING ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFICIENCYIN COMPETITIVE POWER MARKETSFor years the electric utility industry operated as aregulated monopoly, largely immune to market forcesexcept those of competing fuels.  That era came to anend with the Public Utilities Regulatory Policy Act(PURPA) of 1974, which created a market for non-utilitygenerated power. Within 20 years, non-regulatednon-utility generators have become the primary supplierof new energy resources.  Their market power is matchedby their political power, as evidenced in the EnergyPolicy Act of 1994 (EPAct) that requires open access toutility transmission lines to facilitate inter-utilitybulk power sales.Conventional wisdom regarding this issue believes thatactive wholesale power markets with competition amongalternative generators will lead to lowerpower-development costs and cheaper retail powerprices.  However, the trend towards alternative bulkpower sources at low prices intersects with largeretail power customers' interests in accessingalternative power supplies.  In many instances, thesealternatives to local utilities are at a lower costthan retail rates.For the most part, proponents of generation competitionhave remained silent about potential environmentalconsequences.  However, skeptics of increasedcompetition, including some major environmental groups,cite environmental impacts among their concerns.  This(Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) paper dealswith energy and environmental efficiency in competitivepower markets, and examines these concerns.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960115; Feb. 1995,16 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTRICITY REGULATION IN GERMANY IN THE CONTEXT OF THEEUROPEAN MARKETThis translation from Germany (Oldenburg University)concerns electricity regulation in Germany in thecontext of the European Market.  It presents a surveyof the electric power regulatory thinking and situationin Germany with respect to ongoing European Marketreform.  Electric utilities in Germany are semi-publicor private enterprises having a wide variety of size.The large producer-utilities operate the high voltagegrid on the basis of private contracts.  Regionaldistribution companies, mostly without a considerableshare in production and often in cooperation with localdistributors, deliver electricity in the non-urbanareas; whereas mostly city-owned electric utilitiessupply the large cities, often with a considerableshare of electricity produced in cogeneration plants.In the past, the equilibrium between the parts of thissystem was ensured by a legal framework that protectedlocal monopolies, as well as by long-term contractsbetween producers and distributors.  This equilibriumderived its stability from political, more theneconomic, factors.Now, deregulation trends inherent in European Marketlegislation on competition threaten this stability.  Inthe first phase of this legislation, resistance againsta more competitive order seemed unanimous.  Since thattime, however, the different players have had time torethink their positionS.  The European Council has nowproposed a more moderate regulation, taking intoaccount the large differences among the differentmember countries.  The German Government has made aproposal for some important changes in the EuropeanMarket Energy Law and connected passages in theCompetition Law, which would introduce somemore-competitive elements into the system.  Wholesaleproducers and regional distributors, as well ascustomer groups, are in favor of this reform, whereasthe local distributors fear they will become the losersin the ongoing reform process.  Environmentalistsexpress concern that a more competitive order couldlead to a lowering of environmental standards.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960116; June 1994,18 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996HOW A SMALL ENVIRONMENTAL GROUP HELPED REFORM ELECTRICUTILITY REGULATIONThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) paper tells astory about David and Goliaths; how a smallenvironmental group helped reform electric utilityregulation.  In 1991, the Land and Water Fund of theRockies (LAW Fund) -- a regional environmentalorganization -- started an energy project with twolawyers and a scientist to challenge theenergy-efficiency, renewable-resource, andenvironmental-protection practices of utilities in thevast six-state Rocky Mountain region.  Within threeyears, Colorado and Utah had adopted comprehensiveIntegrated Resource Planning (IRP) rules, and severalutilities had developed plans to expand theirDemand-Side Management (DSM) activities.  The paperdiscusses the role that this small band of lawyers andpolicy analysts played in stimulating these changes.It also comments on the substantial influence andvaluable services that such a small group can provide.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960117; 1994, 8 pp.Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDUSTRIAL MICROWAVE HEATING AND EQUIPMENTThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns industrial uses and the design of microwaveheating equipment.  Included are: heating and drying ofpaper; industrial process heat; vulcanization; textileprocessing; metallurgical heat for sintering andceramic manufacturing; food processing; the curing ofpolymers; and more.  The report consists of acollection of abstracts of available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.  It will be updatedto include the most current information available atthe time you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD508JC, minimum of181 citations as of Oct. 1994.  Price: $279.00,prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THERMAL BARRIER COATINGSThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concernschemical and physical coating methods, performanceevaluations, failure analysis, and heat and corrosionresistant applications involving thermal barriercoatings. Various coating methods are covered,including for example: plasma spraying; vapordeposition; sprayed ceramic; sputtering; and diffusion.Other topics include: coating materials; coatingprocesses and equipment; substrate-coatingcompatibility; thermal shock resistance;yttria-stabilized zirconia coatings; coating aging anddegradation; coating life prediction; and more.Applications involving hot corrosion and erosiveenvironments for gas turbines and components areemphasized.  The report consists of a collection ofabstracts of available reports, papers, studies, andother documentation, with references for theiracquisition and extensive indexing to make it easy tofind exactly what you want.  It will be updated toinclude the most current information available at thetime you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD508P, minimum of161 citations as of Nov. 1994.  Price: $279.00,prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE TRANSPORTATION ENERGY DATA BOOKThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) transportationenergy data book is a desk-top reference that presentsan assembly and display of statistics and informationthat characterize transportation activity and presentdata on the factors that influence transportationenergy use.  It presents relevant statistical data inthe form of tables and graphs.  Each of the majortransportation media is treated in separate chapters orsections.   The data book compares U.S. transportationdata with data from other countries, and presentsaggregate energy use and energy supply data for allmodes of transportation.  It covers: the highway mode,including automobiles, trucks, buses, fleet vehicles,federal standards, fuel economies, and high-occupancyvehicle-lane data; household travel behaviorcharacteristics; alternative fuels andalternatively-fueled vehicles; major nonhighway modesof transportation, including air, water, and rail;environmental issues relating to transportation; andmore.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD509L; May 1994,310 pp.  Price: $339.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996FLEET DEMONSTRATION OF ALTERNATIVE FUELS FOR VEHICLESThis (New York State Energy R&D Authority) reportsummarizes the accomplishments and results of the firstfive years of a fleet demonstration program involvingalternative fuels for vehicles.  It covers 24 majortasks involving various kinds of alternative fuels andvarious kinds of vehicles.  The demonstrations involvea wide range of alternative fuel/vehicle hardwaredesigns, software packages, operation of vehiclefleets, and the first steps to establish analternative-fuel infrastructure in New York State.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DA; Oct. 1994,87 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INTERNATIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE PROGRAMS AND POLICIESAND THEIR LIKELY CONSEQUENCESThis (GAO) report examines international electricvehicle development and commercialization programs, andthe likely consequences they will have on the futurefor electric vehicles.  The study also encompasses areview of current barriers to electric vehicleimplementation, field visits in seven nations and theU.S. to examine electric vehicle programs and policies,and analyses of electric vehicle effects on economics,energy, and the environment.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DB; Dec. 1994,138 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996A NATURAL GAS CONVERSION VEHICLE PROJECT FOR MEXICOCITY, MEXICOThis (Power Design International Inc.) report details afeasibility study for the implementation of a naturalgas vehicle conversion project for the Mexico City,Mexico metropolitan area.  It presents the results ofan extensive study done to show cause for theintegration of natural gas powered vehicles, to helpalleviate the low air quality within the Mexico Citymetropolitan area.  The report consists of:geographical information; the design and implementationof a conversion vehicle; and an assessment of theavailability and design of refueling stations.  Itcovers: diagnostics; regulations; technology; andimplementation.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510DC; Sep. 1994,221 pp.  Price: $249.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIRECT CONVERSION OF METHANE TO METHANOLThis (University of Colorado) report covers a programto demonstrate the effectiveness of a catalyticmembrane reactor (a ceramic membrane combined with acatalyst) to solely produce methanol by partialoxidation of methane.  Methanol synthesis andseparation in one step would make methane more valuablefor producing chemicals and fuels.  Both ceramic andmetal membranes are tested, and similar results areobtained.  A cooling tube is inserted inside themembrane reactor to create a low-temperature zone thatrapidly quenches the product stream.  Thisnon-isothermal non-permselective membrane reactor hasproved effective for increasing methanol selectivityduring CH4 oxidation.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510KA; 1994, 8 pp.Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE NET ENERGY BALANCE OF CORN ETHANOLStudies conducted since the late 1970s have estimatedthe net energy value of corn ethanol; however,variations in the data and assumptions used among thestudies have resulted in a wide range of estimates.This (Economic Research Service) study identifies thefactors causing this wide variation and develops a moreconsistent estimate.  It concludes that the net energyvalue of corn ethanol has become positive in recentyears due to technological advances in ethanolconversion and increased efficiency in farm production.It shows that corn ethanol is energy efficient, asindicated by an energy ration of 1.24.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960125; June 1995,22 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996SOLAR ENERGY STORAGE APPLIED TO PHOTOCHEMISTRYThis English-language report from Egypt (Ain ShamsUniversity) presents the proceedings of aninternational conference on solar energy storageapplied to photochemistry (Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 6-11,1993).  The report includes the text of manypresentations, for example: Strategies for solar fuelgeneration; Photobiotechnology: Application ofphotosynthesis to the production of renewable fuels andchemicals; Gold-platinum bimetallic cluster catalystsfor visible light-induced hydrogen production fromwater; Light-induced hydrogen production using wastecompounds as sacrificial electron donors; Purificationof drinking water by irradiation; What's new instereophotolithography?; Heterogeneous and homogeneousphoto-assisted wastewater treatment; Appliedphotochemistry in dental science; Kinetics of sunlightphotodegradation of 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuranin natural water; Supramolecular photochemistry;Luminescent and redox-active dendritic polynuclearmetal complexes; and more.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD510MB; Dec. 1993,508 pp.  Price: $559.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996REVIEW OF DOE'S SOLAR INDUSTRIAL PROGRAMThis (DOE) report on the Solar Industrial Program for1994 includes: an overview of the program and itsparticipants and objectives; solar detoxification usingsolar energy to destroy environmental contaminants inair, water, and soil; solar process heat -- thegeneration of industrial quantities of hot water,steam, and hot air from solar energy; and advancedprocesses using concentrated solar energy tomanufacture high-technology materials and to developnew industrial processes.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960127; Mar. 1995,16 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996HIGH ENERGY DENSITY BATTERIESThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concerns highenergy density electric batteries.  It covers, forexample: battery electrolyte materials, such assodium-sulfur, lithium-aluminum, nickel-cadmium,lithium-thionyl, lithium-lead, nickel-iron,nickel-zinc, sodium-sodiumpolysulfide, andalkali-sulfur; test methods for these high energybatteries; molten salt electrochemical studies for highenergy cells; military applications; and more.  Thereport consists of a collection of up to 250 abstractsof the latest available reports, papers, studies, andother documentation, with references for theiracquisition and extensive indexing to make it easy tofind exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960128A; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)A companion report (from the Energy Science andTechnology Database) covering the same subject matteris also available.  The report consists of a collectionof up to 250 abstracts of the latest available reports,papers, studies, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960128B; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATIONS OF ALUMINUM-AIR BATTERIESThis report (from the Energy Science and TechnologyDatabase) concerns aluminum-air batteries forautomotive and electric utility applications.  Thesebatteries have advantages including high energydensity, long life, light weight, and low cost.  Thereport covers many topics, for instance: controllingelectrolyte conductivity in an aluminum-air batterythrough catalytic reaction or by adding an externalcrystallizer; corrosion prevention of the aluminumalloy electrodes by adding gallium, indium, orthallium; batteries for long-range electric vehicles;battery storage systems for electric power plants; andmore.  The report consists of a collection of up to250 abstracts of the latest available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960129; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996OPPORTUNITIES FOR BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE IN UTILITYAPPLICATIONSThis (Sandia National Laboratories) report details aninitial analysis to: identify specific utilityapplications for energy storage batteries; developengineering requirements for each of them; identifyentry markets for specific battery technologies; assessnational-level benefits for each application.  Input isprovided by representatives from utilities, battery andbattery systems manufacturers, consultants, and others.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960130; Oct. 1994,67 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996POLYMERIC BATTERIESThis report (from the INSPEC Database) concerns thedevelopment, models, and evaluations of polymerelectrolyte batteries, including, among other topics:the design and fabrication of polymeric materials forlithium and solid-state batteries; applications inmarine electric propulsion and electric vehicles;microelectronics; and more.  The report consists of acollection of abstracts of available reports, papers,studies, assessments, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.  It willbe updated to include the most current informationavailable at the time you place your order.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960131; latest250 citations.  Price: $319.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996MONITORING THE STATE OF CHARGE OF BATTERIESThis report (from the Energy Science and TechnologyDatabase) concerns the use of electrical or electronicindicators to monitor the state of charge of batteries.The report consists of a collection of up to250 abstracts of the latest available reports, papers,studies, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. U960132; latest50-250 citations, updated to the date of your order.Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY REPORTER--FUELS ENERGY & POWER via NewsNetJanuary 1996NEW ENERGY R&D IN JAPANThis translation from Japan (by Japan's New EnergyDevelopment Organization) summarizes the implementationplans for R&D projects involving new energy.  Theimplementation plans cover the following energydivisions: coal conversion technology, including coalliquefaction plant development; coal-based hydrogenproduction plant development; entrained-flow coalgasification power generation plant development; solarenergy technology, including polycrystalline and thinfilm solar cell systems development; geothermal hotwater power generation plant development technology;energy conversion and storage technology, includingfuel cell power generation plants development;alcohol/biomass energy technology; geothermal energyresources development, including geothermaldevelopments, promotions, and survey projects; coalresources exploration projects in China and Indonesia;superconductivity technology; new energy promotiondepartment activities; policy planning departmentprojects; and NEDO information center activities.  Theproject themes, R&D contents, states of progress, andannual research budgets in FY 1993, are illustrated inthe report for 58 projects in 11 energy divisions.(Order this UTILITY REPORTER reviewed report fromInfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640, Plantation, FL33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305) 473-9560, Fax(954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No. UD509KB; Apr. 1993,125 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List WT02-B36-22IA086-000616-B015-190http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey14.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002014 text/html 17121HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:17:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:59 GMTContent-length: 16934Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey14.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNet March 23, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WEST AFRICAN DEEP WATER DRILLING SET TO TAKE OFF END YEAR (1160 words) OFFSHORE RIG TOP DRIVE SURVEY (788 words) NORTH SEA SEMI DEMAND TUMBLES (236 words) MEDITERRANEAN MARKET POSSIBLY NOW IN BALANCE (253 words) GULF OF MEXICO JACK-UP MARKET FUTURE UNCLEAR (198 words) CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994WEST AFRICAN DEEP WATER DRILLING SET TO TAKE OFF END YEARA new market for high specification semi-submersibles opens up in deepwater off West Africa at the end of this year.  Suitable drilling unitswill need to be brought in from outside the region to cope with waterdepths varying from 2,500 to over 4,000 feet.Co-operation is likely between the operators planning to drill during1995/6 to reduce mobilisation costs and avoid undue competition withinthe small worldwide pool of suitable rigs.  This will probably limitthe number of deep water rigs required offshore Nigeria to two - one anupgraded third generation or standard fourth generation unit operatingin intermediate water depths of around 2,500 ft, and the other aspecialist deep water rig capable of drilling in 4,000 ft or more.There are also deep water drilling programmes planned elsewhereoffshore West Africa, notably in Angola, but also in Congo, GabonEquatorial Guinea and potentially Namibia.  These could providecontinuing employment for one other deep water unit. The DP drillshipPelerin has begun to establish a foothold in this segment of themarket.Pelerin moved from South East Asia last year to drill two deep waterwells for Elf in the Congo, although the contract was terminated aftera single well.  However, after modifications in Cape Town, Pelerin willdrill two deep water wells for Shell in Block 16 in Angola starting inMay.The critical players in the Nigerian deep water semi market are Shelland Statoil, the latter operating on behalf of the Statoil/BPconsortium.  Statoil and Shell are due to drill up to six wells apiecein the period 1995 to 1997, amounting to approximately six monthsdrilling by each company per year.Initially, the two operators investigated combining their programmes,and sharing a suitable rig.  A pre-tender was issued late last year fora semi for a one year term starting at the end of 1994, with twofurther one year options. Partly as a result of this pre-tender theincompatibility of the two programmes in terms of rig specification andtiming became clear.Both operators require semis equipped with 15,000 psi BOP stacks forprogrammes starting early in 1995.  Shell plans three wells in over2,500 ft of water and one in over 4,000 ft.  Two of these are plannedto be drilled from the first quarter of 1995.  After a four month gapto early 1996, a further two wells will be drilled.  Shell is thenconsidering two further deep water wells in 1997.  In contrast five ofsix wells planned by Statoil are understood to be in around 2,500 ft ofwater, while one well in deeper water is being deferred until 1997.For its programmes in 1995 and 1996, Statoil is believed to consider anupgraded third generation semi to be suitable, whereas Shell will needa more specialised fourth generation deep water rig.  Havingestablished the mutual incompatibility of theirprogrammes, the two operators are now seeking alternative partners tofill the gaps in their requirement with a single rig contract.  Shell istalking to Esso which is planning a well in over 3,250 ft of water inthe third quarter of 1995, and could, with minor adjustment, neatly fillthe gap between Shell's 1995 and 1996 programmes.Statoil is understood to have circulated other operators with theresults of its joint pre-tender exercise with The Norwegian statecompany is expected to tender by early April for a semi to start workat the end of 1994.  As well as attempting to set up a partnership withone or more other operators, it is thought Statoil could base itscontract on anything from one to six firm wells plus options.Other operators in NigeriaOther operators planning deep water wells offshore Nigeria from the endof 1994 have already begun their own market inquiries.  This month Agiphas sought details of availability and indicative rates for a semi forone firm well plus two options starting between December 1994 andFebruary 1995 based on one of two possible scenarios.  Option A isbased on a water depth of 3,600 ft and Option B on a maximum depth of2,650 ft.  In both cases a 15,000 psi BOP, three mud pumps andchain/wire mooring with propulsion assist form the basis of therequirement.  In terms of start date Agip's plans appear to clash withboth Statoil and Shell, so some compromise may need to be worked withone or the other depending whether Agip goes for Option A or B.Among others planning deep water wells off Nigeria, Dupont has alocation in about 2,700 ft of water, although the spud is not nowexpected until late in 1995.  Elf could also drill in 1995, although ithas indicated it might be 1996 before it drills on its acreage inpermits OPL 222 and OPL 223 where the water depth ranges from 3,000 to6,000 ft.  Mobil has yet to formulate definite plans for its deep waterNigerian acreage, but has indicated it intends to work with otheroperators to ensure it has access to a suitable rig at the appropriatetime.Angolan deep water marketApart from its two wells this year with the drillship Pelerin, Shellalso plans three more deep water wells in Angola Block 16 starting inmid-1995.  While it is not yet definite that the Pelerin will beretained for this work, Shell does have options on the rig.  Subject tosuccessfully concluding its initial two well programme with Shell, thePelerin should be well placed to win a further contract with Elf whichis planning a well in Angola Block 17 in 3,300 ft of water spudding inAugust or September 1994.  Also in Angola, BP is operator on Block 15for a consortium including Statoil and Exxon where deep water drillingwill be required, although details of the start date are not yet known.Congo, Gabon, Namibia and Equatorial GuineaElsewhere in West Africa exploration is gradually moving into deeperwater off the edge of the continental shelf.  In Congo, Elf has alreadydrilled a deep water well in 1994 and could return in the next year ortwo to drill deep water well Moho-1. This had previously been plannedfor a 1994 spud.  In Gabon, British Gas could drill a well in 1995 inaround 1800 ft of water, while Shell is planning a well in similardepths on its Kenguerie Marin permit in mid-1996.UMIC/Mobil is understood to be planning a well in 1700 ft of wateroffshore Equatorial Guinea at the end of 1994.  Some acreage in therecently licensed Namibian offshore also includes deep water territory. Norsk Hydro's block is in water depths up to 6,000 ft, but althoughconsideration has been given to drilling a well in around 3,000 ft ofwater, this prospect now appears to have been dropped in favour ofconcentrating on more accessible prospects.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994OFFSHORE RIG TOP DRIVE SURVEYUse of top drives in Americas below world average.The Gulf of Mexico lags behind the rest of the world in the fitting oftop drives or power swivels on offshore rigs.  The top end of the jack-up market in the US Gulf is well supplied with top drives, as would beexpected in an area with so much development drilling.  This is not thecase for the lower specification units.  However, recent increasedcompetition, with many rigs mobilising to the area last year, shouldresult in a rise in the number of top drives fitted.Experience in the North Sea has shown that while there may well be aninitial dayrate premium gained by rigs with top drive, this disappearsas top drive installation becomes a necessity in order to remain in themarket.  All the competitive jack-ups and all the marketed semi-submersibles in the North Sea are equipped with top drive.Just under 52 % of the competitive offshore rig fleet is now equippedwith a top drive or power swivel.  64 % of semis in the world have topdrives, largely reflecting operator preference in the North Sea, wheremany semis are still based.  Only 49 % of jack-ups worldwide have topdrives, reflecting the lower percentage of rigs so equipped in themajor jack-up market, the US Gulf, and in other parts of the Americas.In India top drives are not an ONGC requirement, so statistically thereare a below average number of top drives in the Middle East/Indiaregion.  Top drives are, however, widely used in the Middle East Gulf,and to a slightly lesser extent in the Gulf of Suez.Only three drillships have top drives, just 16 % of the world fleet,principally because drillships are mostly involved in exploratoryrather development drilling.  Of the three which are fitted, Canmar hastwo, and Sonat has one on the Discoverer 534.Rigs with a higher initial capital cost and/or of a more sophisticateddesign tend to be fitted with top drive. (see table p 3)  70 % ofdeeper water jack-ups and 86 semis are equipped with top drive or a powerswivel.  Many older rigs are not marketed, and upgrades are notcontemplated, so the percentage of marketed rigs with top drive or apower swivel .  Many older rigs with top drives amongst 1st and 2ndgeneration semis and shallower water jack-ups is higher than it appearsstatistically.The provision of top drives and power swivels is dominated by Varco,which has supplied 215 or 83 % of the top drives to the offshore mobilecompetitive rig fleet.  Maritime Hydraulics is having increased success,and to date has supplied 11 % of the units to the mobile fleet.Portable top drives have been developedby both companies.  National Oilwell and ACB,  the market.A comparison of the investment which drilling contractors have made infitting top drives to offshore rigs is interesting.  Seven of the majorcontractors (managing over 80 % of their rigs equipped with top drives. This figure would be increased to eight., if Global Marine had notrecently purchased three 116 jack-ups which arees.  Although the Gulfof Mexico has, on average, a lower proportion of top drives comparedwith the rest of the world, several of these contractors have the bulkof their fleet in the US Gulf.The figures for top drives fitted by contractors is revealing aboutcontractor status in the largest jack-up market in the world: the USGulf.  Three types of controse with over 50% of their rigs equippedwith top drives: Diamond, Dual, ENSCO, Global Marine, and Rowan.  Thosethat have a few of their rigs so equipped: Chiles (although that rig iscurrently in West Africa,) Marine Drilling, and Noble; and those withno top drives yet fitted: Falcon Drilling, NR Marine and Southwestern.Competition will ensure that more top drives are bought.Explanation of definitions used in top drive tablesThe accompanying tables (in the hard copy) on pages 5 to 13, and alsoon page 3, give a 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th generation description for eachsemi-submersible.  Many rigs, however, have been upgraded to have someof the characteristics of the next generation of units; the earlierSedco 700 series being a particular case in point.  However, somesubjective demarcatioon of a generation to a semi-submersible has beenmade more on build date than on physical characteristics.Jack-ups in India have been grouped with those in the Middle East,whereas drillships in India have been grouped with those in Asia,reflecting the way the market for these two types of rigs tends tofunction.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994NORTH SEA SEMI DEMAND TUMBLESAs expected there has been a dramatic drop in the utilisation levels ofsemi-submersibles in the North Sea.  In January there were 34 semisworking in NW Europe.  This is expected to drop to 22 or 23 in the nextmonth.  With the large exodus out of the North Sea at the end of lastyear, demand elsewhere in the world for North Sea semi-submersibles hasfor the foreseeable future mostly been satisfied.  There are fewopportunities for contractors now, and lay up for most is aprobability.For the surplus North Sea semis there may be work for one in theMediterranean for Repsol off Egypt, and two deepwater units will berequired in West Africa at the end of the year.  Competition for thesewill be strong, with the West African deepwater tenders likely to bebid also by contractors with rigs in the Americas.  However, of theNorth Sea semis, West Delta is mobilising to the Far East for a onewell plus two options contract with Mobil Indonesia in 1,800 ft ofwater.  On previously awarded contracts Dan Baroness is substitutingfor Dan Countess for Unocal Trinidad, with Dan Princess now mobilisingto LASMO Vietnam, leaving the older Dan Countess stacked in UK.  Thejack-up market in NW Europe has fairly low utilisation levelsanticipated for the rest of 1994, but demand is at least expected tostay constant.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994MEDITERRANEAN MARKET POSSIBLY NOW IN BALANCEIn the Mediterranean a potential shortage of a jack-up in the area hasprobably been solved by Santa Fe which plans to mobilise Key Hawaii fora 2 well plus option contract with Samedan offshore Tunisia.  KeyHawaii is currently working for Mobil Nigeria, but NNPC paymentproblems have made it difficult for Mobil to confirm a definiteextension of a proposed contract.There are longer term tenders in the Mediterranean area, notably withTPAO in the Sea of Marmara and Agip Italy where the results are as yetundetermined.  Sonny Voss is a candidate for mobilising through theSuez Canal, if the rig is awarded work in the Mediterranean.  INA'sjack-up Labin, based in the Mediterranean, was refused work in Tunisiaat the turn of the year as a protest against political events in formerYugoslavia.  Whether this will extend to other Muslim countries remainsto be seen, but in such a small market, currently just nine jackups,this could be of importance.The award of QGPC's term programme off Qatar will affect rig contractsin the Gulf of Suez, and possibly the Mediterranean.  QGPC tenders werelodged at the end of December, and the operator is nearing a decision,but has not yet awarded the work.  Santa Fe has offered a rig to QGPC,and is apparently in competition with Maersk for the contract.  IfSanta Fe is successful it will have to mobilise a rig from outside theArabian Gulf, probably from the Gulf of Suez or Singapore.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD RIG FORECAST via NewsNetMarch 23, 1994GULF OF MEXICO JACK-UP MARKET FUTURE UNCLEARThe Gulf of Mexico jack-up market, apart from the Far East and WestAfrican floater markets, now remains the only one in the world whereutilisation in 1994 might be reasonable.  As current natural gas pricesare still well over the $2/mmbtu level, as are the futures prices, theprognosis is good.  Confidence has not fully returned to the marketafter the optimism shown at the end of 1993 before the oil price drop.Plans being formulated at the moment by many of the operators will becritical for the market.  A survey of operators' intentions wasintended earlier in the year for this issue of World Rig Forecast, butin the event, many plans were not firm enough to make a comprehensivesurvey worth publishing.With the large number of mobilisations into the Gulf of Mexico in 1993,and the heavy refurbishment programme of previously stacked units,there must remain a doubt about utilisation levels of jack-ups in 1994. The top end of the market is showing continuing strength with highspecification units being extended at end 1993 rates.  Those wishing tore-enter the market after lay-up are having to cut rates.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-23IA086-000616-B015-209http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/el05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002034 text/html 7608HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:18:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:18 GMTContent-length: 7422Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/el05.html Sample Issue Copyright THE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNet May 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ========================= CHRISTOPHER CREEK, SONOMA COUNTY--LARRY WALKER LIKES THEIR TWO REDS; CO-OWNER SUSAN MITCHELL SUGGESTS FOOD PAIRINGS; THEIR CHARDONNAY, WHICH WALKER ALSO LIKES, IS AVAILABLE ONLY AT WINERY: 707/433-2001 (478 words) 'SONOMA ODYSSEY' JUNE 1, 1996--WORTH A VISIT (179 words) MURPHY-GOODE 1993 SONOMA COUNTY FUME BLANC-- DON'T RUSH OUT TO GET IT BECAUSE IT'S SOLD OUT, BUT THEIR 1995, $10.50 IS WIDELY AVAILABLE (302 words) CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996CHRISTOPHER CREEK, SONOMA COUNTY--LARRY WALKER LIKES THEIR TWO REDS;CO-OWNER SUSAN MITCHELL SUGGESTS FOOD PAIRINGS;  THEIR CHARDONNAY,WHICH WALKER ALSO LIKES, IS AVAILABLE ONLY AT WINERY: 707/433-2001  If Rhone-style wines go out of favor in the USA, most producers ofsyrah, mourvedre, carignane and the like can go back to blending thoserich wines into their other reds.  But tiny Christopher Creek Winery, just south of Healdsburg, has betthe farm they bought almost ten years ago on petite sirah and the trueRhone, syrah, both of which win them numerous medals and much praise.Except for an acre or so of chardonnay, which is distributed mostly fromthe winery, their land is devoted to the two reds.  Larry Walker recently tasted the wines and recorded co-owner SusanMitchell's food suggestions, in the California Visitors Review, a greatweekly magazine, $40 per year from PO Box 92, El Verano, CA 95433, tel.707/938-3494, fax 938-3674 (they don't have e-mail yet, I guess).    -- The 1991 syrah, $14, brought forth from Walker's quill "lush;rich;  dark velvety fruit;  full;  layered."  Susan Mitchell, mother ofthe teen-age Christopher for whom the winery is named, says heartycassoulet is a great match.    -- The 1992 syrah, also $14, is big and powerful, Walker says-- butbecause of tasty fruit, there's a certain graceful quality about it aswell.  So Ms. Mitchell suggests "a chicken and turkey meatloaf withgarlic mashed potatoes and a green salad."    -- The 1992 petite sirah runs true to its varietal character --deeply intense, lots of flavor including a full-flavored finish, andwhat Walker calls "meaty tannins" which must mean you can pair it withsome hard-knuckled, hot-tempered foods:  sure enough, here's Ms.Mitchell suggesting pepperoni pizza!  Maybe next year it'll be perfectwith the grilled steak, prime rib or roast pork loin she also mentioned.    -- There's a 1994 chardonnay whose oak makes its statement from"behind" a citrus character.  The wine is "elegant, stylish, poised andbalanced," says Walker, mentioning a winery price of $16.  Food?Grilled chicken or light pasta dishes.  If you contact Christopher Creek, ask for their recipes matched totheir wines.  Here's one.SUSAN'S WINTER POTATO SOUP      1/4 cup olive oil        1 medium yellow onion, chopped        4 cloves garlic, finely chopped    2-1/2 lbs Yukon gold or red potatoes        3 cups chicken stock    Also, freshly-ground pepper and salt to taste      and sun-dried tomatoes, finely chopped, or fresh Italian parsley,            finely chopped.  Saute onions and garlic one to two minutes in heated oil.  Use alarge, heavy pan.  Don't peel potatoes, but wash and cube them and addthem, with the chicken stock, to the pan;  add water as necessary tocover the potatoes.  Simmer over heat until potatoes are tender, about20 minutes.  You can serve from the pot, or puree after allowing thesoup to cool a bit.  Use the tomatoes or parsley as garnish atop eachbowl, and accompany it with warm crusty bread and syrah.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996'SONOMA ODYSSEY' JUNE 1, 1996--WORTH A VISIT  Perfectly in tune with the high quality of Sonoma County food andwine, the gorgeous, even breathtaking scenery, and laid-back exurbanlifestyle of Sonoma County is its off-the-beaten-track (but not far)Sonoma Odyssey, June 1, 1996.  From 1 to 5 PM, at Richard's Grove--Saralee's Vineyard, you can meetfood and wine authors, taste premium wines from 30 producers, sampleMediterranean style foods (Sonoma County is a dead ringer for Tuscanyand a number of other "mid-earth" ambiances), buy new, used and rarebooks, and participate in an auction the nature of which-- who knows?  To get there you go north from Santa Rosa to the River Road exit of USHighway 101 (the Luther Burbank Center for the Performing Arts dominatesthe view here;  you can't miss it) and go west on River Road to SlusserRoad and turn north to number 3375.  Tickets are $20.  Information from co-sponsor the Sonoma County WineLibrary, PO Box 43, Healdsburg, CA 95448, tel. 707/433-2485.  The othersponsors are National Public Radio state KRCB-FM and PBS KRCB-TV,Rohnert Park.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FEARLESS TASTER via NewsNetMay 1, 1996MURPHY-GOODE 1993 SONOMA COUNTY FUME BLANC-- DON'T RUSH OUT TO GET ITBECAUSE IT'S SOLD OUT, BUT THEIR 1995, $10.50 IS WIDELY AVAILABLE  The Airport Club, the health facility where our family spends time andmoney (too bad the effects don't show on me), has been serving a 1993Murphy-Goode fume (sauvignon) blanc that's so good I've wanted to writeabout it.  I thought I'd wait for their 1995 to show up on the market,and taste them side by side.  Not really possible.  But a certain housestyle will connect the two, I think, and so I'll tell you the 1995 isavailable, list price $10.50, and give you the winery phone number, andlet you know what I think you might want to prepare to go with it.  The '93 probably has just a hint of residual sugar;  I can just aboutdetect it and my "threshold" is 0.03 percent.  Alcohol is 13 percent andin a white wine that level in a crisp wine can make it "hot" but I feltno such effect.  Delightful lemon and grapefruit with a background hint of tropicalfruit (typical for the Alexander Valley) come through in a wine that'scrisp from start to lemon-zesty finish.  It's so clean it would beperfect with any dish with a rich white sauce -- perhaps fettucine sosauced, with seared and braised tuna slices or chunks?  To prepare thatfresh tuna steak, I'd sear it on a bed of course-ground black pepper,remove it from the hot iron pan, reduce the heat to medium high andbraise it over lemon slices with enough of the fume blanc to come half-way up the height of the tuna flake;  remove from the pan when it seemsthe tuna will just barely begin to flake, and slice or cube it.  Alternatively you could make a lemon-garlic creamy white sauce (I useKnudsen non-dairy sour creme for that).Back to Headline List WT02-B36-24IA086-000616-B015-227http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/el01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002056 text/html 41562HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:19:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:18 GMTContent-length: 41375Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/el01.html Sample Issue Copyright VIDEO WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THIS WEEK'S NEWS * WARNERVISION ANNOUNCES BUYOUT PLANS (425 words) LARGE VIDEO CHAINS GETTING BIGGER PIECE OF PIE (971 words) NOV. VCR SALES HIT RECORD, CENSUS TOPS 150 MILLION (282 words) 16-BIT VIDEOGAMES HOLD SHARE AMID NEW FORMAT BATTLES (865 words) EASTER PROMOTIONS SPRING INTO ACTION (575 words) Trident Entertainment has entered video arena with (90 words) CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr. (75 words) Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty Morphin (60 words) A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on World (43 words) * VIDEO NOTES * Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995. Fox last (155 words) Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996 (248 words) Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with First (86 words) RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation last (85 words) Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Store (36 words) Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft. (38 words) Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settled (69 words) Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2nd (130 words) VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will be (35 words) Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it will (114 words) Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business, (92 words) Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA on (110 words) * VIDEO EQUIPMENT SALES * Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-week (179 words) * VIDEO PERSONALS * Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd., (242 words) CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WARNERVISION ANNOUNCES BUYOUT PLANS     As expected, WarnerVision Entertainment Pres. Stuart Herschwill participate in buying company he founded as A*VisionEntertainment in 1990.  Company announced agreement in principlefor Hong Kong-based Tiger Eye Investments Holdings to buy it fromWarner Music Group.  Deal is expected to close early this year.     Executives couldn't be reached for comment over holidayseason, when WarnerVision was among many industry-related companiestaking week off.  However, news of Hersch's plans had been expectedfor several months.  Fate of WarnerVision and Hersch had been inquestion since executive shakeup began at Warner Music Groupearlier last year.  Sources had posed various scenarios -- Herschleaving company altogether or leaving Warner Music but takingWarnerVision with him, as is occurring (VW Nov 6 p6).     Although ownership is changing, WarnerVision won't sever itsdistribution ties with Warner Music -- it has 4-year deal to bedistributed by WEA, sources say.  Name will be changed, though --WarnerVision name, adopted less than year ago (VW Jan 16 p5), islikely to revert to A*Vision, name with which company was foundedas affiliate of Warner's Atlantic Records.     Price Tiger Eye will pay for WarnerVision is in $50-$70million range, sources said.  Gross sales of WarnerVision, knownfor its aggressive stance in acquiring nontheatrical properties,are believed to be in $120-million range.  It has major share offitness video market and owns leading direct response fitnessequipment distribution company Fitness Quest, which it acquired in1994.  It also distributes children's, music and other specialinterest videos along with some direct-to-video movies.     Tiger Eye Pres.-CEO Robert Book will become chmn. of newcompany.  Tiger Eye specializes in acquiring media, publishing andentertainment companies.  Hersch is expected to continue to runWarnerVision.  Before founding it he was COO of King WorldProductions, serving as key figure in taking company public.     Time Warner won't lose much by selling WarnerVision, which itstill will distribute.  Although losing ownership of one videocompany, Time Warner will gain others if pending merger with Turnergoes through.  Time Warner owns Warner Home Video and HBO Videoalong with direct response specialist Time Life;  it will gainTurner Home Entertainment and New Line.       Sale of WarnerVision comes after months of turmoil inexecutive ranks of Warner Music Group that most recently resultedin resignation of Michael Fuchs (VW Nov 20 p7).  Earlier ousters atWarner Music included Doug Morris, who originally set Hersch up atAtlantic and now is at MCA -- one of possible future homes that hadbeen rumored for WarnerVision.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LARGE VIDEO CHAINS GETTING BIGGER PIECE OF PIE     Stores making up top 100 video chains now represent more than25% of the more than 28,000 video specialty outlets in U.S.,according to annual Top 100 report in Video Store Magazine.  Totalnumber of stores among top 100 chains for 1995 was 7,220 -- 24%increase over 1994.  However, total revenue for top 100 amounted to$4.06 billion, only 3% increase over $3.95 billion in 1994.     Consolidation was main reason for increase in number ofstores, report said.  Acquisition-hungry newly public chainsswallowed many smaller chains that had made Top 100 in past,leaving room for 24 chains to make list for first time.  Top 20chains earned $3.65 billion -- up $15 million in year.  Increasecame despite overall decline in video rental business, which VideoStore documents as down 6% for retailers on industrywide basis from1994.     However, average Top 100 store grossed only $568,000 in 1995-- off 16% from $679,000 in 1994.  Drop followed 3 consecutiveyears of advances.  Report said decline is "more a result of theswelling ranks of Top 100 retailers than anything else."  Increasein total stores of 24% was far greater than any in history ofreport since 1987.  Commenting on overall revenue gain of only 3%for Top 100 chains, report said that "as chains grow, it takes awhile for new stores to come up to speed."     Video revenue inched up 2% for Top 100 and ancillary revenue5%, indicating growing importance of such products as snacks,audiobooks, CD-ROMs, videogames, music, magazines, licensedmerchandise.  Biggest ancillary category, videogames, accounted for9.8% of average Top 100 store's revenue -- up 4% despite overallslump in 16-bit market.  Videogame rentals accounted for 8.3%,sales 1.5%.  Sales and rentals of laserdiscs and CD-ROMs went upslightly to 0.9% each from 0.8%;  food and drink sales were downslightly to 0.7% from 0.8%.     Percentage of average Top 100 store's revenue earned fromvideocassette rentals actually increased slightly to 77% from 76.3% after several years of decline.  Only 8.3% of average Top 100store's revenue came from video sellthrough, and almost half ofthat was from previously viewed cassettes.  Total was down 10% frompreceding year's 9.3%.     Blockbuster continued to dominate Top 100, although its powerwas slightly diluted because of challenges from newly publiccompetitors and chains hoping to go public soon.  Blockbuster'sshare of Top 100 revenue amounted to 62% in 1995, down from 67% in1994, and its gross revenues for 1995 were $2.6 billion.  Companyhad 3,350 domestic locations at year-end.     Hollywood Video, which went public in 1993, exploded to 280stores in 1995 from 97, increasing revenues to $165 million from$73 million.  Movie Gallery, which made initial public offering(IPO) in Aug. 1994, grew to 665 stores in 1995 including 90franchisees, from 279, increasing revenue to almost $200 millionfrom $90 million.  Video Update, whose IPO was in July 1994, roseto 250 stores from 45, growing revenue to $82.5 million from $26.9million.  Moovies, only chain to complete IPO in 1995(Aug.),expanded to 107 stores  from 11, with revenue soaring to $49million from $5.5 million.     Home Vision, which filed registration statement for IPO inOct. that has yet to hit market, increased its store count to 53from 38 during year, with growing to $25.5 million from $18.8million.  West Coast Entertainment, franchiser that was purchasedby smaller Giant Video in 1995, had about 500 franchised locationsthroughout year, with revenues increasing to $195 million from$183.6 million, report said, and plans IPO early this year. Roadrunner Video, which became public by merging with shell companyBusiness Data Group in July, maintained 53 stores throughout yearwith annual revenues of $22 million.  First National Entertainment,public company that originated as film distributor, purchased25-store Video Tyme of Las Vegas, with annual revenue of $13.1million.     Top 10 chains accounted for 84.8% of Top 100 revenue -- $3.44billion.  Preceding year's top 10 accounted for 83.2% of total.  Ofentire video specialty business, top 10 chains drew 39% of income,up from 34% in 1994.  Top 10, ranked by 1995 gross revenue, were(1) Blockbuster, (2) West Coast, (3) Hollywood, (4) Movie Gallery,(5) Tower Records/Video, (6) Video Update, (7) Moovies, (8) VideoConnection (recently sold to Movie Gallery), (9) Palmer Video(expected to be sold to West Coast), (10) Home Vision.     Chain with most revenue per store was tiny 2-store OdysseyVideo of L.A. -- No. 82 on Top 100 list, its locations had averagerental revenue of $1.45 million.  Blockbuster Video stores averagedhighest amount of rental income -- $645,900 per store, down from$826,300 in 1994.  Chain with highest sellthrough revenue per storewas RKO Warner Video, which ironically was forced into liquidationat year-end despite almost doubling sellthrough income to $241,500per store from $143,182 in 1994 (see separate item in this issue). Average Top 100 store earned only $37,776 from sellthrough in 1995.     Lion's share of consumer dollars spent on video sellthroughisn't claimed by video specialists.  Video Store puts totalindustry retail revenue at $14.5 billion for 1995, $8.3 billion ofit spent in video specialty stores ($7.6 billion rental and only$690 million sellthrough).  That leaves whopping $6.2 billion spentin nonspecialty outlets, most of them sellthrough-oriented.  Top 10stores of any type carrying video in N. America in 1995, accordingto report:  (1) Blockbuster, (2) Suncoast Motion Picture Co. (410stores, $280 million in video revenue), (3) Wal-Mart (2,189 stores,$271 million in video revenue), (4) K mart (2,163 stores, $249million), (5) merged Price Club/Costco (242 stores, $173 million),(6) West Coast Video, (7) Wherehouse Entertainment (327 stores,$155 million), (8) Sam's Club (433 stores, $141 million), (9)Musicland/Sam Goody (869 stores, $139 million), (10) HollywoodVideo. Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NOV. VCR SALES HIT RECORD, CENSUS TOPS 150 MILLION     Our running count of VCR sales since inception in 1975 showscumulative total U.S. sales hit 150 million in Nov. after just over20 years on market.  In other Nov. hardware news, EIA figures showdealers' purchases of VCR and several other consumer electronicsproducts set records for month despite less-than-enthusiasticestimates of holiday sales potential.     TV/VCR combo sales showed biggest advance of all -- 49.1% --but fell shy of record for month because of huge combo sales inNov. 1993.  VCR decks, achieving record, were up 23.5%.  VCR censuspassed 150 million unit mark in 4th week of Nov., reaching150,039,297 (VW Dec 11 p8).     Here's how 1995 probably will go down in record books, basedon seasonal rates for first 11 months:  Direct-view color(excluding combos), 23.56 million, down 4.8% from last year'srecord 24.71 million.  Projection TV, 828,700, big 30.3% gain over1994's record 636,177.  TV/VCR, 2,190,000, record 8.5% more than1994's 2.02 million.  VCR decks, record at 13.71 million, 4.7% over13.09 million last year.  Camcorders, 3.66 million, topping 1994record of 3.21 million by 14%.     Following is table of EIA figures on sales to dealers forNov.:     Product           Nov. 1995   Nov. 1994 % Change  Nov. 1993     Total color...... 2,830,624*  2,785,792  + 1.6  2,713,898        Direct-view... 2,724,755*  2,710,528  + 0.5  2,665,970         TV only...... 2,452,823   2,528,184  - 3.0  2,372,512         TV/VCR combo.   271,932     182,344  +49.1    293,458        Projection....   105,869**    75,264  +40.7     47,827     Total VCR#....... 1,792,885*  1,414,090  +26.8  1,501,131        VCR decks..... 1,520,953*  1,231,746r +23.5  1,207,673     Camcorders.......   409,465*    282,375  +45.0    320,468     Laserdisc players    21,830      21,349  + 2.3     21,770     * Record for any Nov.  # Includes TV/VCR combinations.  **Record for any month.  r Revised by EIA.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199616-BIT VIDEOGAMES HOLD SHARE AMID NEW FORMAT BATTLES     "Old-fashioned" 16-bit videogame systems probably will holdonto major market share even this year as manufacturers wage war ofwords, games and marketing dollars over high-powered newtechnology.     Sparking latest contretemps were comments by 3DO Chmn. William(Trip) Hawkins that internal "bus" structure of Nintendo Ultra 64would severely limit performance of system overall, and was like"squeezing a fire hose into a garden hose."     "That's bull," said Nintendo of America Sales & Mktg. Exec. VpPeter Main.  At issue is ability of Nintendo's system to moveinformation from one part of machine to another.  Some portions ofNintendo's machine use 32-bit bus structure.  Hawkins says thatwill limit system's performance, Main and Nintendo engineers sayabsolutely not.  What's clear is that such battles definitely willwind up dominating media coverage and high-end game scene -- butperhaps not dollar volume.     Introduction of Ultra 64 in Japan is absolute lock for April21, Main said.  Picture in U.S. is far fuzzier, with potentiallaunch dates ranging from May to Aug.  Some observers are bettingon spring launch themed on Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) inL.A.  If that's to be case, Nintendo is going to have to do somefast advertising footwork.  In visit last week to Nintendo'sRedmond, Wash., hq, company told our affiliated publicationConsumer Multimedia Report that no ads had been placed in game fanperiodicals, even though deadlines are drawing near.  Another signthat Ultra may come later rather than sooner:  Despite flyinghalf-dozen journalists to Redmond, Nintendo had only Ultra 64videotape to show, not game itself.     One thing is sure:  1995 was tough year for videogameindustry, Nintendo included.  "This year was called the great yearof confusion," Main said.  One big challenge:  Primary audience --8-12-year-old boys -- is getting more choosy than ever before,willing to skip products that don't offer dramatic edge inperformance and game play.  "We're dealing with 8-12-year-oldsacting like 35-40-year-olds in terms of savvy," he said.  That'sresulted in good and bad news for Nintendo -- software sales havebeen strong, but company's new hardware introduction, Virtual Boy,is struggling so hard that company is planning "relaunch" in bothU.S. and Japan.     "It was the year of hits, not bits," Main said, with winnerdetermined by "who is going to have the greatest content."  Hepointed to Nintendo's Donkey Kong Country 2 as both hit and goodsoftware product.  "Even while other software is selling at best60-70% of last year's totals, this one has worldwide demand of110-120%," he said.  One sign that strength of 16-bit market caughtNintendo as well as most of rest of videogame market by surprise isfact that DKC2 is sold out on global basis.  Main predicted 16-bitstrength would continue to lesser degree through 1996.  "At thistime next year [16-bit] is going to represent 35-40% of thevideogame market," he said.     While Donkey Kong may be doing well, rest of videogame marketisn't setting any records.  Projections were that game market wouldbe down anywhere from 5-6% to 20%, Main said.  He thinks totaldecline will come to 10-12%, with U.S. videogame dollar volume at$3.8-$3.9 million.  Once counted out, 16-bit products represent 2/3of that, he said.  Market share of 16-bit games declined to 66% oftotal sales in 1995 to 77% in 1994.  Hand-held market share alsoslumped, to 15-16% from 25%.  That still represents somesignificant volume, though.  "We've got 19 million Game Boys sold,"Main said.  "This year we'll be moving 5.7 million pieces."     New technology, including 32-bit games and Virtual Boy,account for only fraction of total market, about 19%, Main said. He estimated that fewer than one million units of 32-bit consolessold.  Of that number, Sony's Playstation accounted for400,000-500,000, Sega's Saturn for 200,000 and 3DO for 150,000,with Atari's Jaguar and other devices accounting for rest.  Bycontrast, 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment system sold 2.4million units, he said.  Virtual Boy's sales were far underexpectations, Main admitted.  "It's been a long year for VirtualBoy in the U.S."  Even though 3D game playing units have sold farunder expectations, "we are not finished with Virtual Boy," hesaid.     Nintendo has sold 400,000 Virtual Boys in U.S. and 250,000 inJapan, Main said.  Games released for unit just scratch surface ofits unique capabilities, he said.  In Japan, "they are planning torelaunch the product in February," he said, with similar relaunchset for U.S.  "It has not seen its full potential.  It is going tohave another round."     One area Nintendo isn't planning to explore is CD-ROM games. Cost structures in CD-ROM market benefit manufacturers, notconsumers, Main said.  When it comes to adding bulk memory capacityto Ultra 64, Nintendo is going to stick with recordable magneticdisc that company already has announced, he said.  Disc will moveat 8 times CD-ROM speed.  Position may leave Nintendo vulnerablewhen DVD hits market, since competing M-2 and Sony PlayStationsystems reportedly will be able to play back DVD discs withrelatively simple upgrade.  Signs are that Ultra 64, with itsproprietary magnetic discs, won't have that capability.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EASTER PROMOTIONS SPRING INTO ACTION     With Christmas over, now is time for full concentration on 2ndbiggest selling season of year -- Easter.  Suppliers readyingpromotions for Feb.-April period include ABC, Disney, LIVE,Paramount, Sony Wonder, Turner.  Easter falls on April 7 this yearand Passover begins at sunset April 3.     "Disney's Easter Video Shop" debuts Feb. 21 with collection of14 titles including 2 new to video -- The Best of Roger Rabbitfeaturing 3 "Maroon Cartoons" originally shown in theaters, and TheEaster Chipmunk featuring Alvin, Simon and Theodore.  Titles arepriced at $12.99-$14.99.  Who Framed Roger Rabbit is included atnew low price of $14.99.  Promotional support includes mail-inrefund offering savings of up to $1.50 on any greeting card withadditional purchase of one Easter video.  Buena Vista is providingoptional Roger Rabbit-themed display, reporting retailers who usedEaster display last year saw incremental sales increase of almost30% over preceding year compared with those who didn't use display.     LIVE's Family Home Entertainment (FHE) label will rerelease 10titles at $12.98 each Feb. 20 in cross-promotion with TCBY.  Amongtitles are Here Comes Peter Cottontail, The Velveteen Rabbit, Talesof Beatrix Potter.  TCBY's 1,000 stores will offer coloring sheetsfeaturing characters from FHE titles for 6 weeks;  children canredeem finished sheets for free frozen yogurt cup or cone.  Couponsfor $2 off FHE Easter videos and $2 off TCBY cake or pie will beincluded with sheets.  For whole family LIVE is offering 3 filmspriced at $14.98-$69.98, including 3-vol. Jesus of Nazareth. Company's Easter promotion titles have sold more than 2.3 millionunits over last 4 years, said Tim Fournier, vp-sales, sellthrough& multimedia.     Paramount and distributed label ABC Video each have Easterpromotions.  Paramount's Peanuts Easter Promotion will includererelease of It's the Easter Beagle, Charlie Brown, for first timein clamshell packaging, March 5 at $12.95.  ABC's Easter titleswill be released March 19.  ABC Classic Easter Promotion consistsof religious titles such as Pope John Paul II Celebrates Mass inCentral Park.  ABC Children's Easter Promotion consists of 4 titlesincluding Jirimpimbira:  An African Folktale ($9.95), program thatwill air as ABC Weekend Special Feb. 24.  Company also has 6-titleGolf Promotion including Byron Nelson's Timeless Golf Lessons. Further details will be forthcoming.     Turner Home Entertainment (THE) will rerelease 2 series of$9.98 volumes Feb. 13 -- The Greatest Adventure Stories from theBible and Timeless Tales from Hallmark.  Titles also are availablein gift sets.  THE will offer $5 rebate to consumers who buy 4 ormore titles from either series and will make available "create yourown basket" displays for retailers.     Sony Wonder will emphasize Passover with Nickelodeon's ARugrats Passover ($9.98) Feb. 20.  Program was series'highest-rated ever when it aired as special last year.  Also onFeb. 20 company will offer collection of Ren & Stimpy shorts for$14.98:  Nothing but Shorts, the Unwashed Collection.  Company willinclude mail-in offer for pair of boxer shorts.                       *    *    *    *    *     Major League Baseball Home Video's 3 titles released in 4thquarter sold more than 450,000 pieces, Senior Vp Rich Domich said. Orion-distributed label's titles have sold especially well in WorldSeries markets Cleveland and Atlanta, he said, and have done wellin department store chains, music outlets and national and regionalvideo stores.  Titles are WAHOO! What a Finish on ClevelandIndians, The Official 1995 World Series Video, Cleveland Rocks.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Trident Entertainment has entered video arena with     Trident Entertainment has entered video arena withinstructional All Pro Sports Football Series featuring NFL players. Series will be available at midyear;  company is in discussionswith potential distributors, said Bruce Singman, vp-business &legal affairs, CEO of All Pro Sports Video Productions and lawyerwho has represented NFL players.  Series will consist of 12football titles featuring Jerry Rice, Reggie White, Ronnie Lott,others.  Topics will include physical conditioning, gamestrategies, insider tips, all offensive and defensive positions,coaching video.  Tapes will include computer graphics, upbeatmusic, NFL highlights.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr.     CBS/Fox will support Feb. 6 release of 4 more titles from Mr.Rogers' Neighborhood with puppet offer.  Priced at $9.98 each,titles are Going to School, Learning Is Everywhere, Our Earth: Clean and Green, The Doctor Your Friend.  Consumers will be offered2 puppets -- X the Owl and Daniel the Striped Tiger -- for price ofone, $12.95.  Titles will be advertised in Video Business, DiscountStore News, Parents' Magazine, Sesame Street Parents' Magazine.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty Morphin     Saban Home Entertainment's Feb. 20 release of Mighty MorphinPower Rangers All-Time Favorites collection includes 3 titles withadditional footage made for video, at $12.95 each.  Titles also areavailable in 3-pack collectors' case at 20% savings.  Each video ispackaged with coupon for free Slurpee from participating 7-Elevensplus mail-in offer for $6 off personalized Power Rangers adventurebook.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on World     A&E Network and History Channel have launched sites on WorldWide Web, said Tom Heymann, vp-new media for A&E.  Sponsorshipareas are included, as well as those offering videos and otherproducts for sale through 800 number.  A&E -- http://www/aetv.com; History -- http://www.historychannel.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995.  Fox last     Rental prebook record was shattered twice in 1995.  Fox lastmonth reported orders of 735,000 copies of Die Hard with aVengeance in N. America, including revenue sharing and notincluding laserdisc and direct mail.  Film released on video Dec.19 grossed $100 million at box office.  Buena Vista earlierreported 715,000-piece order for Pulp Fiction, highest total sinceLIVE released Terminator 2 (VW Sept 4 p5).  Both Die Hard 3 andPulp Fiction prebooked during period when retailers overall wereexperiencing downturn in rental business.  Record numbers reflectfact that video business is becoming increasingly hit-driven, withtop titles dominating while other categories suffer.  Figures alsoattest to growing importance of revenue sharing, with Rentrak nowservicing many top chains;  both Fox and Buena Vista, which havecontracts with Rentrak, are benefiting from increased orders fortheir titles from Rentrak by settling for less money upfront whileawaiting share of retailers' income from rentals.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996     Buena Vista's sellthrough lineup for first 6 months of 1996could be its strongest ever for first half thanks to March 6release of Pocahontas, March 27 release of The Many Adventures ofWinnie the Pooh (previously released only at rental early inindustry's history), and April 24 direct-to-sellthrough debut ofanimated classic The Aristocats.  Last-named, just announced, willbe backed by tie-in with General Mills, which will offer $5 rebatewith Big G cereal purchase.  Disney will offer own $5 rebate on$26.99 title with purchase of another video.  Film was releasedtheatrically 3 times, first in 1970;  children have been awaitingits video debut since trailer appeared on The Lion King.  On rentalside, Buena Vista also plans big first half.  Its "Thriller Picksin '96" program features 3 thrillers, The Prophecy (March 12), TheTie That Binds (March 19), The Innocent (April 9).  Titles will bemarketed together on 3-sided standee, with oversized consumerpostcards along with theatrical size posters and cross-trailering. Company also will release Operation Dumbo Drop to rental marketMarch 19.  Family film that grossed $25 million theatrically willbe supported by radio promotions and POP including mobile.  Also,Miramax Home Entertainment's March 12 rental release Muriel'sWedding will be supported by Caribbean trip sweepstakes forconsumers in which retailer where winning consumer entered winsvacation too.  Company is standing behind film's rentability withrental guarantee buyback program offering $15 per tape May 13-June13 for any tape bought in 3-unit prepacks.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with First     Rentrak signed long-term revenue-sharing deal with FirstNational Entertainment, company that recently acquired 25-storeVideo Tyme of Las Vegas.  Rentrak will boost its stake in companyas part of deal, agreeing to purchase additional 357,143 shares --it currently holds less than 5% of company.  In other news, Rentraksaid it's discontinuing most of its computer software businessdevelopment because of slow rate of return.  It took$200,000-charge in its fiscal 2nd quarter to reflect decision.  Itnow will focus on core pay-per-transaction and retailingbusinesses.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation last     RKO Warner Video was ordered into Chapter 7 liquidation lastmonth by U.S. bankruptcy court judge who acted on motion ofunsecured creditors committee.  N.Y.-based chain had been operatingunder Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for 4 years.  Chain is beingclosed because stores failed to make profit under Chapter 11.  RKOentered video retail in 1984 by opening stores next to its theatersand bought industry pioneer Video Shack chain in 1986;  RKO grew toabout 30 locations before scaling back to 7 this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Store     Moovies completed purchase of Norcross, Ga.-based Movie Storechain.  Acquisition includes 8 superstores in Atlanta areareporting average store revenues of $550,000, company said. Moovies, which went public in Aug., operates 145 stores in 10states.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft.     Tower Records has expanded into Canada, opening 22,500-sq.-ft.store in Toronto.  Outlet is stocked with 100,000 music CDs, 10,000videos, laserdiscs and CD-ROM titles, 14,000 books.  It has 50listening stations.  Tower operates 150 stores in 12 countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settled     Viacom, Scott Beck and Charles Howell said they settledlitigation on Blockbuster Entertainment's 1989 purchase offranchise operated by Beck and 3 Blockbuster Video stores in whichHowell had minority interest.  Howell, who filed 1991 lawsuit inDallas charging that Beck had sold stores without his permission,was awarded $124-million judgment in 1994 (VW Feb 20 p7).  Viacomand Beck appealed.  Settlement terms weren't disclosed because ofconfidentiality agreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2nd     Video Update reported same-store sales increased 16% for 2ndquarter ended Oct. 31, outpacing overall video retail segment,which had negative results during period.  St. Paul-basedretailer's revenues soared 523% to $10.7 million from $1.7 millionyear earlier.  Net income was up whopping 1,694% to $486,466 (5cents per share) from $27,118 (1 cents) thanks to secondary publicoffering in April and exercise of Class A warrants in Sept. Company had 383% more shares outstanding than in preceding year's2nd quarter.  For first half, revenues were up 441% to $15.8million from $2.9 million and net income was $786,418 (9 cents)compared with net loss of $122,564 (-8 cents).  Same-store saleswere up 21% for half.  Company now has 179 corporately owned storesand 24 franchised locations in N. America.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will be     VSDA's VidTrac research and statistics program will belaunched early this quarter, Assn. said.  Assn. has securedparticipation of 9 of country's 10 largest video chains, said Pres.Jeffrey Eves, including "nation's largest chain" (Blockbuster).Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it will     Seeking to boost flagging CD-i business, Philips said it willconsolidate sales and marketing functions in Washington and shiftfocus away from "traditional retail."  Strategy is to sell through"small retailers and alternative types of distribution," includingdirect marketing, Philips N. America CD-i Mktg. Vp Gail Wellingtonsaid.  Philips Professional Media Pres. John Gray will head new, asyet unnamed, operation in Washington, while Philips Media keepsoffice in L.A., she said.  Philips Media will focus efforts onCD-ROM software and "some of the newer game platforms" as well asCD-i, company said.  As CD-i discs will be compatible with new DVDplayers, company also will try to ride DVD coattails to boostsales.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business,     Commenting on 3M's leaving videotape manufacturing business,TDK Mktg. Vp Tim Sullivan warned retailers to beware of"nonmanufacturing tape suppliers who will seize the opportunity tobuild market share by cutting prices."  Buying from such supplierscould be "penny wise and pound foolish," he said, because 3M'sdeparture could create supply shortage, leaving those supplierswith inadequate quantities.  With demand high for blank and pancaketape, "suppliers who lack the capacity to manufacture their ownproduct will not be able to service their retail customers withsufficient quantities of tape," Sullivan said.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA on     Vidmark is promoting Jan. 30 rental release Kids with PSA onhead of tape for Children of the Night service for runaways. Company also is supporting title with post-street date radio adsand on-line promotion offering sweepstakes for college scholarship. There also are on-pack stickers promoting video on soundtrack, andcollege newspaper ads.  In Canada, Alliance Communications willrelease film Jan. 23 with program benefiting Video Industry AIDSAction Committee (VIAAC) of Canada.  Alliance will donate portionof retailers' purchase price on every copy to VIAAC Canada fordistribution to AIDS-related youth service programs.  List of AIDSInformation Hotlines throughout Canada will precede film and appearon posters promoting video.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-week     Sales to dealers, from EIA, for 3nd statistical week of 5-weekDec. and year to date:                DEC.    1994      %    50 WEEKS    50 WEEKS     %                9-15    WEEK     CHG.    1995        1994      CHG.TOTAL VCR**... 202,070 258,772  -22.3 15,048,358* 14,403,594  + 4.5  HOME DECKS.. 175,164 229,110  -23.5 12,952,829* 12,457,532r + 4.0CAMCORDERS....  40,100  70,261  -42.9  3,419,697#  3,069,270  +11.4L'DISC PLAYERS   4,953   2,159 +129.4    249,483     264,426  - 5.7TOTAL COLOR TV 392,870 458,174  -14.3 25,301,618  26,284,320* - 3.7  DIRECT-VIEW. 376,453 445,957  -15.6 24,527,729  25,684,275* - 4.5   TV ONLY.... 350,545 416,295  -15.8 22,432,200  23,738,213* - 5.5   TV/VCR COMBO 25,908  29,662* -12.7  2,095,529#  1,945,062  + 7.7  PROJECTION..  16,417* 12,217  +34.4    773,889#    600,045  +29.0    VCR CENSUS -- Total sold to dealers to date (1975-1995): 150,895,127**.    VCR deck 5-week moving average:  1995--320,412;  1994--301,293r(up 6.3%).    TV/VCR 5-week moving average:  1995--50,032;  1994--43,725 (up14.4%).    Camcorder 5-week moving average:  1995--79,870;  1994--79,928(down 1.3%).    Direct-view TV 5-week moving average:  1995--592,011; 1994-630,665 (down 7.7%).* Record for period.  # Full-year record.  ** Includes TV/VCRcombinations.  ## Record for any week.  r Revised by EIA.Back to Headline List CopyrightVIDEO WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd.,     Robert Book, pres.-CEO, Tiger Eye Investments Holdings Ltd.,to become chmn. of company now known as WarnerVision uponcompletion of its acquisition by Tiger Eye... Brothers Orrin andJohn Ingram promoted to co-presidents of Ingram Industries, beingsplit from Ingram Entertainment, which will be owned principally by3rd brother David Ingram as CEO;  Linwood (Chip) Lacy,co-chmn.-CEO, Ingram Micro, named vice-chmn.-CEO, IngramIndustries... Changes at Warner Home Video:  Beth Baier promoted tovp-business & legal affairs and asst. gen. counsel;  EdwardLeonard, ex-Nissan Motor Corp., joins as vp-financial planning &operations, N. America, replacing Jaime Ovadia, who relocates toMiami to join PolyGram Records... IntelliVentures, TV and videoproducer (Mitch Gaylord's Men's Total Body Workout), expands with6 appointments:  Kenny Taylor, ex-restaurant industry, todir.-sales;  John Fahr, ex-Robert Greenwald Productions, to assoc.producer;  Kirk Demorest, ex-Buena Vista Home Video, topost-production supervisor;  Bruce Brantseg to controller;  JillZemming, ex-ITC Entertainment, to exec. asst.;  Reuben Paris tooffice mgr... Named to board of Video Industry AIDS ActionCommittee (VIAAC) for 1996:  Jere Rae-Mansfield, Monterey HomeVideo, pres.;  Bruce Apar, Video Business, East Coast vp;  MariaLaMagra, MCA/Universal Home Video, vp;  Jeff Jenest, Playboy HomeEntertainment, treas.;  Bo Beatty, Central Park Media, assoc.treas.-East Coast;  Larry Klingman, Kilkea Mktg. Group, assoc.treas.-West Coast;  Eileen Fitzpatrick, Billboard, secy.; additional board members:  past pres. Leonard Levy, PMEntertainment Group;  Sheryl Biesman, Daily Variety;  Steve Wegner,MGM/UA Home Entertainment;  Michelle Fiddler, BMG Video;  BarryLyons, PM.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-25IA086-000616-B015-251http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002122 text/html 80042HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:19:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:14 GMTContent-length: 79855Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev10.html Sample Issue Copyright AIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (424 words) PROCESS BORROWED FROM THE COLD WAR VALUABLE ALLY FOR WASTEWATER PLANTS (568 words) EPA AUDIT POLICY PROVIDES LENIENCY BUT GRANTS NO 'PRIVILEGE' TO RESULTS (544 words) ASME: CHLORINE LEVELS OF FEEDSTOCKS HAVE SCANT ROLE IN DIOXIN EMISSIONS (279 words) UPCOMING NSR RULE TO GIVE FLEXIBILITY TO STATES IN MAKING BACT DECISIONS (328 words) OCCIDENTAL TO PAY U.S. $129M TO SETTLE LANDMARK LOVE-CANAL POLLUTION CASE (372 words) MEETINGS, ETC. (90 words) EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS COULD LEAD TO MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS (398 words) SENATE ENVIRONMENT PANEL MEMBERS BACKING LIMITED REWRITING OF CWA (635 words) API ASKS EPA TO REVISIT RFG PHASE II TO REPEAL NOX-REDUCTION PROVISIONS (361 words) EW FOCUS: OPEN MEETINGS HAZWASTE INCINERATORS, GREEN GROUPS CHALLENGE EPA-CEMENT NEGOTIATIONS (789 words) CALIFORNIA AIR BOARD MOVES TO DROP MINIMUM ZEV MANDATE FOR 1998 (443 words) COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS (450 words) EPA CITES NPS FOR RCRA VIOLATIONS AT HAWAII VOLCANOES NATIONAL PARK (137 words) EPA: HEALTH BENEFITS EXCEED COSTS OF REDUCING ACID RAIN PRECURSORS (292 words) EPA, ASIWPCA ISSUE DRAFT GUIDANCE FOR EVALUATING NONPOINT PROGRAMS (255 words) STATE OFFICIALS SEE HWIR PROPOSAL COMPLICATING WASTE MANAGEMENT (391 words) PHYSICIANS' GROUP SOUNDING ALERT ABOUT DANGERS FROM AIR POLLUTION (199 words) GREENHOUSE 'CAR TALKS' REPORT URGES BOOSTING CAFE STANDARD TO 45 MPG (335 words) EPA PROPOSES AIR PERMIT EXEMPTIONS FOR SOME NON-MAJOR AREA SOURCES (356 words) REFRIGERATOR MAKERS SETTLE LAWSUIT OVER 'CFC-FREE' ADVERTISEMENTS (255 words) R E S O U R C E S (306 words) GREAT LAKES EFFORT COULD BE DAMAGED BY GOP BUDGET CUTS, BROWNER SAYS (319 words) CALIFORNIA'S AIR RESOURCES BOARD MANDATES CLEANER-BURNING FUEL (781 words) AGING DNEPR RIVER HYDRO PROJECTS THREATEN MANY AREAS OF UKRAINE (739 words) EVENTS CALENDAR (458 words) CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSSUPERFUND HIT-The toxic-waste cleanup program joins the restof EPA in the federal budget-morass shutdown today whenSuperfund's tax-and-spend authority expires. Officials saythis means furloughing about 2,500 agency employees whooversee contractor activities at waste sites. The employeeswere able to continue working beyond the Dec. 18 governmentshutdown because Superfund's operating authority is separatefrom the rest of the agency. This authority ends today, andofficials say that without the site supervisors, "we'regoing to have to shut down the program nationwide"-exceptfor emergencies. The waste cleanup trust fund does not lackmoney, only the congressional go-ahead to spend it.A LITTLE LATE?-First, EPA gives in to state opposition anddrops its unpopular test-only requirement for vehicle-emission inspection and maintenance stations. Next, Congresstakes steps to ensure that test-only mandates remain on theregulatory shelf. Finally, with the barn door wide open, theAssociation of Vehicle Inspection Companies was formed inWashington last month by the firms that operate test-onlyfacilities under state contracts. Its rear-guard mission:"to provide sound information to help educate the public,state officials, political leaders and others on thesignificant benefits of test-only contractor-operatedvehicle inspection programs."EMPLOYERS OFF THE HOOK-Another mobile-source pollution-prevention program headed for the discard bin when PresidentClinton signed legislation Dec. 23 repealing the Clean AirAct mandate for employers in polluted areas to adopt plansto reduce commuting by employees. The Mobility Coalition forClean Air, the ad hoc group that lobbied for the repeal,said it expects most states to abandon mandatory trip-reduction requirements.THE CHLORINE FACTOR-Findings by resear-chers at Queen'sUniversity in Canada could have a bearing on U.S. EPA'songoing evaluation of drinking water disinfectants anddisinfection byproducts. The researchers report that from 10percent to 13 percent of bladder or colon cancer cases inOntario may be caused by long-term drinking of and bathingin surface water treated with chlorine. Professor Will Kingsaid people with a 35-year exposure to chlorinatedbyproducts have a 60 percent risk of bladder cancer thanpeople with little or no exposure. "We think the results areimportant, but we don't think they mean stop usingchlorination. It's still much safer to use chlorinated waterthan to use untreated water."WHAT'S HOT IN MINNESOTA?-In a year-end review of its topenvironmental issues of 1995, the state Pollution ControlAgency listed "the curious discovery of numerous deformedfrogs" in wetlands in southern Minnesota last August.Officials are still seeking answers for the frogs' missinglegs.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PROCESS BORROWED FROM THE COLD WARVALUABLE ALLY FOR WASTEWATER PLANTS   A process borrowed from U.S. and Russian Cold Wartechnology may perform a wide array of valuable functionsfor wastewater treatment plant operators, according toScientific Utilization Inc. (SUI).   In pilot studies, the pulse power process increased therate of anaerobic digestion in treatment units, the Decatur,Ala., company reports. It also can boost methane production,lower the volume of solids and neutralize cryptosporidium,SUI says.   Using pulse power, plant operators may be able to doubleanaerobic digestion of sewage sludges, SUI says. This canhelp boost methane production to power blowers, generators,heaters and other devices in treatment plants, according toSUI.   The technique works by subjecting sludge to high-energyelectric arcs as it enters a plant's digesters. The arcsrupture the cell walls of aerobic bacteria, making theirnutrients immediately available to anaerobic bacteria andreducing the time it takes anaerobic organisms to consumeaerobic microbes and cut solids volume.   Pulse power also may help turn sewage effluent intopotable water, according to the company. When used withozone and oxygen generation, the system has been shown torender cryptosporidium non-infectious. For more information,contact SUI's Randy Chew at (205) 355-2333.   Applied Spectrometry Associates Inc., Waukesha, Wis., haspurchased the ChemScanR Process Analyzer business ofBiotronics Technologies Inc., also of Waukesha.   Chester Environmental, Pittsburgh, has received thePennsylvania Governor's Export Excellence Award in theService Sector. Chester's international sales grew from$170,000 in 1992 to $12 million in 1994.   Microbics Corp., Carlsbad, Calif., and SiemensEnvironmental Systems, United Kingdom, have developedMicrotox-OS, an on-line test system for automatic monitoringof aquatic toxicity.   Pace Analytical Services Inc., Minneapolis, has beenformed to operate former PACE Inc. labs.   RFG Environmental Systems Inc., West Palm Beach, Fla.,has received the Cleaning Equipment Trade Association's 1995Technological Innovation Award for its Thermo OxidationSystem.   Rockwell International Corp., Seal Beach, Calif., says ithalved its generation of hazardous waste from 1990 through1994.   Thermo Power Corp., Waltham, Mass., is the first companyto receive ultra-low emissions vehicle certification fromEPA for a heavy-duty engine powered by natural gas.   U.S. Electricar Inc., San Francisco, has received a $2.8million contract from the Department of Defense to fieldtest advanced battery technologies in its ES-10 pickuptrucks.   Versar Inc., Springfield, Va., has been namedsubcontractor to EG&G Washington Analytical Service Centerfor environmental services to the Naval Surface WeaponsSupport Center, Indian Head, Md.   United States Filter Corp., Palm Desert, Calif., hasagreed to acquire Jet Tech Inc. of Edwardsville, Kan., forabout $12 million in cash and stock. Jet Tech, with expected1995 revenues of $16 million, manufactures sequencing batchreactors and autothermal thermophilic aerobic digesters.   PERSONNEL: Joseph Angley has joined GeoSyntecConsultants' office in Boca Raton, Fla. David Hendron hasbeen appointed manager of GeoSyntec's new regional office inChicago....New staffers in Burns & McDonnell WasteConsultants' Kansas City, Mo., office include ShannonFlannigan, William Craig, Lance Erickson and Eric Wenger.New faces at ENSR: William Siok, program manager in Acton,Mass.; Cynthia Chiles, senior program manager in Costa Mesa,Calif.; and Jacqueline Breese as senior project manager inCamarillo, Calif....Saeed Darian has joined HNTB Corp. todirect its work with industrial clients....BernardKennedy, chair/president/CEO of National Fuel Gas Co., hasbeen reelected chair of the trustees of the Institute of GasTechnology.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA AUDIT POLICY PROVIDES LENIENCYBUT GRANTS NO 'PRIVILEGE' TO RESULTS   Companies that report self-discovered environmentalviolations within 10 days and act to correct them will beeligible for reduced penalties or waivers of civilviolations and no criminal sanctions under EPA's finalpolicy on environmental audits.   The policy (Federal Register, Dec. 22, 1995, p. 66706)does not apply to violations that harm human health and theenvironment. EPA said it had been studying the issue ofself-audits for 18 months and that the policy is "theoptimum way to encourage voluntary self-policing whilepreserving fair and effective enforcement."Will Override State Laws   Under the approach, EPA retains its power to levy finesthat equal any economic gain created by the violation inorder to "preserve a level playing field." EPA also willoverride state laws shielding results of corporate self-audits from enforcement if the violations threaten publichealth or the environment. At the same time, the agency said"where a state has obtained appropriate sanctions needed todeter such misconduct, there is no need for EPA action."   The final policy is basically the same as an interimpolicy released last March. The earlier statement appliedonly to self-audits, while the final statement covers otherself-discovery steps such as due diligence. EPA defines duediligence as systemic efforts to prevent, detect and correctviolations.EPA Restates 'No Privilege'   EPA will continue its policy of not routinely requestingthe results of corporate self-audits, although the agencyreiterated its position that environmental self-audits andrelated corporate self-discovery activities are notprivileged information protected from public disclosure.This contrasts sharply with an increasing number of statelaws that provide varying degrees of privilege for auditresults.   EPA will reduce gravity-based civil penalties-those basedon the severity of the pollution problem and not on theeconomic gains a company realizes-by up 75 percent. In somecases they could be waived. To be eligible for reduced or nocivil penalties provisions of the policy, EPA said companiesmust meet these conditions:Violations must be discovered through a company's self-audits or due-diligence process.Violations must have been discovered voluntarily and not aspart of an EPA- or court-mandated monitoring, and theviolations must be reported promptly in writing to EPA.Discovery of a violation cannot be based on any third-partyaction such as a citizen suit or local governmentinvestigation.The violation must be corrected as soon as possible, and anyenvironmental damage must be mitigated.The company must take steps to prevent any reoccurrence ofthe violation.Leniency is not available to repeat offenders. Repeatedoffenses are defined as "the same or closely-relatedviolation...[occurring] previously within the past threeyears at the same facility or...part of a pattern ofviolations on the regulated entities' part over the pastfive years."Not eligible are violations that led to substantialenvironmental harm or presented an imminent and substantialdanger to public health or which violated the terms of acourt order.A company must cooperate with EPA and provide data thatcould reveal related violations.   Copies of the seven-page policy statement signed bySteven Herman, assistant agency administrator forenforcement and compliance are available from BPI's %DocuDial Service as Doc. #03-1103.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ASME: CHLORINE LEVELS OF FEEDSTOCKSHAVE SCANT ROLE IN DIOXIN EMISSIONS   The chlorine content of combustor or incineratorfeedstocks has little or no effect on the composition orquantity of dioxin emissions, the American Society ofMechanical Engineers and other participants found in a studyof various combustion facilities.   The conclusion contradicts arguments by public interestgroups that there is a direct relationship between chlorineand dioxin emissions. The groups have advocated regulationsrestricting the amount and type of chlorinated waste thatcan be combusted in various types of combustion systems.   The study was conducted on municipal waste combustors,medical and hazardous waste incinerators, waste-firedboilers, cement kilns and biomass combustors at 169facilities. More than 1,900 test results were analyzed forThe Relationship Between Chlorine in Waste Streams andDioxin Emissions from Waste Combustor Stacks.   Researchers say they found no statistically significantrelationship between chlorine input and dioxin emissions ingas streams at 80 percent of the facilities. Ten facilitiesshowed higher dioxin/furan levels consistent with increasesin chlorine input, but eight other facilities showed adecrease in dioxin/furan emissions, the study says.   "The failure to find simultaneous increases in mostcases-and finding a few inverse relationships-indicates thatwhatever effect waste feed chlorine has on [dioxin]concentrations in combustor flue gases, it is smaller thanthe influence of other cau-sative factors," ASME said in astatement. "Any effect chlorine has on...concentrations incommercial-scale systems is a factor of air pollution-control system temperature, ash chemistry, combustionconditions, imprecise measurement and localized flowstratification."   Besides ASME, other participants in the study includedthe Vinyl Institute, the Chlorine Chemistry Council andEnvironment Canada. For a copy of the study, contact ASME at(800) 843-2763.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996UPCOMING NSR RULE TO GIVE FLEXIBILITYTO STATES IN MAKING BACT DECISIONS   Proposed new source review (NSR) rules to be announcedsoon by EPA will recommend a "top-down" approach fordetermining best available control technology (BACT), butthey will give states some flexibility in determining whatmethod to use.   The proposal will allow states to develop their own BACTdetermination criteria so long as they take into account thetop technologies available. Under the plan, states will begiven a set of minimum criteria they must use in developingmethods for making BACT determinations.   Dennis Crumpler, head of the NSR section of EPA's airquality planning & standards office, told EW the governmentshutdown and furlough affecting EPA would delay the scheduleto reform NSR.   BACT is an emission limitation based on the maximumdegree of emission reduction achievable through applicationof production processes, available methods, systems andtechniques. Crumpler said the rule will propose using a top-down approach to identify BACT technology.   New emissions sources located in areas that are inattainment with ambient air quality standards are requiredto install BACT under "prevention of significantdeterioration" requirements. BACT is determined on a case-by-case basis for each source required to install it.   Under the top-down method, available control options areranked by effectiveness for the pollutant under review.Initially, the most stringent option is regarded as theBACT, but source-specific energy, environmental, or economicconsiderations may alter the initial determination. Statesare given the discretion to determine what is the BACT forthe sources they regulate, but EPA adds two core conditionsto the state's deliberations.   First, a source must consider all available controls inmaking a BACT determination, especially the most stringentcontrol. Second, the draft rule will say, "the selection ofa particular control system as BACT must be justified interms of the statutory criteria and supported by the record,and must explain the basis for the rejection of the othermore stringent candidate control systems."Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996OCCIDENTAL TO PAY U.S. $129M TO SETTLELANDMARK LOVE-CANAL POLLUTION CASE   Ending a landmark case that provided the impetus for theSuperfund program, Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed topay $129 million to cover costs associated with the massivepollution of Love Canal. The settlement announced by theJustice Department ends a 16-year-old cost-recovery casethat began after a toxic-waste nightmare forced abandonmentof more than 1,000 homes near Niagara Falls.   The proposed settlement "should send a message of federalpersistence and tenacity," Attorney General Janet Reno saidDec. 21. She said the government will recoup all of the $101million it spent on the cleanup, plus $28 million ininterest.   EPA's Superfund program will receive $102 million fromOccidental, with $27 million going to the Treasury on behalfof the Federal Emergency Management Agency, DoJ said. FEMAprovided funding for early cleanup and relocation effortsbefore creation of the Superfund program in 1980.Remediation Actions Taken   After enactment of the Superfund law, the U.S. governmentand New York remediated the Love Canal site. Creeks andsewers adjacent to Love Canal were cleansed of dioxinwastes, and federal and state agencies improved a leachatecollection system to contain contaminated groundwater.   Occidental was considered a "responsible party" underSuperfund. The company has insisted that the United Statesalso was a responsible party and should contribute towardcleanup costs based on regulatory actions and allegeddumping by several federal agencies. Under the settlement,the government will pay $8 million in cleanup costs toresolve this claim.   One bright spot for Occidental could be a proposed $64.5million tax credit for its Love Canal payment-a proposalthat was criticized by Lois Schiffer, head of DoJ'senvironmental section. "This would destroy the fundamentalprinciple that a polluter should pay to clean up its ownmess."   Joining Reno in supporting the agreement was EPAAdministrator Carol Browner, who said it represented "thisAdministration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters,not the American people, pick up the tab for cleaning uptoxic waste dumps." FEMA expressed relief that "theSuperfund law has enabled us to recover our money." Thesettlement will not be final until after a 30-day publiccomment period. For more information, call DoJ at (202) 616-2771.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MEETINGS, ETC.   -EPA's Sanitary Sewer Overflows Dialogue: public meeting,Jan. 11-12, Crystal Gateway Marriott,Arlington, Va. Contact: Lam Lim, (202) 260-7371.   -EPA's Office of Water: public meetings on approaches tomethod flexibility and streamlining of analytical methodsunder the Clean Water and Safe Drinking Water acts; Jan. 25,Boston, and Feb. 14,Chicago. Contact: Marion Thompson, (202) 260-7117.   -Energy Information Administration: Profit from Energy &Emissions Tracking conference on the Department of Energy'sVoluntary Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Program; Feb. 27-28,Washington, D.C. For information, call (800) 803-5182.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONSCOULD LEAD TO MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS   The temporary furloughing of EPA workers under thepartial government shutdown may turn into permanent layoffsfor up to one-quarter of the agency's 17,000 employees byspring, EPA officials warn. Unless Republicans substantiallyincrease EPA's funding, the agency's cut in employees "willbe devastating," EPA Administrator Carol Browner says.   While officials have repeatedly said they cannot predicthow deep personnel cuts would be, they estimate that underthe EPA appropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, theagency would have to lay off one-third of its workers whopromulgate regulations, issue permits and performinspections. Researchers and employees involved inenvironmental cleanups would not be cut, according to oneofficial.   At a press conference Dec. 18, President Clinton said hevetoed the $5.7 billion spending bill-that called for adecrease of 21 percent from the fiscal 1995 level-becauseenvironmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safedrinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45percent and the air would become dirtier. The cuts wouldcondemn "10 million children under the age of 12 to livingnear toxic waste sites that might not be cleaned up foryears," Clinton said.   The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policy riders,including a first-ever provision that would prevent EPA fromoverriding Army Corps of Engineers' wetlands decisions. Thepackage also proposes a 50 percent cut in funding toimplement the Montreal treaty for protection of the ozonelayer.   In his veto statement, Clinton said that "when I agreed afew weeks ago to work with the Congress to balance thebudget in seven years, Congress committed to a budget thatprotects the environment. These bills that I have to vetotoday, I do because they do not meet that test. For 25years, leaders of both parties have recognized that ourcountry is stronger when we control pollution and protectpublic health. Environmental protection is not, or at leastit never has been until now, a partisan issue."   In response to earlier Democratic attacks on EPA fundingcuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo), chairman of the SenateAppropriations subcommittee that handles EPA funding, said:"I am first to admit EPA did receive some targeted budgetcuts in the appropriations process, but the reductions comefrom areas which were identified by the National Academy ofPublic Administration and others as being unnecessary,wasteful or duplicative."Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SENATE ENVIRONMENT PANEL MEMBERSBACKING LIMITED REWRITING OF CWA   Key members of the Senate Environment Committee aremaking it clear they support little more than a fine-tuningof the Clean Water Act in the 104th Congress-not thesweeping rollback bill passed by the House (A/WPR, May. 22,1995, p. 163).   Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.), in the first of a seriesof hearings on reauthorizing the CWA, said he favors amodest bill with a limited agenda because a more ambitiouspackage such as H.R. 961 would be harder to get through thelegislative process and would engender strident oppositionthat would undermine more important goals.   The panel's ranking Democrat, Max Baucus of Montana, saidthe CWA is a "major, major success story" and that "Houseefforts to gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected andwrongheaded....No CWA reauthorization would be better thanthe one the House suggested." Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.)added that health and economic benefits for the fishing andtourism industries have justified the high costs of CWA-mandated improvements.   A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen. ChristopherBond (R-Mo.), told the hearing that the CWA deserves creditfor rehabilitating the Mississippi River. He said waterquality has been getting better over the past two decadesand that he supports continued progress. Bond said he willwork to fix CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken"and will stress the importance of proceeding with anunderstanding of what local entities, states and the federalgovernment can afford. "We have cities spending upwards of$650,000 to obtain [stormwater discharge] permits. Thisexpenditure does not result in cleaner waters." Bond addedthat "assessing humungous [CWA] fines against smallcommunities with limited resources is probably the dumbestthing you can do if you want to improve the environment."   The focus on the hearing was the CWA's impact on stateand local governments. Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urgedthe committee to consider his proposal, S. 1390, to allowCWA fines to be invested in local pollution prevention andremediation rather than sending the money to Washington.Move to Ease Privatization   Lautenberg has introduced S 1436 to help localgovernments privatize wastewater facilities by addressing alegal quirk setting different standards for privately- andpublicly-owned systems. The bill would expand the definitionof a publicly-owned treatment works to include systems thatwere constructed, owned or operated by government buttransferred to the private sector. Ronald Dungan, presidentof the National Association of Water Companies, testifiedthat more private-sector participation is needed inwastewater treatment because the cost of repairing andmaintaining infrastructure is beyond the finances ofgovernments and municipal utilities. Dungan said S 1436would provide a "single and clear definition of a wastewatertreatment facility based on purpose rather than ownership."   Al Bilik, president of the AFL-CIO's public employeedepartment, said organized labor strongly opposesprivatization because it would result in a deterioration ofthe quality of public works. Businesses' top priority ismaking money, not public well-being, he testified. Investorsmight be able to buy public utilities at bargain-basementprices and milk them for profit while maintaining an outwardappearance of functioning well, Bilik said. If the utilitygoes bankrupt, the government will be left holding the bagbecause these services are vital, he warned.   Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's water office, said thatin order to make $2 billion in loans to states annually forthe next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested in thewastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the next sevenyears. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal1996 to support the SRF program. The appropriations billpassed by Congress would provide $1.25 billion forwastewater capitalization grants for 1996, Perciasepe said.EPA is requesting authorization levels of $1.3 billion forfiscal 1997 and $1 billion for 1998 through 2005.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996API ASKS EPA TO REVISIT RFG PHASE IITO REPEAL NOX-REDUCTION PROVISIONS   The American Petroleum Institute is asking EPA to repealprovisions in the second phase of the reformulated gasoline(RFG) program requiring reductions in nitrogen oxideemissions. The trade group says in a petition that the NOx-reduction requirements are not a cost-effective means tocontrol summertime ozone and may not be beneficial. API alsoargues that reductions in NOx have been demonstrated in somecases not to be an effective way to curb ozone.   The NOx requirement was based partly on a 1991 NationalResearch Council report that said more attention should befocused on NOx as a means to control ozone. The second phaseof the RFG program calls for NOx emissions reductions of 5percent to 7 percent, beginning in 2000. API's petitionstates that although EPA used findings from that study, itdiscounted "those portions of the same studies showing thatNOx control may be counterproductive in many areas,depending on the VOC/NOx ratio."Disagreement over Costs   There is considerable debate on the cost of thedesulfurization of gasoline, a major part of the RFGprogram. While EPA contends that reducing sulfur to 138parts per million would have a nationwide cost of about$5,200 per ton, API counsel David Deal said the cost iscloser to more than $10,000 per ton. Deal said this costwould be passed on to consumers. "We have good reason towant to reassess the program before people make acommitment."   The petition makes another point concerning costs,stating that the cost of controlling NOx emissions in fuelsrelative to the cost of stationary sources has not beengiven enough attention by EPA.   API wants the agency to respond promptly so refiners mayhave enough time to make the necessary adjustments to theirfacilities. Although phase II of the RFG program does notbegin for another five years, "the lead time to makerefinery changes is about three years. So sometime in 1997is the time by which it is important to know what the storyis," Deal said. A copy of the 32-page petition is availablefrom BPI's % DocuDial Service as Doc. #03-1104.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EW FOCUS: OPEN MEETINGSHAZWASTE INCINERATORS, GREEN GROUPSCHALLENGE EPA-CEMENT NEGOTIATIONS   A lawsuit seeking to prevent EPA from using closed-doormeetings with the cement kiln industry to reach an"enforceable agreement" on cement kiln dust (CKD) disposalrules is coming down to whether the selective process can bedefined as a federal advisory committee. Theplaintiffs-Environmental Technology Council (ETC), SierraClub and four local environmental advocacy groups-contendthat EPA-cement industry meetings since March violate theFederal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). The cement industryand EPA argue they do not.   A cement industry official told EW Dec. 27 that despitethe diverse makeup of the plaintiffs, the case is beingpushed by the incinerator industry in an effort to gaincompetitive advantage in the market for waste-treatmentservices.   The suit (Huron Environmental Activist League et al. v.U.S. EPA, DC DC, No. 95-2124) was filed Nov. 15 (EW, Dec. 4,1995, p. 473). The battle widened when the Cement KilnRecycling Coalition (CKRC) and the American Portland CementAlliance (APCA) intervened as defendants on Nov. 29. Sincethen, papers have been flying: motions for summary judgmentwere filed by all sides Dec. 8; all sides filed responsesDec. 15, prompting still further motions. Judge CharlesRichey of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia will decide soon as to whether EPA's meetings withthe cement industry violate FACA requirements.   FACA is meant to control how private groups become asource of advice and recommendations to Federal agencies. Itrequires notice of meetings in the Federal Register and thatan agency official approve agendas and be present at allmeetings.   EPA and the cement industry had been negotiating sinceMarch over an enforceable agreement on CKD disposal. Theagency had already decided not to expose cement kilns to allof the rigors of the Resource Conservation & Recovery Act's(RCRA) Subtitle C, which governs disposal of hazardouswastes. The plaintiffs charge that seven EPA-cement industrymeetings violated FACA. EPA got advice on managementstandards from only one interest group, "closed its meetingswith the cement industry...and denied plaintiffs' requestto attend the meetings," says the Dec. 8 defendants' motionfor summary judgment.   EPA allegedly provided no public notice, no meetingsummaries and no agendas, and no documents developed fromthe meetings were made available to the public. Theplaintiffs also charge that EPA utilized APCA and CKRC as an"advisory committee" in the sense of FACA without formallyestablishing one. Once the cement industry proposed that theagency promulgate an "enforceable agreement" to manage CKDstandards, EPA crossed the line into territory governed byFACA, the plaintiffs contend.   In its motion, EPA contends that the cement kiln groupscannot be defined as "advisory committees" under FACAbecause they were not established, funded or controlled bythe government. Mere use of the committee's work product isnot enough to trigger FACA rules; the government mustexercise strict management over the group, EPA argues. EPAreferred to the only FACA case judged by the U.S. SupremeCourt (Public Citizen v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 491 U.S.1989), in which the justices upheld EPA's consultations withthe activist group founded by Ralph Nader. In that case, themajority wrote: "We cannot believe that FACA was intended tocover every formal and informal consultation between anagency and a group rendering advice."   In a response filed Dec. 15, the plaintiffs maintain thatEPA managed the advisory group and its agenda; controlledthe process by identifying the issues for the group toaddress; controlled participation by denying plaintiffs'requests to attend meetings; and suspended its efforts todevelop regulatory standards in order to conduct theadvisory-group process. The plaintiffs also argue they willnot have meaningful input on an enforceable agreement ifthey cannot meet simultaneously with the cement industry andEPA.   Andy O'Hare, vice president of APCA, told EW that therival waste-incineration industry "has been meeting with EPAall along but claims that only the cement kiln industry'sprivate meetings are in violation of FACA." In its motion,EPA says that it met at least once since March with all ofthe plaintiffs on the enforceable agreement.   O'Hare, while claiming CKD is "innocuous" from a publichealth standpoint, said the plaintiffs are led by theincinerator industry. "This whole case should be seen as anattempt by the incinerator industry to regain"competitivity." It is not an environmental issue; it is amarket-share issue." ETC, formerly known as the HazardousWaste Treatment Council, filed the case using their lawyerand brought along the environmentalists to bolster the casefor the incinerator interests, he charged.   ETC lawyer David Case was not available to respond to thestatements about the suit's genesis.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CALIFORNIA AIR BOARD MOVES TO DROPMINIMUM ZEV MANDATE FOR 1998   California has begun formalizing its retreat from itssmog-fighting mandate for zero emission vehicles (ZEVs) tocomprise at least 2 percent of the new cars and light trucksmarketed in the state in 1998.   The action throws into doubt whether Massachusetts andNew York will maintain their similar mandates, which wouldtranslate into minimum sales of electric vehicles.Massachusetts Gov. William Weld (R) said, "We think theCalifornia Air Resources [Board] staff made the wrongrecommendation, but the decision does not bindMassachusetts." In New York, a spokesman for Gov. GeorgePataki (R) made only the following statement: "the staff isevaluating New York State's legal obligation in the wake ofCalifornia's decision."   Electric car supporters and clean-air advocates chargethat California Gov. Pete Wilson (R) gave into the massiveanti-electric vehicle advertising and public relationscampaign financed by petroleum refiners and carmanufacturers.Mandate for 2003 Retained   California's Air Resources Board (CARB), which pioneeredZEV-sales mandates, will sponsor ZEV demonstration projectsin Los Angeles and Sacramento. They will use only 3,750ZEVs, rather than the 60,000 projected under the shelvedmandate. CARB maintains its requirement that 10 percent oftotal vehicles sales in the state will be ZEVs in 2003.   CARB Chair John Dunlap said: "This [revised] planprovides for a successful launch of commercially viableelectric cars that protect public health and will providenew high-tech jobs in California. This plan promotes amarket-based introduction of ZEVs and will unleash theengineering and the marketing prowess of automakers."   A spokesman for the California-based Coalition for CleanAir said the group has "seen no scientific or technicalreason for delay. The agency responsible for worldwideadoption of catalytic converters, unleaded gasoline andreformulated gasoline has never before buckled to politicalpressure."   The ZEV retreat is laid out in a CARB staff proposal thatis subject to change pending final action in March. Otherstaff recommendations include:Automakers voluntarily introduce ZEVs, with an annualproduction capacity of 5,000 in 1996-1997 rising to 14,000in 1998.Automakers produce cleaner standard cars to make up for theshortfall in lower emissions without the ZEVs.Automakers place 750 ZEVs in 1998 and 1,500 in 1999-2000 inthe Los Angeles and Sacramento areas.Automakers commit to continued ZEV research and development.CARB creates extra ZEV credits for longer-range vehicles andearly introduction of electrics.Each year the state will buy some advanced-battery vehicles.The staff proposal also calls upon all automakers to changetheir media publicity and legislative initiatives fromattacking the ZEV mandate to supporting the state-manufacturers' ZEV partnership.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDSFOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS   Newer municipal waste combustors (MWCs) will be requiredto install a combination of high-efficiency pollution-control equipment starting Jan. 29, if a direct final rulefrom EPA does not draw significant negative comments. Whilethe rule enables EPA to reduce several pollutantssimultaneously, it is expected to impose substantial capitalcosts.   The maximum achievable control technology standard willaffect existing and new MWCs capable of combusting more than35 metric tons daily. It establishes emissions limits fordioxins, furans, cadmium, lead, mercury, particulate matter,hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide andfugitive ash. Stricter performance standards apply to MWCswith capacities greater than 225 metric tons a day.   The rule, published in the Dec. 19 Federal Register,mandates that MWCs built after Sept. 20, 1994, or modifiedafter June 19, 1996, will be subject to new, more stringentperformance standards. MWCs built between Dec. 20, 1989 andSept. 20, 1994, or modified before June 19, 1996, willremain subject to MWC performance standards for plants builtafter the 1989 date. This provision was promulgated Feb. 11,1991. The dates were set to avoid same MWC plants beingsubject to overlapping rules.   EPA says there are about 307 operating MWC units at 128plants, providing a total combustion capacity of 94,000metric tons per day. It says that 179 MWCs will be affectedby the rule; about 100 are publicly owned. Costs for theupdated standard exceed those for the 1991 standard by $156million for capital investment and by $43 million for annualoperations. Total capital costs from investments mandated byboth rules approach $780 million, or an added $13 per metricton of solid waste combusted.   The agency says the benefits include annual emissionsgreater than the 1991 rule: 3,000 fewer metric tons of SO2and 4,000 fewer metric tons of hydrogen chloride. For mostcategories there is less than a 10 percent improvement, butfor mercury, the new standard will eliminate 200 percent ofthe amount removed by the 1991 rule. In total, the ruleexpects to reduce emissions of several hazardous airpollutants by about 110,000 tons per year, EPA says.   If a facility combusts less than 10 metric tons a day ofsolid waste, regardless of capacity, it is exempted from therule. Tire-burning facilities are exempted from theperformance standard but not re-cordkeeping requirements.Small independent power producers, cogeneration facilitiesand metals recovery facilities are not subject to MWCstandards.   The regulation, simultaneously released as a direct finalrule and a proposed rule, takes effect Jan 29 unlesssignificant adverse comments are received by Jan. 18. Formore information call Walter Stevenson, emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5264.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA CITES NPS FOR RCRA VIOLATIONSAT HAWAII VOLCANOES NATIONAL PARK   EPA is asking the National Park Service (NPS) to pay a$243,800 penalty for allegedly storing hazardous wastes atHawaii Volcanoes National Park last year without therequired Resource Conservation & Recovery Act permit. Thewastes included acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol,arsenic, mercury and other substances generated by roadbuilding, automotive maintenance and labs studyingvolcanoes.   NPS also was cited for storing wastes in containers thatwere rusted or leaking despite having acceptable containerson site which could have been used. The park removed thecontainers with the waste in October 1995. EPA has orderedthe facility to develop a hazardous waste-management planwithin two months. It must include procedures ensuring thatall hazardous waste is moved off site shortly after it isgenerated. For more information, contact EPA's Lois Grunwaldat (415) 744-1588.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA: HEALTH BENEFITS EXCEED COSTSOF REDUCING ACID RAIN PRECURSORS   The Clean Air Act's acid-rain provisions will providebetween $3 billion and $11 billion worth of health benefitsin 1997 to residents of 31 eastern states, according to anassessment by EPA.   The agency's report also says the value of healthbenefits from reducing acid-rain precursors will be evengreater once the controls are fully in place by 2010. Thecost of complying with the acid-rain provisions are expectedto range from $1.2 billion to $2.4 billion in 2010, thereport adds.   Sulfate aerosols comprise about 40 percent of inhalableparticulate matter in the eastern United States, accordingto the report. Reductions in the number of new cases ofchronic bronchitis account for another 9 percent of thehealth benefits, with other avoided problems accounting forthe remainder.   EPA's Regional Acid Deposition Model provided the basisfor the report, which also used SO2 emission reductionsprojected to occur under Title IV to estimate atmosphericsulfate aerosol concentrations in the eastern United Statesand Canada. This data were combined with 1990 Census data toforecast population levels in portions of the two countrieswhere changes in sulfate levels are projected.   The study used published epidemiology studies that linkcertain health effects with sulfate level changes andwillingness-to-pay estimates published in economicliterature to put a value on changes in health, according toEPA.   The report was prepared by EPA's acid rain division aspart of an effort to estimate the total costs and benefitsof the Clean Air Act. To obtain a copy, call EPA's Acid RainHotline at (202) 233-9620 or the Acid Rain Division'shomepage on the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/docs/acidrain/ardhome.html. For moreinformation, contact Ann Watkins of the acid rain divisionat (202) 233-9113.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA, ASIWPCA ISSUE DRAFT GUIDANCEFOR EVALUATING NONPOINT PROGRAMS   States would have nine major components upon which toevaluate and upgrade their runoff pollution-controlprograms, according to a draft guidance issued by EPA and anassociation of state officials.   The guidance allows states to review and revise theirprograms to include:Explicit short- and long-term goals for protecting surfaceand ground waters.A balance between statewide, nonpoint-source programs andon-the-ground management of individual watersheds wherewater bodies are polluted or threatened.Abatement of water quality impairments from current sourcesand possible future activities.Identification of waters and watersheds polluted orthreatened by polluted runoff.A review, upgrade and implementation of all programcomponents required under Section 319 of the Clean WaterAct.Efficient and effective program management.Strong working partnerships with appropriate groups.Identification of federal lands and goals that are inharmony with state program goals.A feedback loop through which the state reviews, evaluatesand revises its nonpoint-source program and its managementevery five years.   A state that follows these requirements would beconsidered a Tier I state and would be given moreflexibility than other states, the draft guidance says. EPAwould also provide states with the necessary technical andfinancial assistance.   The final guidance is slated for release in March 1996.Comments are being sought through Jan. 19. The draftguidance is available through the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/owow. It also is available from theAssociation of State and Interstate Water Pollution ControlAdministrators at (202) 898-0905.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996STATE OFFICIALS SEE HWIR PROPOSALCOMPLICATING WASTE MANAGEMENT   While some industry officials are cheering possibleexemptions of certain hazardous waste from strict managementrequirements under the proposed Hazardous WasteIdentification Rule (HWIR), state management officials areexpecting their role to become more complicated.   The self-implementing rule would require state officialsto conduct more sampling and inspecting at facilities toensure these businesses are complying with the rule, saidJennifer Kaduck, chief of the hazardous waste branch for theGeorgia Environmental Protection Department. The proposalsets concentration levels below which generators can managehazardous process waste constituents under Subtitle D of theResource Conservation & Recovery Act.   The rule would be difficult to enforce, Kaduck said.Although state agencies already have done much inspectionand sampling, HWIR will increase these responsibilitiesconsiderably, she said. "We have an obligation to thepublic" to ensure businesses are properly complying with therule, she said.Many Questions Expected   States also would have to consider the costs of adoptingthe rule, according to Susan Ferguson, director of wastepolicy for the Texas Natural Resources ConservationCommission. An overlooked upfront cost states would incur isthe time spent answering questions from the regulatedcommunity, Ferguson said. The rule is self-implementing forbusinesses, and companies are likely to ask about testing ofwaste to determine the hazardous concentration, she said.   The proposed rule (EW, Nov. 27, 1995, p. 451) also mayskew state funding, officials say. Many state agenciesreceive federal funding based on the management of hazardouswaste, Ferguson said.   State officials do not know how many businesses wouldseek to remove waste from Subtitle C requirements throughthe HWIR or how much of the waste stream would meet the newexit level, Ferguson said. The levels are fairly low, andtreatment residue and wastewater possibly are the mostlikely to exit Subtitle C. Ferguson said she hopes companieswill modify processes to limit the amount of listedhazardous waste they generate.   Some officials also are concerned about a section in therule's preamble asking for comments on a future proposal toset contingent management exit levels for Department ofEnergy mixed waste, Ferguson said. "States have not beenconvinced by the data" showing mixed waste is safe in lowconcentrations, she said. For more information, contactFerguson at (512) 239-5000 or Kaduck, at (404) 656-4713.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PHYSICIANS' GROUP SOUNDING ALERTABOUT DANGERS FROM AIR POLLUTION   The American Medical Association's House of Delegates hasadopted policy resolutions urging doctors to inform thepublic about air pollution's impact on the body, protectingbiological diversity and the dangers of the sun'sultraviolet rays. The group based the recommendations on thepremise that "human health is inseparable from the health ofthe natural world."   Resolution 404 seeks to alert doctors, patients and thepublic of damage to body organs and systems by indoor andoutdoor air pollution. Exposure to air pollutants occursthrough the lungs, skin and digestive tract, the resolutionstates.   John Kimball Scott, vice president of the NationalAssociation of Physicians for the Environment, said that "itis important to understand that pollution can affect notonly the lungs, but virtually every organ and system of thebody."   Resolution 403 urges physicians to be aware of biologicaldiversity and its relationship to human health, especiallyin terms of the development of drugs and biologicals derivedfrom plants, animals and other elements of the naturalworld. Resolution 405 is intended to alert the public aboutdangers from excessive exposure to ultraviolet rays inadvance of the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREENHOUSE 'CAR TALKS' REPORT URGESBOOSTING CAFE STANDARD TO 45 MPG   Raising the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE)standard to 45 miles per gallon is the single biggest stepthat can be taken to slow global warning, according theClinton Administration's Policy Dialogue Advisory Committeeon Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Personal MotorVehicles. Because the technology to raise CAFE to 45 mpg isavailable, benefits from this step would be evident beforethose produced by reduced driving and alternative fuels, the"car talks" committee says.   The recommendation is contained in an executive summaryissued by a majority of the committee, which was unable toreach consensus following more than a year of discussionsamong regulators, environmental advocacy groups and affectedindustries such as automakers and oil companies. Althoughthe process stalemated, the committee majority said in itsDec. 13 report that three key actions can be taken to reducegreenhouse gas emissions: higher CAFE, reduced driving andcleaner fuels.Tire 'Feebates' Recommended   Higher CAFE standards, plus research and developmentsupport, should be implemented in 1998 to provide marketincentives, the summary says. Introducing "feebates" for lowrolling-resistance tires will also help fuel economy, itadds.   Recommended alternative fuels measures include supportingfurther research and development for electric vehicles andinfrastructure; tax credits for natural gas vehicles andinfrastructure; more support for liquid biofuels researchand development; and production incentives for low-emittingfuels.   Driving-reduction steps include encouraging the equitableshift of state and local road subsidies to cost-of-driving;encouraging land-use away from auto dependency by improvingfixed-route and on-demand transit services plus bicycle andpedestrian access; and reforming workplace parking-subsidyprograms.   The committee majority contended that its suggestions areneeded if the United States is to meet its obligation underthe Framework Convention on Climate Change. Besides reducingvehicle emissions, the suggestions should also reduce urbansmog and consumer expenditures, create jobs and eliminateU.S. reliance on imported oil, the summary says. For a copyof the report, contact Roni Lieberman of the Sierra Club at(202) 675-7903.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EPA PROPOSES AIR PERMIT EXEMPTIONSFOR SOME NON-MAJOR AREA SOURCES   Chromium electroplaters, dry cleaners and commercialsterilizers would benefit from amended EPA rules for newarea sources of hazardous air pollutants. A rule proposedDec. 13 would give these source categories a reprieve fromClean Air Act operating permit requirements.   Except in the case of Subpart X, the action proposes tolift the requirement that these non-major sources obtainTitle V operating permits. An EPA amendment to Subpart Xconfirms that existing non-major secondary lead smeltingfacilities will still be subject to Title V permit rules.   EPA says the purpose of the proposal is to reduce theregulatory burden on states and local agencies, EPA regionaloffices and industry "at a time when tremendous resourcesare necessary for the initial implementation of the Title Vpermit program."   Regulatory agencies, overburdened by a backlog of permitapplications, will be unable to assist nonmajor sources,forcing these small businesses to go through greater painsto deal with the regulation. Loosening the permitting rulewill not affect a source's obligation to implement maximumachievable control technology by the assigned date,according to EPA.   On a case-by-case basis, states will consider whether togrant facility exemptions for perchlo-roethelyne from drycleaners, ethylene oxide from commercial sterilizers, hardand decorative chromium electroplaters or anodizing tanksand halogenated solvent cleaning. Only the standard forhalogenated solvent cleaning previously had a permittingexemption. EPA decided to grant a permanent exemption frompermitting requirements to decorative chromium operationsthat use either fume suppressants or trivalent chromium bathtechnologies to reduce emissions.   The exemptions would not apply to secondary lead smeltersbecause the agency judged that meeting permittingrequirements would not impose an "undue burden" on them.There are only 16 secondary lead smelters, and five of theseare non-major sources, the proposal states. "Additionally,the five non-major smelters are owned by relatively largecompanies [that]...should be better equipped to handle thePart 70 permitting process than the small businessescharacterizing the other source categories." Comments on theproposal will be accepted through Jan. 12. For moreinformation, contact Lalit Banker of the emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5420.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996REFRIGERATOR MAKERS SETTLE LAWSUITOVER 'CFC-FREE' ADVERTISEMENTS   Three manufacturers have agreed to change advertisingclaims about ozone-depleting chemicals used in theirrefrigerators to settle a California lawsuit brought bythree environmental advocacy groups.   The lawsuit, Ozone Action v. Amana Refrigeration, (No.973282) was filed in San Francisco Superior Court byEnvironmental Law Foundation, Earth Day 2000, and OzoneAction. It alleged that General Electric Co., AmanaRefrigeration Inc., and Whirl-pool Corp. and severalretailers were making false claims about so-called "CFC-free" refrigerators in violation of California's "Green"labeling law and Federal Trade Commission guidelines forenvironmental marketing claims.   The refrigerator manufacturers agreed to furnish stickersto dealers stating the refrigerators contain HCFC-14b, aknown ozone depleting chemical, and to display store posterslisting the HCFC content of the refrigerators. The threemanufacturers, as part of the settlement announced Dec. 22,also are making a $100,000 grant for further study of ozonedepletion.   The suit said the "CFC-Free" ads, while true, weremisleading consumers into believing the refrigerators didnot harm the ozone layer. HCFCs contribute to ozone-layerloss, but are a far smaller factor than CFCs. Thedefendants, which included Sears Roebuck & Co., Circuit CityInc., Montgomery Ward & Co. and Basic Living Products, saidthey did not believe the advertising was misleading.   In a separate action, the three environmental groups saidthey and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group will sueMaytag and Sony for allegedly failing to label theirrefrigerators as containing CFCs-a designation required bythe 1990 Clean Air Act amendments.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996R E S O U R C E SNortheast-Midwest Institute has released the 156-page reportComing Clean for Economic Development: A Resource Book onEnvironmental Cleanup and Economic Development. Copies cost$39 each. Call (202) 544-5200.U.S. Government Information has released EPA NationalPublications Catalog 1995. It is available for $42. Call(202) 512-1800.American Society for Testing & Materials has published thefirst peer-reviewed scientific examination of the fate andeffects of the Exxon Valdez oil spill. Call (610) 832-9500.U.S. Department of Commerce is organizing an EnvironmentalTechnologies Matchmaker Trade Delegation to Korea, Singaporeand Indonesia April 23-30. For information aboutparticipating, call Derek Parks at (202) 482-0287.American Society of Civil Engineers begins publication thismonth of the Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, edited byLevent Kavvas of the University of California. Call (800)548-2723 for subscription information.EPA has released Innovative Treatment Technologies: AnnualStatus Report, 7th Edition, which describes innovativemethods being used at hazardous waste sites. Forinformation, call the RCRA/Super-fund Hotline at (800) 424-9810.Wessex Institute of Technology, Southampton, U.K., hasestablished a World Wide Web site to provide information onits conferences. The site is located athttp://www.witcmi.ac.uk/.Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development hasreleased the study Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants inOECD Countries (235 pp., $56). Call (202) 785-6323.Blymyer Engineers Inc. is offering seminars on how to usethe Internet for environmental information. Dates andlocations are Feb. 21, Marietta, Ga.; Feb. 22, Atlanta, Ga.;Feb. 26, Emeryville, Calif.; Feb. 28, San Jose, Calif.;March 1, Sacramento, Calif.; March 6, Anaheim, Calif.; andMarch 7, Burbank, Calif. Call (800) 753-3773.Energy Research Corp. has established a World Wide Web siteat http://www.ercc.com.Government Institutes Inc. is distributing its 1996 catalogof materials on environmental health and safety. Call (301)921-2355.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996GREAT LAKES EFFORT COULD BE DAMAGEDBY GOP BUDGET CUTS, BROWNER SAYS   The Republican-drafted EPA appropriations bill vetoed byPresident Clinton may cost the Great Lakes initiative morethan $245 million in water quality funding, EPAAdministrator Carol Browner says.   Browner issued the findings of an economic analysisestimating costs and benefits of the final guidance issuedby EPA that sets water quality standards for the Great Lakesarea. She noted that EPA has made strides in the Great Lakescleanup over the past 25 years but that the fiscal 1996spending bill threatens the Great Lakes effort.   The bill also would limit EPA's ability to takeenforcement actions in the Great Lakes area, Browner said.EPA and the Great Lakes states made more than 19,000inspections and took more than 2,000 enforcement actions inthe eight-state area in 1994. "With the Republican budget,the environmental cop would not be on the beat," she said.   Great Lakes Superfund sites would also be hurt, accordingto Browner, who said 434 sites in the area would not becleaned up because the bill "cuts funding of toxic wastecleanup by 25 percent."   The cost-benefit analysis that was performed on the areajustifies the potential costs of the Great Lakes initiative,according to EPA. Three case studies of representativecommunities were used for the analysis: the Fox River nearGreen Bay, Wis.; the Saginaw River near Bay City, Mich.; andthe Black River near Cleveland.   The analysis said the Fox River area would pay $3.6million for water-quality improvements and receive benefitsworth $4.5 million, while the Saginaw River area would pay$2.6 million and receive benefits worth $4 million. However,the Black River area would pay $2.1 million and receivebenefits worth $900,000, according to the study.   Copies of the Great Lakes reports are available bycalling (513) 489-8910. For more information on theguidance, contact Jim Hanlon (202) 260-5400 or Mark Morris(202) 260-0312.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CALIFORNIA'S AIR RESOURCES BOARDMANDATES CLEANER-BURNING FUEL   The California Air Resources Board has mandated thatcleaner-burning gasoline be sold statewide, a step officialsexpect will reduce vehicular emissions by about 1 billionpounds annually. The gasoline is produced by changing therefinery process to reduce toxic compounds and sulfurcontent of gasoline.   Although the price of the gasoline cannot be predictedbecause prices are dependant on market conditions, CARBestimates that production costs will be between five and 15cents a gallon.   CARB officials says the new gasoline has undergoneextensive testing, with more than 800 cars driven more than5 million miles. It will be available in the same octanelevels as the current gasoline. For more information, call(800) 566-6655.   CALIFORNIA-The San Diego Regional Water Quality ControlBoard has refused to reduce two fines totaling $6.2 millionagainst the San Diego for sewage spill and treatmentviolations. City officials offered $1.1 million toward aproposed $3.7 million fine for a 1993 spill in LosPenasquitos Lagoon and a separate $2.5 million fine forinadequate sludge treatment. A senior deputy city attorneysaid the city is negotiating with the regional board. SanDiego has gone to court seeking relief from the fine, andSuperior Court Judge Judith McConnell remanded the matter tothe board for a rehearing.   COLORADO-Home Depot U.S.A. Inc., U.S. EPA and the statehave announced a prospective-purchaser agreement to resolvepotential liability claims and foster commercial propertydevelopment in Denver. The deal requires Home Depot to cleanup a portion of a Superfund site in exchange for agreementby the governmental agencies not to sue it for liability.The company also will operate and maintain the property toensure there will be no risk to the public health orenvironment from past contamination. Home Depot plans astore on the remediated site. Cleanup will be supervised bythe state Department of Public Health and Environment.   DELAWARE-The Department of Natural Resources andEnvironmental Control has proposed a trading program for airemissions. The proposal would allow industries to earncredits for voluntarily reducing emissions of volatileorganic compounds or nitrogen oxides below levels set understate regulations. If a facility exceeds the targeted levelsfor emission reductions, 90 percent of the excess could bebanked, with the remainder retired to assure additional air-quality improvements. A facility seeking to expandoperations could use its banked credits to offset additionalVOC or NOx emissions or buy credits from another facility atwhatever price it can negotiate. A program audit would beconducted every three years, and public comment would besolicited during the permit-approval process. Two publichearings will be held this month, with final adoption of therules expected in April.   MASSACHUSETTS-The legislature has authorized $100 millionin bonds to continue state hazardous site cleanups. A $60million fund that has paid for cleanups since 1987 hadfallen to $150,000 when the House passed the reauthorizationbond. The state had halted cleanup at 73 sites and hadexpected to close down the remaining remediation operations.Contractors are working again on all state cleanupactivities, a state official said. For more information,contact Te Leone at (617) 292-5845.   NEW JERSEY-Auto emissions testing is being threatened byRepublican leaders in the Assembly. Assembly Speaker GarabedHaytaian and Majority Leader Jack Collins have said they arewilling to make changes in the law to respond to publicconcerns about the program. The testing has becomecontroversial because other states are bailing out of thefederally mandated program and because of publicity thatclaimed the law would lead the state to confiscate cars. Thelaw regulating testing, passed just five months ago,requires owners of vehicles that fail the test to correctproblems. Both lawmakers have said there is enough time tomake changes because the program is not scheduled to startuntil 1997.   TEXAS-The Border Environmental Cooperation Commission hasapproved a $11.7 million waste water treatment and reuseproject for El Paso. BECC, a bilateral body arising from theNorth American Free Trade Agreement, will certify additionalprojects at its next meeting. They are expected to include a$40 million wastewater treatment plant in Ciudad Juarez,Mexico; a $1 million wastewater treatment plant inMatamoros, Mexico; a $7.8 million tire recycling project inMexicali, Mexico; a $52 million water distribution andtreatment project in Nogales, Mexico; a $770,000 watersupply and waste water treatment plant in Naco, Mexico; a$118 million urban development and environmental improvementproject in Rio Tijuana, Mexico; a $2.7 million upgradingplan for a wastewater treatment plant in Somerton, Calif.;and a $2 million upgrading plan for a water system inDouglas, Ariz.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AGING DNEPR RIVER HYDRO PROJECTSTHREATEN MANY AREAS OF UKRAINE   Decrepit Soviet-built hydroelectric works along the DneprRiver are putting vast areas of Ukraine at risk of flooding,according to an group of international experts. The groupwarns that excessively high water levels may cause the sandand soil foundation of the Kakhovka Reservoir to collapse.   The failure of this dam would release a 20-30 meter highwave moving at 130 km. per hour, capable of destroying somecities and hundreds of towns in the Kherson, Odessa, Crimeaand Nikolayev regions, the authors of the study documentsaid.   Chemicals, oil products and waste contained in thereservoir would create an environmental disaster, destroyingsoil in the Dnepr Basin and life in the Black Sea andirreparably damaging coastal areas and resorts on the Azovand Black seas. Vasyl Durdynets, Ukraine's minister forstate security and emergencies, said the government is awareof the consequences of a disaster and will submit a plan forthe safe functioning of the Dnepr reservoirs to thegovernment's commission on environmental safety.   AUSTRALIA-The nation has withheld endorsement of threeOrganization for Economic Cooperation & Developmentenvironmental resolutions, surprising observers who expectenvironmentally friendly actions from Australia. The mainblockage is over binding resolutions to extend to non-membercountries mutual acceptance of data and guidelines forchemical testing. Australia also has reservations aboutguidelines on setting up a pollutant release and transferregistry modeled on the U.S. Toxic Release Inventory.Another source of discord may concern the "greening" ofgovernment operations. Contact: Bill Long, OECD, (+33 1) 4524 8200.   CANADA-British Columbia has adopted Canada's mostrigorous new-vehicle emission standards. They are aimed atreducing pollution at least 50 percent by 2010 and 70percent by 2020 in the southwest corner of the province. Thelaw stipulates that by 1998, all cars sold in BritishColumbia will have to meet U.S. emissions standards, whichare stricter than Canada's. By 2001, all new vehicles soldin the province will have to be certified under "California"standards and emit on average 70 percent less of certainpollutants than current vehicles, if they are to sold in theprovince. The standards also mandate that zero-emissionvehicles comprise 10 percent of the market by 2003. Contact:Environment Canada, (819) 997-2800.   CHILE-The Ministry of Mining says government and privatesector actions against air pollution will bring miningoperations and smelters up to U.S. and European standards by2000. Technical requirements to set emission levels andother standards should be passed by next June, and existingdecrees aimed at specific pollutants have already affectedmining, ministry official say. Large sources such as copperproducers Codelco and ENAMI, are said to be committed tobecoming more environmentally responsible. Contact: JanetMaritano, Ministry of Mining; (+56 2) 696-5872.   ECUADOR-Fundacion Jatun Sacha has acquired 4,000 acres ofwet forest, with the goal of preserving the last 0.8 percentof land in western Ecuador. It describes the land as havingthe world's richest biodiversity. The group says it needs12,500 acres to adequately protect life forms but iscompeting with a logging company that is eyeing the entirearea. Contact: World Parks Endowment, 1616 P St. NW, #200,Washington, DC 20036; (202) 939-3808.   JAPAN-The Ministry of International Trade and Industryhas asked private businesses to prepare new voluntary anti-pollution plans to conform with ISO 14000 environmental-management standards. MITI's directive also promotesrecycling, non-polluting vehicles, measures to reduce air,water, soil and noise pollution and alternative energysources, including solar power.   NEPAL-This Himalayan nation and the European Union haveagreed to improve environmental cooperation. The accord, thefirst between the E.U. and Nepal, calls for the creation ofa permanent mechanism for facilitating communication onenvironmental and other issues.   NEW ZEALAND/AUSTRALIA-A cooperative waste programannounced at the 10th bilateral Environment and ConservationCouncil creates an "interim biogeographical regionalization"of the two nations to identify shortcomings in nationalwildlife protection. The governments will create acomprehensive mechanism for protecting natural areas.   SOUTH KOREA-Seoul has decided not to build a nuclearwaste repository on Kulop Island because two fault lineswere located about two miles away, the Environment Ministryhas announced. The facility was to store up to 1 milliondrums of waste. South Korea now has no specific site tostore waste from its 10 nuclear power plants. Five moreplants are under construction. Contact: EnvironmentalAttache, South Korean Embassy, (202) 939-6463.Back to Headline List CopyrightAIR/WATER POLLUTION RPT:ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EVENTS CALENDAR   Feb. 5-Risk v. Resource Allocation: EnvironmentalDecisionmaking; symposium sponsored by American Society forSafety Engineers, National Registry of EnvironmentalProfessionals and American Industrial Hygiene Association;Orlando, Fla. Call (703) 849-8888.   Feb. 5-7-The Environmental Regulation Course; presentedby Executive Enterprises Inc.; Iselin, N.J., and Denver.Also being presented Feb. 14-16 in Cincinnati and Feb. 19-21in San Diego. Call (800) 831-8333.   Feb. 5-9-Corporate Environmental Management Systems:Preparing for ISO 14000; course presented by University ofMassachusetts and Bureau Veritas Quality International;Amherst, Mass. Call (413) 545-4195.   Feb. 5-9-Field Sampling QA/QC Course; presented by Centerfor Hazardous Materials Research; Pittsburgh. Also beingpresented Sept. 9-13. Call (412) 826-5320.   Feb. 6-7-Environmental Site Assessment Practices forCommercial Real Estate; course presented by ASTM; San Diego,Calif. Call (215) 299-5480.   Feb. 6-9-Wet Weather Flows: Integrating EnvironmentalResponse in Urban Wetlands; 1996 Winter Technical Conferenceof the Association of Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies;Eldorado Hotel, Santa Fe, N.M. For information, call (202)833-2672.   Feb. 7-An Air Toxics Technical Update: Innovative Methodsfor Sampling & Analysis; seminar presented by Air ToxicsLtd.; Sacramento, Calif. Also being presented Feb. 27 in SanFrancisco and Atlanta; Feb. 28 in Seattle; and Feb. 29 inIrvine, Calif., and Denver. For information, call (800) 985-5955.   Feb. 7-9-Stormwater Management & Treatment; environmentalengineering short course presented by George WashingtonUniversity; Washington, D.C. Call (800) 424-9773.   Feb. 8-Advanced Hazardous Waste Management; coursepresented by University of Missouri College of Engineering;Kansas City, Mo. Call (800) 776-1044.   Feb. 12-13-Fundamentals of Dispersion Modeling; Feb. 14-15-Computer Modeling Laboratory; courses presented byTrinity Consultants Inc.; Greenville, S.C. Call (214) 661-8100.   Feb. 12-16-The Environmental Compliance Bootcamp: BasicTraining for New Environmental Professionals; coursepresented by Government Institutes Inc.; Salt Lake City.Call (301) 921-2345.   Feb. 13-14-1996 Conference on Corporate Environmental,Health & Safety Excellence; sponsored by Arthur D. LittleInc. and the Conference Board; Marriott Marquis, New YorkCity. Call (212) 339-0345.   Feb. 14-16-New Techniques in Risk Assessment; coursepresented by International Business Communications; LakeBuena Vista, Fla. Call (508) 481-6400.   Feb. 15-16-Title III Air Toxics Workshop; presented byAir & Waste Management Association; Atlanta. Forinformation, call (412) 232-3444, ext. 3142.   Feb. 15-16-Registered Environmental Manager and CertifiedEnvironmental Auditor Workshop and Exams; presented byNational Registry of Environmental Professionals; Orlando,Fla. Call (770) 486-9253.   Feb. 26-March 1-The Environmental Technology Institute;presented by Government Institutes Inc.; Orlando, Fla. Alsobeing presented Aug. 26-30 in Hilton Head, S.C. Call (301)921-2345.   Feb. 28-March 1-Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl; conference and courses sponsored by Air & WasteManagement Association and U.S. EPA; Sheraton Sand KeyResort, Clearwater Beach, Fla. For information, call (412)232-3444, ext. 3142.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-26IA086-000616-B015-272http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev49.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002133 text/html 6156HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:19:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMTContent-length: 5970Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev49.html Sample Issue Copyright ALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet April 17, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- VOLKSWAGEN JOINS THE RACE FOR FIRST COMMERCIALLY VIABLE ELECTRIC CAR (58 words) --------------------------- ITALIAN CHEMICAL CO. INTRODUCES NEW, CLEANER DIESEL FUEL (272 words) -------------------- CHINA MOVES TOWARD VISION OF GIANT HYDRO DAM, DISPLACING 1.3 MILLION (240 words) LOS ANGELES SET TO ADD 150 MEGA-WATT GEOTHERMAL COMPLEX (98 words) CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992VOLKSWAGEN JOINS THE RACE FOR FIRST COMMERCIALLY VIABLE ELECTRIC CARVolkswagen AG has plans to unleash an electric vehiclecalled the Chico car by the end of 1993.The company has just developed a computerized system that willgreatly assist in mass producing the vehicle.  Volkswagen hopes thatthe Chico will put it in the front-running position of the newlydeveloping electric car market.(CHICAGO TRIBUNE: 4/5)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992ITALIAN CHEMICAL CO. INTRODUCES NEW, CLEANER DIESEL FUELDiesel-Bi is the name of a clean diesel fuel produced in part fromvegetable oils and methanol.  An Italian company, Novamont, based inMilan and a subsidiary of the Ferruzzi-Montedison Group, will beginfield testing the fuel this month in South Dakota.The company has worked closely for two years with Senator ThomasDaschle (D-SD) who hosted a March 28 ceremony to inaugurate the fieldtests.  A company spokesman said Ferruzzi is seeking eventual EPAapproval of the product so that it can be commercially sold in theU.S.  Testing will take place in the EPA-certified laboratory inSioux Falls, and data from these tests along with other company testswill be compared to 1993 and '94 clean diesel emissions standardsadopted in California.Diesel-Bi is made of 90 percent vegetable oil and 10 percent methanolthat is "combined in the presence of a catalyst to produce a methylester," a company official said.  Ethanol could be used, but methanolis preferred by the company as more price competitive.Palm, sunflower, soya and other oils can be used to produceDiesel-Bi.  In Europe, canola is the feedstock most commonly used.Some test results have shown that sulphur emissions have beeneliminated and particulates and carbon monoxide have been reduced upto 50 percent.  The fuel can also be used in combination withtraditional diesel fuel.Ferruzzi began his work on Diesel-Bi about two years ago and held thefirst field tests in Zurich last summer.  Two buses in Sioux Fallsare scheduled to operate solely on the fuel for four months.(NEW FUELS REPORT: 3/30)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992CHINA MOVES TOWARD VISION OF GIANT HYDRO DAM, DISPLACING 1.3 MILLIONThe dream of damming the flood-prone Yangtze, which captivated MaoZedong in the 50's, is moving toward realization.Everything about the project is enormous.  It will generate 84billion kilowatts of hydroelectric power per year by 2008.  The l85-meter-high dam will be the biggest hydropower station in the world,as well as the world's largest ship-lift.  The price: an estimated$l0.5 billion.But the human cost will be equally enormous.  Some 1.3 million peoplewill be displaced from 140 towns (some with populations of overl00,000) and countless villages.  Also lost will be 58,800 acres ofarable land, 159 smaller power stations, and 675 factories.Resistance is so strong, particularly from small farmers, that athird of the deputies to the National People's Congress, usually arubber-stamping body for government decisions, voted against it.Adding to the tension is an inequality of benefits.  Sichuanprovince, with 85 percent of the people to be displaced, stands toreceive only l0 percent of the power generated.  It will also face aheightened risk of flooding.Critics worry about the risk of the reservoir, induced earthquakesand river bank collapses.  They also contend that the rapidaccumulation of silt will wipe out much of the gains in generatingcapacity.The dam will be financed through bonds, preferential foreign loans,state funds, and power generation (expected to start nine years afterconstruction is begun).(LONDON FINANCIAL TIMES: 4/7)Back to Headline List CopyrightALTERNATIVE ENERGY NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetApril 17, 1992LOS ANGELES SET TO ADD 150 MEGA-WATT GEOTHERMAL COMPLEXLos Angeles joins the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Coso, CA intapping local geothermal energy. The Los Angeles Department of Water& Power (DWP) has awarded a contract for a nearby 150-megawatt powercomplex to Calpine Corporation, which built the Navy's plant therefive years ago.The Los Angeles DWP will lease a site from the Weapons Center, 200miles north of the city.  Calpine, builder of both plants, alsomaintains and operates the Navy's geothermal facility.No figures have been divulged, but observers estimate the cost atabout $200 million.(ENGINEERING NEWS-RECORD: 4/6)Back to Headline List WT02-B36-27IA086-000616-B015-294http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev27.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002153 text/html 36989HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:19:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:11 GMTContent-length: 36802Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev27.html Sample Issue Copyright ASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (473 words) COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDS FOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS (451 words) OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWARE ON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS (186 words) LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCH ON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (521 words) NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSING PUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS (123 words) HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WAS SOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS (359 words) BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVER FORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS (819 words) BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUT MAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES (238 words) DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCF AS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT (699 words) NEWSBRIEFS (650 words) CONTRACTS (272 words) CALENDAR (109 words) CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDS   GOOD BUDGET NEWS - Researchers and health officialsworking on lead issues received good news Jan. 5 whenCongress passed a bill that will fund the NationalInstitutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) through Sept. 30, the end ofthe fiscal year. This means NIH and CDC now can dispersegrants and carry out disease surveillance and otherprograms. NIH received $11.9 billion, a 5.7 percent increaseover its fiscal 1995 budget. CDC, which supports a varietyof lead education and other programs, was essentially flat-funded at $2.1 billion. The two agencies were the only onesto be fully funded, although the targeted appropriationsmeasure (H.R. 1358) also allocated money for specificfederal programs such as Black Lung benefit payments. H.R.1358, however, does not clearly define how NIH should dividethe appropriations among its 24 institutes, centers anddivisions. The House intended for the institutes to befunded at levels close to those detailed in H.R. 2127, whichthe House passed Aug. 4, committee staff said. But NIH maybe able to make some adjustments, staff said, adding theWhite House Office of Management and Budget is reviewing thequestion.   However, EPA and the Occupational Health and SafetyAdministration (OSHA) were not so lucky. Separate continuingresolutions (H.R. 1643 and H.J. Res. 134) sent employeesback to work but allocated funds only through Jan. 26.Republican Whip Sen. Trent Lott (Miss.) said Jan. 10 the GOPwill not force a third government shutdown. Instead,Congress likely will pass targeted appropriations. "We'llfund the programs we think are important, and we won't fundprograms we don't think important," said House BudgetCommittee Chairman John Kasich (R-Ohio Jan. 14. EPA and OSHAconsistently have been targets of the GOP's frustration withgovernment. "[T]he Republican leadership does not care aboutEPA; does not care about consumer protection; does not careabout OSHA...Corporate interests are going to have a fieldday," said Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.), referring to theomission of these programs from the recent targetedappropriations.   LOOPHOLE NEARLY CLOSED - Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge (R)is pushing to close a regulatory loophole benefitingasbestos-removal companies that has long frustrated stateofficials. Of the five states in the EnvironmentalProtection Agency's Region III, Pennsylvania is the only onewith no method to target and prosecute unscrupulouscontractors, said John Curries, spokesman for the stateDepartment of Labor and Industry (L&I). Pennsylvania beganthe effort in 1990 when the state legislature created anadvisory committee made up of government, academic andindustry representatives to determine whether the stateshould enact a licensing system. The committee endorsed theidea and in April 1995, the L&I drafted language to turn therecommendation into law. Ridge plans to approve the plan andseek a legislative sponsor.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996COSTLY RULE SETS MACT STANDARDSFOR NEWER MUNICIPAL INCINERATORS   Newer municipal waste combustors (MWCs) will be requiredto install a combination of high-efficiency pollution-control equipment starting Jan. 29, if an EPA final ruledoes not draw significant negative comments. While the ruleenables EPA to reduce several pollutants, including lead,simultaneously, it is expected to impose substantial capitalcosts.   The maximum achievable control technology standard willaffect existing and new MWCs capable of combusting more than35 metric tons daily. It establishes emissions limits fordioxins, furans, cadmium, lead, mercury, particulate matter,hydrogen chloride, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide andfugitive ash. Stricter performance standards apply to MWCswith capacities greater than 225 metric tons a day.   The rule, published in the Dec. 19 Federal Register,mandates that MWCs built after Sept. 20, 1994, or modifiedafter June 19, 1996, will be subject to new, more stringentperformance standards. MWCs built between Dec. 20, 1989 andSept. 20, 1994, or modified before June 19, 1996, willremain subject to MWC performance standards for plants builtafter the 1989 date. This provision was promulgated Feb. 11,1991. The dates were set to avoid same MWC plants beingsubject to overlapping rules.   EPA says there are about 307 operating MWC units at 128plants, providing a total combustion capacity of 94,000metric tons per day. It says that 179 MWCs will be affectedby the rule; about 100 are publicly owned. Costs for theupdated standard exceed those for the 1991 standard by $156million for capital investment and by $43 million for annualoperations. Total capital costs from investments mandated byboth rules approach $780 million, or an added $13 per metricton of solid waste combusted.   The agency says the benefits include annual emissionsgreater than the 1991 rule: 3,000 fewer metric tons of SO2and 4,000 fewer metric tons of hydrogen chloride. For mostcategories there is less than a 10 percent improvement, butfor mercury, the new standard will eliminate 200 percent ofthe amount removed by the 1991 rule. In total, the ruleexpects to reduce emissions of several hazardous airpollutants by about 110,000 tons per year, EPA says.   If a facility combusts less than 10 metric tons per dayof solid waste, regardless of capacity, it is exempted fromthe rule. Tire-burning facilities are exempted from theperformance standard but not recordkeeping requirements. Andsmall independent-power producers, cogeneration facilitiesand metals recovery facilities are not subject to the MWCstandards.   The regulation, simultaneously released as a direct finalrule and a proposed rule, takes effect Jan 29 unlesssignificant adverse comments are received by Jan. 18. Formore information call Walter Stevenson, emission standardsdivision, (919) 541-5264.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996OSHA PROVIDES GUIDANCE SOFTWAREON AGENCY'S ASBESTOS STANDARDS   Customized guidance on compliance with OccupationalSafety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards onasbestos is available for free from the agency.   The OSHA Asbestos Advisor - interactive computer softwarethat can provide building owners, contractors, consultantsand others with quick answers to technical questions aboutcomplying with the standards - is available from theDepartment of Labor electronic bulletin board, LABOR NEWSand the Compliance Assistance Section of the OSHA home pageon the internet World Wide Web.   "This powerful new tool is another example of how OSHA isusing technology to make compliance with worker protectionseasier," said OSHA Administrator Joseph Dear. "Not only willit help improve compliance, it should be a great help toemployers in reducing costs."   In addition to being on the Internet, the AsbestosAdvisor will be added to the next edition of OSHA's CD-ROM,which can be purchased through the Government PrintingOffice.   The program can be accessed through the OSHA web page athttp://www.osha.gov/. It also is available from LABOR NEWSat (202) 219-4784. For more information, contact: EdwardStern, (202) 219-7283.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996LBP STUDIES POINT TO LACK OF RESEARCHON DANGERS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORKERS   State and federal officials are not sufficientlyprotecting construction workers from the hazardous effectsof lead-based paint (LBP), according to two studies. Eachreport recommends officials pay greater attention to workersafety as infrastructure repair work is performed on steelstructures and bridges.   The two LBP studies were conducted separately by theAlliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning and by the New YorkState Department of Health in conjunction with the MountSinai Medical Center.   Years of neglect and oversight have resulted in anincreased effort on infrastructure repair, Deborah Nagin,industrial hygienist and researcher with the New YorkDepartment of Health, told the annual convention of theAmerican Public Health Association (APHA). She said morethan 90 percent of these bridges and structures needingrepair are coated with LBP.   In addition, state and federal authorities provideminimal protection for workers who must repaint and repairsteel structures and bridges containing LBP, said PierreErville, director of environmental and housing policy forthe Alliance to End Childhood Lead Poisoning, also speakingat the APHA convention. The alliance is taking an activeinterest in worker safety because it believes inadequatesafety practices on the job can spread lead contamination toothers.Widespread State Effort Needed   The two research efforts analyzed worker safety standardsin California, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland,Michigan, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Texas and Washington.Erville's alliance targeted the scientific procedures usedto prevent lead exposure, the rate of infrastructure repairand the state of current occupational lead poisoningprevention procedures.   Only five states - Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York,New Jersey and Maryland - have passed specific legislationto protect workers from lead exposure, Erville said. Hepointed specifically to New York transportation authorities,who require detailed reports on medical testing for workersexposed to lead from contract bidders and who also require alead exposure control plan. The result of these protectionsare that contractors bidding on construction projects willnot attempt to underbid a contract and then make up for thefinancial loss by ignoring health and risk preventionprograms.   Because most states do not have specific legislativerequirements on worker protection, the U.S. Department ofTransportation should take the lead in educating andtraining state authorities on the risks of lead exposure,Erville said. One method he suggested is a system wherecontractors who bid on projects gather for "pre-bidding"conferences where the specific level of lead content is madeknown to help contractors make accurate bids and prepare forthe necessary level of worker protection.   Erville also called upon state officials to: explicitlylist lead poisoning prevention provisions in theircontracts; consult with industrial hygienists with leadprevention expertise; and ensure a level of contractortraining and worker training programs are developed andimplemented. He also urged that contractors be required toestablish a worker blood-lead level reporting system to besubmitted to state officials.   Following up on that point, Nagin said many of thesetypes of requirements already exist. The specifics of therules and regulations, however, vary widely among states,she said.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996NATIONAL CENTER FOR LEAD-SAFE HOUSINGPUBLISHES SERIES OF LEAD HANDBOOKS   The National Center for Lead-Safe Housing, Columbia, Md.,has released several new publications dealing with leadissues.   Among the new reports: A seven-volume study on dust lead,the Rochester Lead in Dust Study; a review of the scientificevidence on interim controls, Does Residential Lead PaintHazard Control Work?; a guide explaining finance options,Financing for Lead Hazard Control: Descriptions of Programsthat Work; a "white paper" on insurance-related issues,Major Issues Affecting the Availability and Affordability ofLiability Insurance for Housing Which May Contain Lead-BasedPaint Hazard Exposures.   To obtain copies of these reports or for moreinformation, contact: Evelyne Bloomer, National Center forLead-Safe Housing, 10227 Wincopin Circle, Suite 205,Columbia, MD 21044; or call (410) 992-0712.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996HAZWASTE-BURNING CEMENT KILN WASSOURCE OF LEAD IN BLOOD, STUDY SAYS   A hazardous waste-burning cement kiln in Alpena, Mich.,contributed 75 percent of the lead found in the blood ofnearby residents, according to researchers with RutgersUniversity.   In 18 of the 24 residents living near Lafarge Corp. andwhose blood was sampled, the levels of lead in blood werethe result of exposure from the cement kiln dust. The blood-lead levels in most of the residents were under the Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention's warning level of 10micrograms per deciliter (ug/dl), though one resident showedblood-lead levels of 11.87 ug/dl.   The researchers said they aimed to trace where the leadcame from rather than the levels of lead the exposurecaused. The Association for Responsible Thermal Treatment -a trade group of commercial hazardous waste incinerators whocompete with cement kilns in the waste burning market -sponsored the study, performed by Gene Hall in Rutger'schemistry department.Seven Households Sampled   The researchers used samples of people living in sevenhouseholds close to the Lafarge facility, with one otherhousehold located farther away from the plant used as acontrol. The study also collected samples of cement kilndust at Lafarge and samples of paint, tap water and housedust from the sample households.   Currently, cement kiln operators are allowed to storepiles of dust anywhere on their property. The Rutgersconclusions could take on added importance as EPA still iscontemplating how and if cement kiln dust will be regulated.In 1994, EPA sent a report to Congress recommending that insome circumstances, cement kiln dust could be regulatedunder Subtitle C regulations in the Resource Conservationand Recovery Act (RCRA).   Most hazardous waste incinerators are fully permittedunder RCRA, with incinerator ash considered a hazardouswaste to be disposed of in Subtitle C landfills with tripleliners, ground water monitoring requirements and leachatecontrols. EPA currently is working to unify emission limitsfor hazardous waste incinerators and boilers and industrialfurnaces, which include cement kilns. A proposed rule thataccomplishes such a goal now is being reviewed by the WhiteHouse Office of Management and Budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996BALTIMORE RESIDENTS FILE LAWSUIT OVERFORTHCOMING LEAD-PAINT REGULATIONS   Three Baltimore residents filed a class action suit thismonth in a challenge against Maryland state lead-paintregulations slated to take effect next month. The suitargues the regulation favors landlords and will result inchild poisoning.   The suit calls for an injunction prohibiting the MarylandDepartment of the Environment from implementing andenforcing its lead-paint removal and cleanup regulations,which were adopted in November 1994 and scheduled to beginFeb. 24. When passed, the law sought to prevent childhoodlead poisoning while being sensitive to the state'sdecreasing supply of affordable housing. Disputes anddisagreements between childrens' advocates and propertyowner representatives over how to implement the bill havestalled it thus far.   Joseph Espo, an attorney to the tenants who filed thesuit, said the way the forthcoming law is structured,landlords would get immunity from lawsuits in the event achild was poisoned in the lead abatement effort. Officialsfrom the Maryland Department of the Environment and theProperty Owners Association of Greater Baltimore declined tocomment on the suit. D. Robert Enten, with the PropertyOwners Association, did say, however, that the legislationin question seeks to strike a balance between the businesscommunity, the maintenance of affordable housing and theprevention of child lead poisoning.   Landlords are willing to combat the lead problem, butthey also want protection from increasing numbers oflawsuits filed by former tenants who claim their childrenwere poisoned. The property owners say this litigation willsoon drive them out of business with any controls.   Under the bill, owners of pre-1950 rental housing mustreduce lead-poisoning risks on their properties by removingand repainting surfaces that are flaking and peeling paint.In return, the landlords would be immune from lawsuits ifany children living on the property become poisoned.   The bill require landlords to follow some safetyprecautions during abatement, and tenants may be forced tovacate the unit while work is done. At issue, however, areexemptions to the safety requirements when doing electricalor plumbing work, or if repairs are performed on a paintedspace in a room less than 25 square feet.Fat Intake Could Increase Blood-LeadAbsorption in Children, Study Shows   Children exposed to lead will absorb less of it if theyeat less fat, a new study suggests. Certain nutrients havelong been known to affect the rate at which the body takesup lead, which can retard children's development, lowertheir IQs and damage their hearing, according toresearchers.   In a study of 296 inner-city preschoolers, 9 months to 3years old, the researchers found that those with high levelsof fat in their diet were more likely to have dangerouslevels of lead in their blood. Dietary calcium and iron areknown to block lead absorption, but the effects of manyother nutrients have not been explored. The researchers alsolearned that poor children are the most likely to beexposed.   The researchers said if further study supports theirfindings, it "would further strengthen the recommendation ofa low-fat diet as a healthy one for children." Federalhealth officials recommend no restrictions on fats forchildren under 2 because it might harm their growth.   Lead levels among the children ranged from 1 to 55micrograms per tenth of a liter of blood, and averaged about11. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention saysanything above 10 can cause lead poisoning in children. Thequantities of fat in the children's diets were notestimated; the researchers used only relative intakes basedon questions asked of parents.Calories May Increase Absorption   The study also found that higher levels of calories - notjust fat - were associated with higher lead absorption.However, this point is disputed by a longtime leadresearcher, who expressed doubt that higher calorie intakeis linked to higher lead absorption.   Kim Dietrich, a developmental psychologist at theUniversity of Cincinnati School of Medicine who has studiedlead for 15 years, said lead is more readily absorbed on anempty stomach. That is one reason doctors see higher leadlevels among poor children, he said. He agreed, however,that higher fat consumption is related to higher leadlevels, possibly because the fat increases absorption oflead in the intestine.   The research was led by Susan Lucas of the Department ofEpidemiology and Preventive Medicine at the University ofMaryland School of Medicine. The findings are reported inthe January issue of the journal Pediatrics, published bythe American Academy of Pediatrics.   Lucas warned children can be exposed to lead throughdust, dirt and drinking water, along with toys and housespainted before 1975, the last year lead-based paint wasused. Water can be contaminated if it flows through leadpipes, and children may eat paint flakes or inhale or licklead dust, which tastes sweet.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996BLOOD-LEAD MONITOR IN CONNECTICUTMAY BE APPLIED WITHIN OTHER STATES   A program to monitor levels of lead in blood inConnecticut that also includes worker protection measureshas been so successful in lowering blood-lead levels thatefforts are underway to expand the program to other states,according to a report in the Dec. 15 issue of Morbidity andMortality Weekly Report, published by the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC).   The program, the Connecticut Road Industry SurveillanceProject (CRISP), began in 1990 in an effort to reduce leadexposure, contamination and toxicity in bridge workers inthe state. In order to comply with the program, contractsmust carry health and safety language, and medicalmanagement of workers with centralized data reporting andintervention is required.   The CDC report shows, by contrast, that blood-lead levelscontinue to afflict bridge workers even in states withregulatory lead requirements and workplace safety and healthstandards. Among bridge workers from eight states, a quarterhad levels of blood lead above 40 micrograms of lead perdeciliter of blood.   Connecticut, however, had only 2 percent of workers withelevated blood-lead levels, which owes to the state's workerprotection measures incorporated into road constructioncontracts, the CDC report said.THANKS FOR STAYING IN TOUCH: Asbestos and Lead AbatementReport appreciates comments, news and story ideas fromreaders. Contact: Erich Shea, Editor, Business PublishersInc., 951 Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, (301)587-6793, ext. 3050; fax: (301) 587-1081.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996DAMNING DOCUMENTS SINK OCFAS FIRM'S APPEAL FALLS SHORT   Documents are critical to successful litigation againstasbestos manufacturers. The paper trail often leads to theall-important answers to the questions of what did thecompany know of the dangers of their product and when theyknew it.   A case in point concerns asbestos giant Owens-CorningFiberglass Corp. (OCF), which recently appealed a judgmentby arguing in vain that the trial court should have excludeddamaging documents about the company. Three men who sufferedasbestos-related diseases after exposure to OCF productsreceived a total of $3 million in compensatory damages and$500,000 each in punitive damages due to the company'sfailure to warn them of asbestos' hazards.   The documents that led to the verdict included since-declassified Navy reports from World War II detailing thedangers of asbestos as well as internal OCF communications.In its appeal, OCF said the court improperly admitted thesedocuments. OCF argued the Navy reports should have beenexcluded from trial because - as classified documents - thecompany could not have known the findings they contained.   As for the company memoranda, OCF said the plaintiffs hadaltered their copies to highlight damaging statements toinflame the jury. However, the Texas Court of Appeals inHouston Jan. 4 rejected OCF's argument, saying the companyhad access to the same information in the Navy reports andknew the contents of its own corporate memoranda.Navy Documents Admitted   The court also noted that, in a failure-to-warn case,what the company knows of its product's dangers is sometimesless relevant than what other experts in the field know. "Itdoes not matter whether a manufacturer was aware ofinformation regarding the dangers of asbestos use at thetime of exposure and marketing because an asbestosmanufacturer is charged with the duty to know the dangers ofasbestos products," the court ruled. "If the dangers ofasbestos were known by other manufacturers or by the Navy ator before the time of the plaintiffs' exposure, the samerisks were scientifically discoverable by OCF."   In any event, the internal OCF documents introduced attrial indicated OCF had information - at about the same timethe Navy did - on the hazards of asbestos, the court said."As early as the 1940s, OCF had in its files documentationabout shipyard insulation workers who had developedasbestosis," the court said. "It had copies of public healthbulletins about the effect of inhalation of asbestos dust.In letters to OCF, doctors conducting tests on Fiberglassrepeatedly made reference to the dangers of asbestos."   OCF cited markings on the plaintiff's exhibit and arguedthe trial court had improperly admitted into evidencedoctored copies. However, the Texas appeals court agreedwith the trial court that the markings - if indeed theplaintiff made them - were harmless.Court Admits Photocopies   "The documents about which OCF complains arephotocopies," the appeals court said. "OCF does not assertthat the photocopies do not accurately reproduce theoriginals; instead, it complains about marks made onduplicates after reproduction .... However, we have reviewedthe documents and we agree that the markings on thedocuments are not significant."   The Navy report and OCF documents were only a sampling ofthe documents the plaintiffs brought to trial on asbestos.Much of the damning evidence that had been allowed at trialwas struck from the record before jury deliberations. Forexample, the plaintiffs introduced the testimony of a Dr.Irving Selikoff at an Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration (OSHA) hearing in 1984. "The asbestos diseasedisaster which we now face largely unsuccessfully bearswitness to our failures," Selikoff said. "We haveconsistently greatly underestimated or ignored warnings ofdisease and death."   Saying the testimony should have been excluded ashearsay, the trial judge told the jury to disregardSelikoff's testimony before OSHA. OCF urged the judge todeclare a mistrial, arguing there was no way for the jury toignore such testimony. The judge rejected the company'srequest, and the appeals court agreed that the instructionto the jury to ignore the testimony was sufficient. [Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Malone, 1996 WL 3563(Tex.App.-Hous., 1 Dist.)]Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996NEWSBRIEFS   Paint Contamination Control - The Institute ofEnvironmental Sciences seeks voting members for WorkingGroup (WG-029) in its Contamination Control Division, whichis writing a Recommended Practice (RP) on "ContaminationControl Considerations in Paint Spray Applications." A"home-stretch" draft will be issued for discussion at theinstitute's annual technical meeting May 12-17, in Orlando,Fla. The RP is intended to provide guidelines for controlledpaint spray environments and related operations. The goal isto establish a uniform basis for describing, procuring,operating and testing as these relate to paint and coatings,air handling, surface cleaning and preparation, paint-related consumables, personnel garment systems and relatedlaundering, facility cleaning, paint-delivery systems, andenvironmental considerations. "The diversification ofbackgrounds and experience in the working group membershiphas been a key element," said Charles Berndt, working groupchair. "The cross-pollination of ideas that are brought tothe table...has led to the quick progress on this RP." Formore information, call the Institute of EnvironmentalSciences, (708) 255-1561.   Risky Appointment - S. Zack Mansdorf, Ph.D, president-elect of the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA)has been selected as the director of Liberty InternationalRisk Services for Liberty International, a subsidiary ofLiberty Mutual Group, in Boston. As director, Mansdorf'sresponsibilities involve development of technical services,technology transfer and worldwide client relations. Mansdorfwill begin his tenure as AIHA president in May at theAmerican Industrial Hygiene Conference and Exposition, whichis co-sponsored by AIHA. Mansdorf also has held industrialhygiene positions with the Occupational Safety and HealthAdministration, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, and theMidwest Research Institute. For more information, callChristine Feheley, (703) 849-8888.   Demolishing Suit - A couple living in Arapahoe County,Colo., have filed a lawsuit in district court sayingasbestos particles were blown over their home duringdemolition of a building located next to them. KathleenCollins and Theodore Singer named FTSC Partnership,developer of the Polo Reserve now being constructed in placeof the building; Randall & Blake Inc., the demolition firm;and the city of Littleton, Colo., which the suit sayspermitted the demolition. Singer and Collins argue in theirsuit that a crew demolished the building in June duringwindy weather. The incident threatened the couple's healthand caused emotional distress, the suit said.   Lead Contract Award - Versar Inc., Sprinfield, Va., wasawarded with three contracts with a combined potential valueof $1.5 million. The contracts include a $600,000 two-yearcontract with the Federal Highway Administration to assesscontainment efficiency in environmental exposure from leadpaint removal and maintenance on bridges. The secondcontract, worth $700,000, is to provide a variety ofinfrastructure deism services to Leigh City, Utah. The thirdcontract, for $100,000, was with the state of California'sDivision of State Architect Seismic upgrade program.   Quality Control - The American Society for Testing andMaterials (ASTM) is preparing to release a draft standardfor institutions to use for certifying environmentalprofessionals. Once the standard is approved, only about 25percent of the nation's approximately 130 credentialinginstitutions are expected to pass muster. The credentialingguidelines, the result of nearly two years of work, will becirculated to members of ASTM's subcommittee onenvironmental credentialing and ultimately to all ASTMmembers. The model for the standards effort is the Councilof Engineering and Scientific Study Boards, said AnthonyBuonicore, chairman of the task force developing thestandards. The draft standard states it "does not propose toaddress any specific certification program for environmentalprofessionals." It does, however, specify criteria forcredentialing organizations. Contact: ASTM, (215) 299-5400.   Directory - The National Conference of State Legislators(NCSL) has issued a new listing of who in the states isleading various lead-poisoning prevention activities. LeadPoisoning Prevention: Directory of State Contacts costs $20plus shipping, and can be ordered through NCSL's MarketingDepartment: (303) 830-2200.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996CONTRACTS   92nd Contracting Squadron, Fairchild Air Force Base,Wash., seeks contractor for demolition of two buildings andoff-base disposal. Requirements for the removal and disposalof asbestos and lead materials will be included in thesolicitation. SOL F4561396B0007. Contact: Lt. ChristopherMcMahon, (509) 247-4871.   U.S. Coast Guard, Civil Engineering Unit, Miami, seekscontractor to furnish all labor, tools, equipment andmaterial for removal and disposal of existing built-up roofsystem, which includes removal and disposal of asbestos-containing roof flashing. SOL DTCG82-96-B-HAX024. Contact:Shirley Clayton, (205) 536-4133.   Commanding Officer, Naval Facilities Engineering Command,North Charleston, S.C., seeks contractor for repairs toMarine Corps reserve center in Montgomery, Ala. Contractcalls for some removal of asbestos-containing exteriorsiding and removal of lead-based paint. SOL N62467-94-B-1122. For more information, call (803) 820-5853.   Commanding Officer, NAVFAC Contracts Office, PortHueneme, Calif., seeks contractor to demolish asbestos-containing material and boiler at Building 19. SOL N47408-96-Q-5533. Contact: Christine Taborelli, (805) 982-5058.   Officer in Charge of Construction, NAS, Jacksonville,Fla., seeks contractor to renovate conference space andBuilding 11 at the Naval Air Station. The work includesasbestos abatement and interior demolition. SOL N62467-95-B-2512. For more information, call (904) 772-5574.   Federal Correctional Institution, Fort Dix, N.J., seekscontractor for asbestos abatement of approximately 4,700square feet of tile. SOL RFQ 441-0001. Contact: Debbie Tuno,(609) 723-1100.   ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts, NETC, Newport, R.I., seekscontractor for interior demolition and removal of lead-containing paint and asbestos. SOL N62472-96-B-6911. Forinformation, write to: Ms. East, ROICC, NAVFAC Contracts,Building 1, Simonpietri Dr., Newport, RI 02841-1712. Nophone number listed.Back to Headline List CopyrightASBESTOS AND LEAD ABATEMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 12, 1996CALENDAR   Feb. 20, Jersey City, N.J., Lead Abatement Budgeting andEstimating Course, sponsored by the Environmental ManagementTraining Services. Call: (201) 798-3391.   March 11-13, Pittsburgh, The Industrial Lead PaintAbatement and Removal Conference. Conference is sponsored bythe Steel Structures Painting Council. Call: (412) 687-1113.   May 7-11, Munich, Germany, IFAT'96, the 11thInternational Trade Fair for Waste Water and Waste Disposal.Conference will focus on decontamination of old sites. Formore information, call (089) 51 07-0.   Oct. 6-8, Baltimore, IAQ '96: Paths to Better BuildingEnvironments, sponsored by the American Society of Heating,Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers Inc. For moreinformation, call ASHRAE at (404) 636-8400.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-28IA086-000616-B016-41http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev60.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002307 text/html 85634HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:20:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:05 GMTContent-length: 85447Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev60.html Sample Issue Copyright ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNet SEPTEMBER 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INSTRUMENTATION New Instrumentation Detects Toxic Gases (145 words) Sierra Monitor Gas Sensors Employ Four Sensing Technologies (468 words) HNU Systems Uses Photoionization to Measure Gases (380 words) Air Instruments & Measurements' Model 8000 Can Measure Up to 6 Gases in Real Time (199 words) ACID RAIN Legislated Acid Rain Requirements Will Reduce Fine Particulate Emissions (242 words) ALTERNATIVE FUELS/FUEL CHANGES/OXYGENATES Liquid Fuels from Coal-Derived Synthesis Gas (206 words) Biodiesel Offers Environmental and Economic Advantages (297 words) Waste Incineration Technology Produces Syngas (204 words) Quantum Considers Increasing Methanol Production (99 words) Ceramic Engine Fueled by Methanol (113 words) CFC REDUCTION AND REPLACEMENT/OZONE DEPLETION Allied-Signal Increases the Production of CFC Alternatives (150 words) AT&T and Chrysler to Eliminate CFC Usage (225 words) Disagreement Surfaces over HCFC and Methyl Bromide Bans (238 words) U.S. CFC Users Seek Exemptions (212 words) NITROGEN AND SULFUR OXIDES REDUCTION Ceramic-Based Catalysts Reduce NOx Emissions (435 words) Air Products Unveils NOx and N2O Reduction Technologies (319 words) Technology Reviewed for Catalytic NOx Reduction (216 words) Goal Line Environmental Technologies Introduces NOx and CO Reduction Process (136 words) Catalyst-Coated Panels Can Reduce NOx Levels (186 words) Alumina Catalyst Aids Low Temperature NOx Reduction (192 words) Pulp and Paper Process Reduces Sulfur and Chlorine Emissions (172 words) German Process Cuts SO2 and HCl Emissions (184 words) Natural Gas Technology Cuts NOx Emissions (253 words) Ammonia Injection Lowers Engine NOx Emissions (170 words) Engine Modifications Lower Emissions (110 words) Gas Burner Has Low NOx Levels (154 words) SOx Removed from Flue Gas (135 words) Engine Reduces NOx Emissions Through Exhaust Gas Recirculation (134 words) Fuel Nozzle Reduces Gas Turbine Engine NOx Emissions (125 words) NGK Insulators Catalytic Converter Can Reduces Automotive Emissions (96 words) SOx and NOx Removed from Gas Streams (130 words) Patented Diesel Engine Catalyst Reduces Emission of Pollutants (101 words) GOVERNMENT EPA Delay in Implementing Air Permit Rule Causes States to Miss Program Submission Deadline (325 words) Center for Resource Economics (CRE) Report Criticizes EPA (231 words) INDUSTRY NEWS Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Allowances Auction Canceled (56 words) U.S. Leads in Pollution Control Equipment Exports (150 words) Inst. of Clean Air Companies says Smog Control Costs Exaggerated (360 words) Cost Effectiveness of Eliminating CO Vehicle Emissions Studied (326 words) VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS REDUCTION Multi-Layer Coating Reduces VOC's (91 words) VOC's Thermally Stripped from Soil (141 words) Low VOC Cleaner Used Automotive Refinishing (89 words) VOC Emissions from Glycol Dehydrators Reduced (157 words) RESOLV Vapor Recovery Systems Capture VOC's (439 words) RE-THERM VF Units Treat VOC's (278 words) Fate of VOC's in Municipal Activated Sludge Plants Investigated (183 words) ICI Paints Reduces VOC's with Water-Based Formulations (215 words) SOFTWARE, MODELING, AND DATABASES Influence of Landscape Variability on Atmospheric Dispersion (106 words) Atmospheric Sulfur Oxidation Influence by Droplet Size in Clouds and Fog (228 words) Software Models Processes and Tracks Chemical Usage (350 words) PARTICULATE REDUCTION German Technology Cuts Toxic Incinerator Residue (152 words) Vitropore Ceramic Candles Clean Hot Flue Gas (337 words) CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993New Instrumentation Detects Toxic GasesGMD Systems, Inc. (Old Route 519, Hendersonville, PA 15339; Tel412/746-3600 or 800/736-4666, Fax 412/746-1359) has commercializedits Remote Intelligent Sensor (RIS) for the detection of toxicgases such as hydrazines, phosgene, and isocyanates.  William T.Hughes, Product Manager, told us that the RIS is a highly accurate,single point, fixed position area monitor expandable into a networkof up to 120 sensors connected by a 2-way communications link, andcomputer-supervised from a central location.  Since each RIS alsoretains "stand alone" capability, the units can continue to operateduring power outages or computer failures.  The RIS employs aquick-response, microprocessor-controlled sensing system that usesa combination of colorimetric paper tape, cassettes, and electro-optics.  GMD is an affiliate of Bacharach, Inc. (625 Alpha Drive,Pittsburgh, PA 15238; Tel 412/963-2000, Fax 412/963-2091).Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Sierra Monitor Gas Sensors Employ Four Sensing TechnologiesSierra Monitor Corporation (SMC, 1991 Tarob Court, Milpitas, CA95035; Tel 408/262-6611, Fax 408/262-9042) offers 4 sensortechnologies to match the best gas sensor performance withapplication requirements.  Catalytic bead sensors are used tomonitor combustible gases.  The sensor provides reliable zerostability and a linear response to combustible gas over a widetemperature range.  The sensor consists of 2 alumina beads eachsurrounding a platinum wire operating at approximately 450 C.  Onebead is passivated so it will not react with combustible gas.  Theother bead is catalyzed to promote a reaction with combustible gas.Effects of changes in ambient temperature and relative humidity arenullified by placing the two beads in separate legs of a wheatstonebridge circuit.  When the catalyzed bead reacts with thecombustible gas, it heats up, which increases its resistance.This, in turn, increases the output of the wheatstone bridgecircuit used as the sensor signal.Stephen R. Ferree, Vice President - Marketing, told us that SMC'ssemiconductor sensors have a resistance in air which is affected byoxygen adsorbed on the surface of the sensor.  Oxygen atoms captureelectrons on the semiconductor surface, thereby increasing itsresistance.  The sensors may be impregnated with dopants such that,when the sensor's resistance changes, specific gases displace theadsorbed oxygen.  For example, SMC's thin film metal oxide sensordoes not respond when exposed to 5% methane in air.  Othersemiconductor sensors are available for combustible gases, carbonmonoxide, and ammonia.Electrochemical sensors are fuel cell-like devices consisting of ananode, cathode, and electrolyte.  The components of the cell areselected so that a subject gas allowed to diffuse into the cellwill cause a chemical reaction and generate a current.  The cellsare diffusion limited so the rate at which the gas enters the cellis solely dependent on the gas concentration.  The currentgenerated is proportional to the rate of consumption of the subjectgas in the cell.  Unlike electrochemical sensors, where gasdiffuses through membranes into the cell, SMC sensors allow gas todiffuse into the sensor through a simple capillary.  The result isa stable sensor with low pressure and temperature coefficients andthe capability to measure gas as a % by volume.In SMC infrared (IR) sensors, gas molecules absorb IR light withina narrow, characteristic wavelength.  Light is emitted from an IRsource and passed through the gas to be analyzed.  The amount ofabsorption corresponds directly to the gas concentration.SMC gas sensor modules condition the sensor signal and provide anindustry standard 4-20 mA output that can interface with single-and multiple-channel controllers and distributed control systems.Gases monitored by SMC modules include ammonia, carbon dioxide,carbon monoxide, chlorine, combustible gases, hydrogen, hydrogensulfide, nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, oxygen, and sulfurdioxide.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993HNU Systems Uses Photoionization to Measure GasesHNU Systems, Inc. (160 Charlemont St., Newton, MA 02161-9987; Tel617/964-6690 800/724-5600, Fax 617/558-0056) Model 201 continuousgas monitors allow the long term monitoring of volatile organiccompounds (VOC's).  Brian Sheppard, National Sales Manager, told usthat the instruments are suited for the continuous measurement ofprocess streams, stack gas, or ambient air.  They use thephotoionization detection principle, which provides measurementsaccurate to sub parts per million (ppm) levels.  The instrumentscan often measure over a range of 0.1 ppm to 2000 ppm, with higherranges available upon request.  An ultra-stable, sealed ultraviolet(UV) light source used as an ionization source, plus electroniccircuitry, provide instrument stability and repeatability.  Alsounusual is the mechanical simplicity of these photoionizationinstruments (the meter movement and the sampling pump are the onlymoving parts) which helps to ensure stability.  By employing thephotoionization detection principle, the Model 201 instrumentseliminate other problems common to older techniques.  There are nooptics, lenses, or mirrors involved, which eliminates periodicalignment and coating.  There are no flames that can go out nor anyflow regulators  needed, since photoionization is independent offlow, and there are no compressed gases required for operation.Photoionization analyzers can be used to monitor a wide variety oforganic and some inorganic gases.  Aromatics, ketones, chlorinatedhydrocarbons, hydrogen sulfide, reduced sulfur compounds,phosphine, ammonia, iodine, and hydrazine are among the gases whichcan be measured.  The photoionization principle of operationincludes the absorption of UV light by a molecule which leads toionization via: R + hn  = R+ + e- where R+ is the ionized speciesand hn represents a photon which has an energy greater than theionization potential of the species.  The sensor consists of asealed UV light source that emits photons which are energeticenough to ionize many trace species (particularly organics) but donot ionize the major components of air such as oxygen, nitrogen,carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and water.  A chamber adjacent tothe UV source contains a pair of electrodes.  When a positivepotential is applied to one electrode, the created field drives anyions formed by the absorption of UV light to the collectorelectrode where the current (proportional to the concentration) ismeasured.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Air Instruments & Measurements' Model 8000 Can Measure Up to 6Gases in Real TimeAir Instruments & Measurements, Inc. (AIM, 13111 Brooks Dr. SuiteD, Baldwin Park, CA 91706-7901; Tel 818/813-1460 or 800/969-4AIM,Fax 818/338-2585) has introduced its Model 8000 open-path analyzerto measure up to 6 gases in real time across an extended (100 feetor more) path length.  Raj Adani, National Sales Manager, told usthat the system is based on the company's double-pass opticalsystem which features automatic self-calibration with an internalreference mirror and sealed gas cells and/or bandpass filters fora known up-scale response.  The system is mounted in a sealed,double-ended enclosure, and the sensor assembly includes athermostatted heater for weather protection.  Optional cooling isalso available.  The retroreflector end is passive, with noelectrical or moving parts, eliminating the need for thermal orexplosion protection.  AIM says the system is particularly wellsuited for the detection of leaks and spills of hazardous, toxic,corrosive, and/or condensable gases since it measures the sample inplace in the air with no sample contact.  Measurable gases includeHF, HCl, HCOH, benzene, toluene, vinyl chloride, CH4, NO, N2O, SO2,CO, CO2, NH3, HCN, and water.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Legislated Acid Rain Requirements Will Reduce Fine  ParticulateEmissionsEPA, Congress and environmentalists will be pleasantly surprised tolearn that the scrubbers being installed to reduce acid rain willalso reduce fine particulate air pollution by 20,000 to 40,000 tonsper year.  These conclusions are contained in a new report issuedby the McIlvaine Company (Northbrook, IL) entitled  Heavy MetalRemoval from Coal-Fired Boilers .There is renewed concern that fine particulate is the most seriousair pollution problem.  The utility industry is the largeststationary source emitter.  The old coal-fired plants are notregulated as to particulate emissions by any federal laws.  The newSO2 reduction requirements for these plants allow either fuelswitching or scrubbers.  Scrubbers capture 80% of the fineparticulate (not captured by the precipitators) along with the SO2.Most utilities are fuel switching in Phase 1, so this impressivefine particulate reduction will be accomplished by only 15,000 MWof scrubbers.Scrubbers have the further benefit of removing air toxics.Scrubbers would also remove 20,000 to 60,000 tons per year ofchlorine and 7000 to 8000 tons per year of fluorine.  The scrubberswould also remove the toxic heavy metals which are measured inpounds per year instead of tons per year.  The scrubbers wouldremove 12,000 to 36,000 pounds/year of mercury and 13,000 to 42,000pounds of chromium.  Even greater quantities of lead and manganesewould be captured.  Equal or smaller quantities of arsenic,selenium, cadmium and other toxics would also be removed.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Liquid Fuels from Coal-Derived Synthesis GasCoal-derived syngas can be converted to methanol using liquid phasemethanol synthesis (LPMeOH) process.  Methanol can be furtherconverted to gasoline using the Mobil methanol-to-gasoline (MTG)process.  The combination of syngas-to-methanol technology with theMTG process thus provides a ready synthetic route for liquidhydrocarbon fuels.  Sunggyu Lee and Conrad F. Kulik (Department ofChemical Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325)have developed a process for one-step synthesis of dimethyl ether(DME) from syngas.  This DME process improves the reactorproductivity and syngas conversion by as much as 100% over theLPMeOH process.  One-step DME synthesis is thus an ideal front endfor further conversion to gasoline.  This substitution is justifiednot only because DME yields an identical product distribution asmethanol, but DME is also a true intermediate in the MTG process.The integration scheme has been termed the dimethyl  ether-to-gasoline (DTG) process.  The advantages of the UA/EPRI process overthe conventional MTG process are in enhanced syngas conversion,superior hydrocarbon yield and selectivity, and integrated energyefficiency.  The researchers summarized their work in a paperdelivered at the 206th American Chemical Society (ACS) NationalMeeting in Chicago, IL August 22-27, 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Biodiesel Offers Environmental and Economic AdvantagesBiodiesel fuel is produced by esterifying vegetable oils or animalfats by reacting them with methanol in the presence of a catalystto produce methyl ester.  Its major attraction, besides its reducedemissions characteristics, is its ease of use.  As opposed tonatural gas or electric power, biodiesel fuel can power existingdiesel engines with no modifications.  The Comprehensive NationalEnergy Policy Act of 1992 raised the expectations of the industrysince it redefined and broadened the term "alternative" fuel toinclude any fuel "substantially not petroleum."In May 1993, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)provisionally approved petitions to register methyl soyate andmethyl tallowate as motor fuels and fuel additives permitting theirsale in that capacity.  Final approval depends upon researchdemonstrating that methyl soyate and methyl tallowate are"substantially similar" to diesel fuel.  While biodiesel fuelreduces carbon dioxide, hydrocarbon, and particulate emissions, itis an oxygenated fuel and, accordingly, increases nitrous oxideemissions.  Some industry sources expect EPA to consider eachemissions category separately instead of evaluating it for itsaggregate emissions reduction capability.  Such a decision couldjeopardize biodiesel's "substantially similar" designation.The American Biofuels Association (ABA) expects mass transit toprovide most biodiesel activity over the next 5 or so years as EPAurban fleet emissions requirements take effect in January 1995.Since biodiesel is priced at $2.50-3.00/gallon, the ABA is pushingfor tax exemptions and credits at both the federal and state levelsto make the fuel competitive with conventional diesel fuel andethanol and bio-based methanol.  The ABA estimates that 3.4 billiongallons of biodiesel could be produced annually in the U.S., whichwould place land now idled by agricultural subsidies back intoproduction.  Excess soybean oil and yellow grease stocks would alsobe utilized.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Waste Incineration Technology Produces SyngasThe Thermoselect waste incineration process gasifies unsortedmunicipal solid waste (MSW) to produce syngas,  which is scrubbedand fired in a conventional gas engine to generate electricity.This results in significantly less waste gas emissions than intraditional MSW incinerators, claims developer Thermoselect S.A.(Locarno, Switzerland).  A demonstration plant at Verbania, Italyhas been operating at 100 metric tons/day of MSW and generating anet positive balance of 300 kW.  Emissions per metric ton of wasteburned are lower than the proposed European Community (EC)emissions standard, with actual emissions of 90 kg of hydrogenchloride and 1 kg each of dust, hydrogen fluoride, mercury, andcadmium.  The volume of unsorted waste is first reduced by a factorof 10 in a conventional press.  The compressed waste is then fedinto a 600 C coking oven, where metals and inorganic substancesform a solid matrix with the charred organics.  Following aresidence time of 1-2 hours, the solid matrix is fed directly to agasifier at 2000 C to convert the organics to syngas and to liquefythe inorganics and metals.  Each metric ton of MSW yields 30 kg ofrecyclable metal, 250 kg of vitrified slag, and 600 kg of syngas.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Quantum Considers Increasing Methanol ProductionQuantum Chemical Corp. (99 Park Ave., New York, NY 10016; Tel212/949-5000) has taken its LaPorte, TX methanol plant off themarket.  The unit, which has a capacity of 200 milliongallons/year, is operating at only 100 million gallons/year duemainly to a shortage of hydrogen feedstock.  The company says themove is unrelated to its pending acquisition by Hanson PLC (1Grosvenor Pl., London SW1X 7JH, England).  The company is studyingoptions to increase the output of the plant to respond to aperceived increase in demand for methanol stemming from oxygenatedgasoline requirements.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ceramic Engine Fueled by MethanolA compact, low polluting ceramic engine which runs on methanol hasbeen designed by the Kanagawa Academy of Science and TechnologyFoundation (3-2-1 Sakado, Takatsu-ku, Kawasaki City, Kanagawa Pref.213, Japan; Tel +81 44 819 2043, Fax +81 44 819 2027).  It isclaimed to be about 30% more fuel efficient and to performsimilarly to a comparable diesel engine.  The prototype engine has4 cylinders and a displacement of 2000 cc.  It occupies about 20%less space than a diesel engine in the same class and weighs about150 kg.  It is air cooled and can withstand temperature differencesof 800 C between the interior and exterior surfaces of thecylinders.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Allied-Signal Increases the Production of CFC AlternativesAllied-Signal (Box 2245, Morristown, NJ 07962; Tel 201/455-2000)has completed a 6-month expansion program at its El Segundo, CAfacility as part of a $250 million investment in the developmentand commercialization of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) replacements.The company has doubled its annual capacity to 50 million pounds,for hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC)-141b, which is used as areplacement for CFC-11 as a blowing agent in insulating foams.HCFC-141b is also used in new Allied-Signal specialty solvents.The company expects to start full-scale commercial production ofGenetron AZ-50, a mixture of hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)-125 and (HFC)-143a, at its Baton Rouge, LA facility in June 1994.  Allied-Signalhas also received Underwriters Laboratories (UL) approval of theproduct, certifying it for use with UL-approved equipment.Genetron AZ-50 is a replacement for the refrigerant R-502, amixture of CFC-115 and HCFC-22.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993AT&T and Chrysler to Eliminate CFC UsageChrysler Corporation (12000 Chrysler Dr., Highland Park, MI 48288;Tel 313/956-5741, Fax 313/956-1462) says that it will eliminatechlorofluorocarbon (CFC)-12 refrigerant from air conditioningsystems in all Chrysler-built vehicles by January 1, 1994, twoyears ahead of Federal mandates and faster than previouslyannounced.  "We've moved as aggressively as possible in removing R-12 from our product line, and we believe our rapid deployment ofair conditioning systems using R-134a is in the best interests ofour customers and the environment," said Ronald R. Boltz,Chrysler's Vice-President for Product Strategy and RegulatoryAffairs.  Chrysler reports that it is already using 134a on morethan 750,000 of its 1993 model year cars, the most of any automakerselling vehicles in the U.S.  In addition to efforts on new cars,Chrysler says that it is taking steps to help consumers with oldercars.  It is developing a CFC-free "drop-in" substitute withIntermagnetics General Corporation (Box 566, Guilderland, NY 12084;Tel 518/456-5456), which it says looks promising based onpreliminary data.Separately, AT&T (550 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10022; Tel212/605-5500) says that it has ended the use of all Class 1 ozone-depleting materials from its consumer and business manufacturingoperations.  In 1986 AT&T's manufacturing operations emitted 2.5million pounds of CFC's.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Disagreement Surfaces over HCFC and Methyl Bromide BansEuropean proposals for controlling ozone-depletinghydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC's) and methyl bromide have provokeddisagreement from several companies and countries.  The proposals,which were finalized on June 9, 1993, are undergoing examination byEuropean experts.  These proposals stipulate the banning of HCFC'sby 2015 and a production and usage freeze on methyl bromidestarting January 1, 1996.  France, the only European Community (EC)country where methyl bromide is produced, is anxious to protect itsindustry and is unwilling to apply measures more stringent thanthose of the Montreal Protocol.The major corporate opposition in France stems from Elf Atochem(Paris, France), Europe's only methyl bromide producer.  Thecompany is participating in a $400,000 program to developtechnology to prevent emissions of the gas, which is used primarilyas a soil fumigant.  Elf Atochem's 1990 methyl bromide productionwas 5000 metric tons; European consumption of 14,000 metric tonswas met by imports from the U.S. and Israel.  Worldwide methylbromide production is about 65,000 metric tons per year.  The U.S.plans to ban methyl bromide in 2000.  Accordingly, the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is granting acceleratedreviews to methyl bromide alternatives.Southern EC member countries Spain, Portugal, and Greece alsooppose the HCFC phaseout part of the plan.  Belgium, which hasminor reservations, supports the plan, along with Italy, the U.K.,and Ireland.  Denmark, The Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Germanywant an even faster HCFC phaseout.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993U.S. CFC Users Seek ExemptionsThe U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has received about20 requests from chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) users seeking exemptionfrom the ban on the production of the ozone-depleting chemicalswhich is scheduled to take effect on January 1, 1996.  When theyvoted in November 1992 to accelerate the phaseout of CFC's, theparties to the Montreal Protocol On Substances That Deplete theOzone Layer included provisions for exemptions for essential uses.Each country must formally nominate potential exempt uses to aUnited Nations Environment Program (UNEP) technical reviewcommittee.  By its July 19, 1993 deadline, EPA had received 5requests for exemptions for medical devices and 3 for refrigerationor air conditioning uses, according to Nina Bonnelycke of EPA'sSubstitutes Analysis and Review Branch.  Other exemption requestswere for the use of CFC's in analytical tests, as leak detectorsfor nuclear submarines and power plants, in adhesives, in a waspkiller, and in the manufacture of small caliber ammunition.  TheEPA will convene an interagency review group to decide whichapplications warrant forwarding to UNEP.  In order to receive anexemption, petitioners must demonstrate that the  use of CFC's iscritical to the functioning of society; that no alternatives aretechnically, economically, or legally viable; and that no recycledCFC's are available.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ceramic-Based Catalysts Reduce NOx EmissionsCormetech, Inc. (Treyburn Corporate Park, 5000 International Drive,Durham, NC 27712; Tel 919/620-3000, Fax 919/620-3001) producesceramic-based extruded honeycomb catalysts for nitrogen oxide (NOx)removal from coal-, oil-, or gas-fired stationary combustionsystems, such as utility and industrial boilers and gas turbines.End users include electric utilities, petroleum refiners, andchemical producers.  The homogeneous, titania-based, selectivecatalytic reduction (SCR) catalysts resist heat and chemicalattack.  In the SCR process, ammonia is injected into the flue gas,where it reacts with NOx in the presence of the catalyst to formnitrogen and water.  SCR systems have no moving parts and produceno by-products.  When used in SCR systems at 400-1000 F, they canremove more than 90% of NOx emissions.  The honeycomb structure ofCormetech's high surface area titanium dioxide catalysts maximizescatalytic activity while minimizing gas flow resistance.  Eachcatalyst element is 150 mm square and can be provided in lengths upto 1000 mm.  Variations in catalyst composition and cellularstructure are determined by the nature of each application,especially the type of fuel being burned.  Catalysts are engineeredfor each application to minimize erosion and exposure to plugging.Gerhard F. Koenig, President and CEO, says that Cormetech cansimulate flue gas conditions, including space and linear velocityrelationships, at its in-house pilot testing facilities.  Bench-scale "micro-test" reactors are part of the company's resources foruse in catalyst manufacturing process control or when limitedrepresentative sampling is needed.  Flow modeling technology isalso available from Cormetech and permits gas flow simulation ofconditions encountered in the plant, including conditions in thereactor itself.  Flow modeling options include cold flow techniquesas well as computer modeling.  The company can perform andrecommend system design modifications such as installation ofstatic mixers, vanes, and other devices to reduce gas flowvariations.  Reducing variations optimizes the efficiency of thecatalyst while preventing erosion and plugging, i.e., informationderived from the flow modeling permits "conditioning" of the fluegas before it reaches the catalyst to optimize catalystperformance.  The company delivered catalysts during the summer of1993 for the U.S.'s first large utility retrofit using SCRtechnology.  The project involved 2 power plants in southernCalifornia.  Cormetech was formed in 1989 by Corning, Inc.(Houghton  Park, Corning, NY 14831; Tel 607/974-9000) MitsubishiHeavy Industries, Ltd. (Nichimen Bldg., 2-2-2 Nakanoshima, Box 334,Osaka Central, Kita-ku, Osaka 530, Japan; Tel 6 2021231, Fax 62033400), and Mitsubishi Petrochemical Co., Ltd (Mitsubishi Bldg.,2-5-2 Marunouchi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100, Japan; Tel 3 2835574).Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Air Products Unveils NOx and N2O Reduction TechnologiesResearch scientists at Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (7201Hamilton Boulevard, Allentown, PA 18195-1501; Tel 215/481-4911)have discovered two catalytic technologies to reduce industrialpollution.  One of the technologies reduces nitrogen oxides (NOx)emissions from stationary and mobile sources, while the otherprevents nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from certain chemicalprocesses from entering the atmosphere.The NOx technology employs metal-exchanged zeolite catalysts, alongwith methane in an oxygen-rich atmosphere, to convert NOx tonitrogen gas, carbon oxides, and water.  The company says that theprocess offers an environmentally and potentially economicallyattractive alternative to currently available NOx removaltechnology that uses ammonia for reducing emissions from stationarysources, such as industrial boilers or natural gas-fueled powerstations.  Methane used in the Air Products process is alreadyavailable at many facilities which emit NOx, and their NOx-containing exhaust streams typically contain high levels of oxygen.Air Products' John N. Armor said that the technology may also leadto improved catalysts for removing NOx from mobile engineemissions.The company's technology for removing N2O emissions from off-gasesof certain chemical processes uses a different family of metalloaded zeolite catalysts that decompose N2O into its benigncomponents, gaseous nitrogen and oxygen.  These catalysts are saidto be long-lived and stable over a broad (200-800 C) temperaturerange.  In addition, some of the catalysts readily destroy N2O inthe presence of water vapor.  Air Products' Yuejin Li said thatthese characteristics make the technology especially suitable forthe clean-up of off-gases from major sources of N2O emissionsformed during the manufacture of nitric acid and nylon-66.  Sincethe "industrial revolution" began, the concentration of N2O in theatmosphere has been steadily increasing about 0.2% per year.Because the gas has an atmospheric lifetime of about 150 years, theneed exists to develop a commercially viable process for itsdecomposition.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Technology Reviewed for Catalytic NOx ReductionA large amount of equipment is in operation which uses ammonia inV2O5-TiO2-W(Mo)O2 system (the selective catalytic reduction, orSCR, method) to remove high temperature nitrogen oxides (NOx) fromgenerating sources, such as boilers and incinerators.  In thesesystems, even when oxygen of high concentration is present, ammoniareacts selectively with the nitrogen oxide (NO) and the reaction isaccelerated.  A conventional SCR process uses V2O5-TiO2 as thecatalyst.Some European systems using zeolites are in operation, with about50% applied on diesel engines.  This equipment is said to haveseveral advantages, including operation over a broad temperaturerange (300-480 C), the ability to use either 25% ammonia solutionor pure ammonia gas as the reducing agent, the use of monolithicceramic catalysts containing no heavy metals, the absence ofsulfuric acid generation due to the low oxidizing capacity of SO2,the storage capacity of NH3 and NOx is large enough to withstandpartial pressure fluctuations, and long catalyst life.All SCR processes use ammonia to react with NO.  Problems ofuntreated ammonia are being addressed by a research group atJapan's Hokkaido University.  The group is evaluating a processwhich uses hydrocarbons as reducing agents.  Their research isfully described in the Japanese High Technology Monitor, Vol. 11,No. 10.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Goal Line Environmental Technologies Introduces NOx and COReduction ProcessGoal Line Environmental Technologies (GLET, Box 58324, 2045 EastVernon Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90058; Tel 213/233-2224, Fax213/233-7428) has filed a patent application for its SCONOxtechnology.  GLET President Robert Danziger told us that the SCONOxprocess cost effectively reduces nitrogen oxide (NOx) and carbonmonoxide (CO) to below measurable levels at natural gas-fired powerplants.  The technology oxidizes nitric oxide (NO) to nitrogendioxide (NO2), which is then absorbed and recycled into the powerplant's engine.  GLET is a co-venture of Sunlaw Energy Corporation(Los Angeles, CA) and Advanced Catalyst Systems (Knoxville, TN).Sunlaw, which operates two of the ten largest power plants in theLos Angeles basin, plans to install a full-scale SCONOx system bythe end of 1993 and a second system in June 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Catalyst-Coated Panels Can Reduce NOx LevelsHigh-rise buildings and sound barriers lining highways may act asscavengers of 20% of such "greenhouse" gases as nitrogen oxides(NOx) if the walls and sidings are coated with a mixture oftitanium oxide, activated carbon, and a  small amount of iron (III)oxide.  In laboratory-scale tests at Japan's National Institute forResources and Environment (NIRE, Tsukuba, Ibaraki Pref., Japan),panels coated with such catalysts have removed more than 90% of NOxfrom a 0.05 parts per million (ppm) stream under irradiation,equivalent to conditions on a cloudy day, by near-ultravioletlight.  Nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are oxidizedby TiO2 to NO2 and NO3-, respectively.  The activated carboncomponent serves to fix the NO-derived NO2 so that it can befurther oxidized to NO3-.  In practice, rain water will wash theNO3- off the panels.  In a country with Japan's level of rainfall(1.5 m annually), only a slight decrease in the pH of any runoff,equivalent to about 10 ppm, is expected, according to NIRE.  A 5-year project to develop a viable technology began in April 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Alumina Catalyst Aids Low Temperature NOx ReductionCosmo Oil Co. Ltd. (1-1 Shibaura 1-chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105,Japan; Tel 03-798-3211) has succeeded in keeping nitrogen oxides(NOx) particles from diesel engine exhaust to less than 100 partsper million (ppm) for more than 2000 hours by utilizing a honeycombalumina catalyst and alcohol as the reducing agent.  The companyconsiders this an important first step in the practical use of thetechnology for the difficult job of controlling NOx emissions inthe presence of high-concentrations of oxygen.  Cosmo plans tocontinue the research and testing in an effort to raise the under100 ppm time interval from 2000 to 4000 hours.  The company alsohas targeted the 200kW diesel engine of a cogeneration system fordemonstration testing.  The technology features low temperature(300-400 C) NOx removal to minimize the deterioration of thecatalyst due to steam.  Sakai Chemical Industry Co. (Ebisujima-cho5-chome, Sakai City, Osaka Pref. 590, Japan; Tel 0722-23-4111) andseveral diesel engine manufacturers are also participating in thetest work.  The technology was first developed by Japan's NationalInstitute of Materials and Chemical Research and its PetroleumEnergy Center.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Pulp and Paper Process Reduces Sulfur and Chlorine EmissionsFormic acid and hydrogen peroxide replace sulfur- and chlorine-based compounds in the cooking and bleaching steps of a pulp andpaper process under development by Kemira Oy (Helsinki, Finland).The driving forces behind the Milox technology have beenlegislative mandates in Europe and the U.S. to reduce chlorineemissions from wastewater and to remove sulfur compounds from wastegases.  The Milox process is in operation in a 150 kg/h pilot plantand, says the company, could be in operation in a 5000-10,000metric tons/year demonstration plant by 1995.  Lignin, the gum thatbinds the cellulose fibers in wood, is removed by reaction withhydroxonium ions (H3O+) in 3 stages.  The first and last stages arecarried out at 80 C in a solution of 80 wt % peroxyacetic acid,formed by the reaction of H2O2 and HCOOH, while the second stage isan 80 wt % solution of HCOOH at 100 C.  Milox pulp produces paperof similar quality and brightness to chlorine-bleached kraft pulp,says Kemira.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993German Process Cuts SO2 and HCl EmissionsCaldyn Apparatebau GmbH (Ettlingen, Germany) has devised a processfor cutting sulfur dioxide (SO2) and hydrogen chloride emissions to20 parts per million (ppm), well below the 100 ppm German limit.The company claims that the process consumes only 33-50% of thelime required by competitive processes.  Flue gas enters a dryer at250-1000 C where it is sprayed with 50 mm diameter lime particles.In this step, the lime is completely consumed, reducing SO2concentration by 70%.  Following de-dusting, the gases are washedin a second scrubber that combines an additional nozzle-sprayedlime slurry with a water aerosol.  At this step, the limeconcentration, 70%, is 7 times higher than in competitiveprocesses, reducing the scrubber size by 50%.  Following a finalde-dusting step, the gases are released.  In addition to thecompany's 500 m3/h mobile pilot plant, Caldyn has installed a 3200m3/h system on a chemical waste incinerator in Bonn, Germany, whichstarted in June 1993.  Negotiations are in progress for a 44,000m3/h unit for an incinerator at an animal feed plant in easternGermany.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Natural Gas Technology Cuts NOx EmissionsInstitute of Gas Technology (IGT, 3424 South State Street, Chicago,IL 60616; Tel 312/949-3650, Fax 312/949-3700) in tests at theAnchor Glass plant in Huntington Park, CA  confirmed that anadvanced glass melting technology is effective in reducing nitrogenoxides (NOx) emissions.  Hamid A. Abbasi, IGT's Assistant Director- Applied Combustion Research, told us that the technology usesstaged natural gas combustion with oxygen enrichment to lower NOxlevels below 3 pounds of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) per ton of glassproduced.  A consortium of gas utilities led by Southern CaliforniaGas Company and the Gas Research Institute is supporting thedevelopment of this technology.  The process does not increasenatural gas consumption, and oxygen requirements are low (less than5% of stoichiometric) for operating conditions that reduce NOxremissions below the Southern California regulation of 4 pounds ofNO2 per ton of glass produced.  To demonstrate the stating concept,IGT and its commercial partners, Combustion Tec, Inc. (Box 607693,Orlando, FL 32860; Tel 407/299-7317) and Air Products and Chemicals(7201 Hamilton Blvd., Allentown, PA  18195; Tel 215/481-4911), madeonly minor modifications to a 165 ton/day glass melter.  Glenn C.Neff, President - Combustion Tec, said that the changes aretransparent to furnace operators, and no adverse effects on thequality of container glass have been observed.  According to BuddyEleazer, Air Products' Technology Manager - Glass Applications,three months of additional testing are now under way to acquiredesign data for the commercial introduction of the technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Ammonia Injection Lowers Engine NOx EmissionsJames W. Davis (277 Kavenish Dr., Rancho Mirage, CA 92270) has beenassigned a patent for a method of reducing engine pollutants,particularly nitrogen oxides (NOx).  The process described in USPatent 5,224,346, issued to Lester P. Berriman, John M. Zabsky,James W. Davis, and William M. Hylton on July 6, 1993, involves theinjection of ammonia into a conduit between the cylinder exhaustvalves and the catalytic converter.  Ammonia injection occurs farenough downstream of the exhaust valves to avoid burning of theammonia and at a location where the exhaust gases are at atemperature of at least 1200 F.  The ammonia reacts with the NOx inthe exhaust gases prior to the gases reaching the catalyticconverter, which eases the load on the catalyst.  To minimizeammonia use, it is injected only one minute or so after cold enginestartup when the catalyst is too cold to be effective and duringoperation of the engine at high power levels, when the greatestamounts of NOx are produced.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Engine Modifications Lower EmissionsFord Motor Company (Box 1899, Dearborn, MI 48121; Tel 313/322-3000)has been granted a patent for engine modifications which improveefficiency, power, fuel economy, and emission control.  Thebenefits described in US Patent 5,224,460, issued to Peter H.Havstad and Rodney J. Tabaczynski on July 6, 1993, are obtained byphase shifting of both the intake and exhaust valve timing events.Also, reed valves restrict the backflow of exhaust gases into theintake ports.  The phase shifting and use of intake reed valvesoptimize the intake and exhaust event timing at the four majorengine operating conditions: idle, part load, wide open throttlelow speed, and high speed.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Gas Burner Has Low NOx LevelsOsaka Gas Co., Ltd. (4-1-2 Hirano-machi, Chuo-ku, Osaka 541, Japan;Tel 6 2022221, Fax 6 2261681) has a patent for a gas burner whichhas low nitrogen oxides (NOx) generation and combustion noiselevels and improved combustion load and  ignition performancecharacteristics.  The gas burner described in US Patent 5,224,855,issued to Hajime Toyonaga, Toshio Nishida, Yasuo Takeishi, andMasao Shiomi on July 6, 1993, uses two sets of flame openings.  Thefirst set discharges stable, self-combustible, high-concentrationgas; and the second set of flame openings discharges unstable, non-self-combustible, low-concentration gas.  The two sets of flameopenings are arranged in an alternate pattern.  The stable flameformations at the first set of flame openings assists stabilizationof flame formations at the second set of flame openings.Consequently, the gas burner may have a high air excess ratio toreduce its NOx generation and to prevent incomplete combustion.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993SOx Removed from Flue GasMichigan State University (East Lansing, MI) researchers appliedfor a patent for clay materials to remove sulfur oxides (SOx) fromgas streams.  US Patent 5,225,384, was issued to Thomas J.Pinnavaia, Christine A. Polansky, Jayantha Amarasekera on July 6,1993  and describes a composition which includes a smectite clayand a base or base precursor which reacts with SOx in hot flue gas.The composition is formed by dissolving sodium carbonate in asuspension containing a smectite clay in water.  A soluble alkalineearth metal salt is added in a stoichiometric amount for reactionwith the sodium carbonate to form an alkaline earth metal carbonateprecipitate in the suspension with the clay.  The suspension isthen dried to provide the composite material.  When the compositematerial is heated, it can remove SOx from flue gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Engine Reduces NOx Emissions Through Exhaust Gas RecirculationCaterpillar, Inc. (100 NE Adams St., Peoria, IL 61629-2325; Tel309/675-1000, Fax 309/675-1342) has a recent patent for thereduction of nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions from engines throughexhaust gas recirculation.  The engine described in US Patent5,226,401, issued to John M. Clarke and James J. Faletti on July13, 1993, operates with at least part of its combustion chambers ina four-stroke, reverse flow mode.  The remaining combustionchambers are operated in a normal, four-stroke mode.  In the four-stroke, reverse flow mode exhaust gas is inducted into thecombustion chambers and then compressed and expanded.  Cooling ofthe exhaust gas is achieved during the compression and expansionstrokes.  The cooled exhaust gas is then expelled from thecombustion chambers and mixed with fresh charge air.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Fuel Nozzle Reduces Gas Turbine Engine NOx EmissionsGeneral Electric (Schenectady, NY 12345; Tel 518/385-0230) has apatent for equipment to reduce nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions ingas turbine engines.  US Patent 5,228,283, issued to Michael B.Sciocchetti on July 20, 1993, describes a breech-loaded fuel nozzlecartridge assembly for use with gaseous or distillate fuels.  Thecartridge assembly includes an elongated water delivery pipe.  Theforward end of the cartridge pipe has an interior water swirler andan exterior distillate fuel swirler, and the forward end of thefuel nozzle body has an air swirler.  At the fuel nozzle tip, anouter conical air spray, an intermediate distillate or gaseous fuelspray, and an inner conical water spray combine to provide ahomogenous mixture at the point of combustion.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993NGK Insulators Catalytic Converter Can Reduces Automotive EmissionsNGK Insulators, Ltd. (2-56 Suda-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467, Japan;Tel 52 8727171, Fax 52 8727103) has patented a catalytic converterfor use in automotive exhaust emission control.  US Patent5,229,079, issued to Takashi Harada, Fumio Abe, and HiroshigeMizuno on July 20, 1993, describes a catalytic converter with ahoneycomb heater located downstream of the main monolithic catalystor between main monolithic catalysts.  The heater includes ahoneycomb, catalyst-carrying structure and at least two electrodesto supply a current.  It also includes a monolith catalyst forignition located downstream of the honeycomb heater.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993SOx and NOx Removed from Gas StreamsInstitut Francais du Petrole (Rueil Malmaison, France) and BabcockEnterprise (La Courneuve, France) have patented a method ofreducing emissions of sulfur oxides (SOx), nitrogen oxides (NOx),and unburnt combustible compounds while generating heat.  Theprocess described in US Patent 5,230,871, issued to Gerard Martinand Jean-Louis Bouju on July 27, 1993, generates heat whilecleaning effluent with fine particles of absorbent in an entrainedbed.  The gas stream and particles of a fresh absorbent are fedinto a turbulent zone upstream of an adiabatic desulfurizationunit.  The mixture produced is passed into a heat recovery unit.Part of the absorbent is recycled to the desulfurization unit, andthe flow rate of fresh and recycled absorbent is adjusted so thatthe temperature in the unit is 750-1000 C.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Patented Diesel Engine Catalyst Reduces Emission of PollutantsNippon Shokubai Co., Ltd. (5-1 Korabashi, Higashi-ku, Osaka 541,Japan; Tel 6 2239111, Fax 6 2013716) has been assigned a patent fora diesel engine catalyst that reduces emissions of sulfur dioxide,particulates, uncalcined hydrocarbons, and carbon monoxide.  Thecatalyst described in US Patent 5,208,203, issued to MakatoHoriuchi and Koichi Saito on May 4, 1993, includes titaniadeposited on a three-dimensional refractory structure.  At leastone noble metal (palladium, platinum, and/or rhodium) and anotherelement (scandium, yttrium, rare earth elements, alkali metals,alkaline earth metals, gold, silver, copper, or zinc) are dispersedand deposited on the titania.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993EPA Delay in Implementing Air Permit Rule Causes States to MissProgram Submission DeadlineTitle V of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) charged theU.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with issuing a permitrule that would identify minimum elements of state permit programsand govern the implementation of state efforts.  Disagreement amongEPA, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and the Council onCompetitiveness delayed the rule's issuance for 8 months.  This hashindered implementation of the Title V permit program since somestates have waited for the final rule to be issued beforedeveloping their own programs.  Similarly, certain statelegislatures waited for the final rule before enacting legislationauthorizing agencies to fully implement programs and assess fees tocover their costs.  Because the final rule was issued after manystate legislatures adjourned in 1992, many state agencies had towait until 1993 to obtain legislative authority.  As a result, somestates doubt that they will be able to submit their program plansto EPA by the November 1993 deadline.Cost estimates by some states indicate that they will face problemsin funding their permit programs.  Although many state agencieshave adopted the $25 per ton of emissions presumptive fee set byCongress in Title V because of political and economic pressure tokeep fees low, many state officials do not consider this feeadequate to fund their programs.  For example, Texas' permitprogram costs are expected to increase by nearly 300% when Title Vis fully implemented, from the current level of about $15 millionto about $42 million, or $30 to $35 per ton of emissions.  NorthCarolina's Clean Air Act Advisory Council has determined that thestate's cost of meeting Title V will be $12 million, or $36 per tonof emissions.  Wisconsin has estimated that Title V will increaseits needs from $9 million to $18 million.  Wisconsin officialsbelieve that the state's permit fees should be set between $35 and$40 per ton to generate the necessary revenue.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Center for Resource Economics (CRE) Report Criticizes EPAThe U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is failing to carryout its mission because of gross under-funding and skewedpriorities, according to a study by the Center for ResourceEconomics (CRE), a Washington, DC-based nonprofit environmentalresearch organization.  EPA needs a budget increase of at least 13%"to provide even minimally adequate environmental protection," thereport says, but instead is facing an 8% cut in its 1994 budget.The CRE report found that EPA has a 22% budget shortfall in itscore operating programs and, as a result, is unable to fullyenforce a single environmental protection statute.  EPA spends 80%of its funds on pollutants ranked as relatively low risks by theagency, with 20% going to high risk pollutants, charged CRE.Inactive toxic waste sites and point source discharges to surfacewater, two of the low risk categories, receive 54% of EPAresources, while high risk air pollutants receive only 6%.  Workerexposure to chemicals, radon, wetlands destruction, and globalclimate change - all high risk areas - receive less than 1% each ofEPA's resources.  "More than 2 decades after its creation, EPAcannot guarantee the safety of pesticides and other toxicsubstances widely used in the U.S.," CRE said.  EPA officials saythat their priorities are largely determined by laws passed byCongress and that the agency's budget is constrained by the federalbudget deficit.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Allowances Auction CanceledThe Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) canceled its scheduled June 1993auction of sulfur dioxide emissions allowances because the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has not implemented acomputer-based allowance tracking system.  CBT successfully ranEPA's March 1993 auction.  EPA says that the tracking system isunnecessary for companies to trade the allowances privately.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993U.S. Leads in Pollution Control Equipment ExportsThe U.S. was the world's leading exporter of pollution controlequipment in 1991 with a trade surplus of $1.1 billion according toa report released by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency(EPA).  Germany led in 1990, but U.S. companies took the lead in1991 with $188 million more in exports than Germany.  U.S.environmental exports increased 70% from 1989 to 1991, whileimports increased 45%.Financial WatchCompany                  Stock Price               Recent high    Recent low      Recent closeAllied Signal  74 3/4         50        74 3/4Calgon         20             10 1/2    11 3/4Du Pont        53 7/8         44 1/2    48 5/8W.R. Grace     41 1/4         34        39 3/8Millipore      38             25 7/8    31 7/8Osmonics       21 1/2         13 1/4    18 3/8Perkin Elmer   39 3/4         28 1/2    32 7/8Teledyne       25 3/8         17        24 3/4Varian         54             33 3/4    51 3/4Wheelabrator   23 1/2         14 3/8    18 1/4  TechnologiesBack to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Inst. of Clean Air Companies says Smog Control Costs ExaggeratedThe Institute of Clean Air Companies, Inc. (ICAC, 1707 L Street NWSuite 750, Washington, DC 20036-4201; Tel 202/457-0911, Fax202/331-1388), the national association of air pollution controlsuppliers, has released cost figures for high efficiency control ofnitrogen oxides (NOx) that are only 20-50% of the costs assumed bystate regulators in determining reasonably available controltechnology.  ICAC released the figures in comments on a report,Evaluation and Costing of NOx Controls for Existing Utility Boilersin the NESCAUM Region, (Evaluation Report) prepared by AcurexEnvironmental Corporation for the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) and the U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency (EPA).  ICAC's cost figures show that much more NOx can beremoved for a given level of investment than air quality regulatorshave assumed.  For example, the Evaluation Report pegs capitalcosts for retrofitting hot-side selective catalytic reduction (SCR)technology on a 200 MW pulverized coal boiler at about $150/kW.ICAC says that current market transactions show that this cost is$30-70/kW, depending on the difficulty of retrofit.  Costs for oil-and gas-fired retrofits, as well as for new installations, are evenlower.States are revising their Clean Air Act implementation plans tofurther cut NOx emissions, which contribute significantly to urbansmog and acid rain.  "Clean air policy depends on assumptions aboutthe cost of air pollution controls.  In the case of NOx, relianceon inflated cost estimates is leading decision makers to establishunnecessarily loose standards based on controls that can remove nomore than half of a boiler's NOx emissions, when SCR technology isavailable to achieve 80-90% emission removal," stated Jeffrey C.Smith, ICAC's Executive Director.  "The market  history of SCRtechnology exemplifies the path of most air pollution controlscommercialized in the U.S. over the past 30 years.  Competitionpushes costs significantly lower and raises performance andreliability dramatically," Smith added.  A copy of ICAC's writtencomments is available from the organization, which has preparedcomments highlighting what it claims are inaccuracies in thetreatment of selective non-catalytic (SNCR) reduction of NOx in theEvaluation Report.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Cost Effectiveness of Eliminating CO Vehicle Emissions StudiedThe cost effectiveness of identification and repair of vehicleswith excessive carbon monoxide emissions was investigated over the1991-1992 winter period in Provo, UT.  This pilot program used on-road remote sensing at two locations to identify repeat grosspolluting vehicles.  The owners of gross polluters observed at oneof the locations were solicited for a free repair program carriedout under the direction of the Utah Valley Community College, Auto-Diesel Division.  The same two locations were revisited after therepair program had terminated and the vehicle emissions wereremeasured.  Gary A. Bishop, Donald H. Stedman, James E. Peterson,Theresa J. Hosick, and Paul L. Guenther (Chemistry Department,University of Denver, University Park, CO 80208-0179) obtained morethan 17,000 measurements on over 10,000 individual vehicles.  Asobserved elsewhere, half of the total carbon monoxide was emittedby only about 10% of the vehicles.  Solicitation letters were sentto 114 owners, and 47 vehicles were recruited and repairsattempted.  Of the 47 vehicles, 28 were remeasured when the sitewas revisited at the end of the program.  They had improved theiron-road emissions by more than 50%.  The vehicles which wereidentified as gross polluters at the second location, but notnotified of their status, were used as the control group.  Theiremissions were also reduced, but only by 14%.  This pilot programdemonstrated carbon monoxide emissions reduction at a costeffectiveness of $200 per ton, not including the cost benefits ofgas mileage improvement.  $200 per ton is lower than many currentor proposed mandatory programs.  The owner's repair cost would morethan pay for itself in terms of improved fuel economy.  The programwould also generate the on-road fleet emissions data necessary toevaluate its effectiveness.  Without such data, a program is forcedto rely on computer modeling with its known limitations.  Theresearchers published the results of their work in Air & Waste,Vol. 43, July 1993, 978-988.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Multi-Layer Coating Reduces VOC'sDu Pont (Wilmington, DE 19898; Tel 302/774-1000) has been assigneda patent for a low volatile organic compound (VOC) multi-layerclear coating.  The process described in US Patent 5,227,201,issued to Lee R. Harper on July 13, 1993, forms multiple coats offinishes on a substrate by first applying a color basecoat layer ofpigment-containing acrylic polymer latex.  Before the basecoat iscured, a clear coat acrylic polymer having crosslinkable groups anda crosslinking agent in a volatile organic solvent is applied.  Thelayers are cured simultaneously.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993VOC's Thermally Stripped from SoilRichard and Junior L. Crosby (7819-105 Calibre Crossing, Charlotte,NC 28227) has  a patent for a process which thermally stripsvolatile organic compounds (VOC's) from soil using a recirculatingcombustible gas.  The transportable system described in US Patent5,228,803 was issued on July 20, 1993 and includes a vessel inwhich contaminated soil is placed in contact with a hot gas.  Thegas is discharged from the vessel, and ambient air is introducedinto the gas to ensure that it remains combustible.  A blowercirculates the gas to a cyclone separator, where fine soilparticles and ash are removed.  The VOC's in the gas are removed bycombustion in a burner fired with a supplemental fuel.  A portionof the combusted gas is exhausted to the atmosphere, and theremainder is recirculated to the vessel where the process isrepeated.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Low VOC Cleaner Used Automotive RefinishingDu Pont (Wilmington, DE 19898; Tel 302/774-1000) has  a patent fora low volatile organic compound (VOC) cleaner.  The compositiondescribed in US Patent 5,230,821 was issued to John C. Larson andGary L. Horton on July 27, 1993.  It includes an aqueous emulsionof a non-aromatic organic phase stabilized with a blend ofsurfactants.  The emulsion is characterized by a low content ofVOC's and superior cleaning properties.  It is particularly usefulfor removing water- and organic solvent-soluble materials fromautomotive surfaces being refinished.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993VOC Emissions from Glycol Dehydrators ReducedThe Gas Research Institute (Chicago, IL) has been assigned a patentfor a system to control volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionsfrom glycol dehydrators.  The system described in US Patent5,209,762, issued to Philip S. Lowell on May 11, 1993, places aglycol in contact with a natural gas stream to extract water fromthe gas.  The glycol is regenerated by heating it to vaporize theabsorbed water.   The vented steam VOC contaminants flow from theglycol regenerator to the bottom of a steam stripper column.  Thevapors from the top of the steam stripper column are condensed toproduce a water stream with a relatively high concentration ofVOC's.  The water stream is passed to the top of the steam stripperand then through the stripper counter-currently to the vented gasesand steam.  The condenser water stream is thereby stripped of mostof its organics content and emerges from the bottom of the strippercolumn.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993RESOLV  Vapor Recovery Systems Capture VOC'sNew chemical vapor recovery systems developed by Air Products andChemicals, Inc. (7201 Hamilton Boulevard, Allentown, PA 18195-1501;215/481-8451, Fax 215/481-5431) are helping the chemical processindustries (CPI) meet volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionregulations mandated by the Clean Air Act Amendments (Air Toxicsemissions) while reducing costs through the recovery of valuablechemicals.  RESOLV  chemical vapor recovery systems can remove 95-99% of the VOC's by using liquid nitrogen to cool process ventstreams to targeted temperatures, condensing, and capturing theVOC's in liquid form.  The VOC's are captured before they are mixedand diluted by other waste streams, thereby significantly reducingdisposal costs.  The recovered chemicals can then be sold orrecycled in the manufacturer's operation.  Additionally, furthercost savings can be achieved, since the required quantity ofnitrogen to operate a RESOLV system is often already available on-site.In a typical RESOLV installation, liquid nitrogen and VOC emissionstreams pass through an indirect condenser.  In the condenser, thecold liquid nitrogen condenses the VOC's and captures them inliquid form, while the liquid nitrogen simultaneously converts togaseous nitrogen.  The clean, VOC-free vent stream exits therecovery system, and the clean, gaseous nitrogen is then usedelsewhere in the chemical manufacturing process such as in inertingprocessing or storage vessels.  The purity of the nitrogen remainsintact, since it does not come into direct contact with the VOC's.As a result, Air Products' RESOLV systems permit chemicalmanufacturers to realize both the cryogenic and inerting benefitsof their nitrogen supply without the cost and performancedisadvantages associated with freeze-thaw systems.Air Products says that RESOLV systems offer several advantages overalternative technologies for meeting VOC regulations.  AirProducts' systems are flexible and can accommodate changes in VOCregulations without re-engineering the system.  The amount of VOC'srecovered with a RESOLV system can be adjusted simply by reducingthe  temperature of the indirect condenser.  In addition, capitalcosts are less; permitting of flares, incinerators, or catalyticcombustion equipment is avoided; and there are no environmentalproblems associated with nitrogen oxide and small amounts of non-combusted VOC's.  RESOLV systems also eliminate the disposalproblems created by adsorption technology or scrubbers.Air Products' Dr. Bud Dalton, Commercial Development Manager forthe technology, stressed that "RESOLV systems are more than end-of-pipe solutions; they can be integrated upstream into manufacturingprocesses to achieve additional savings."  Air Products customizesthese systems to cost effectively address each customer's VOCstream composition and recovery/compliance targets.  In someinstances, the CPI customer may only require supplemental coolingto meet current emission standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993RE-THERM VF Units Treat VOC'sResearch-Cottrell Reeco, Inc. (Box 1500, Somerville, NJ 08876; Tel908/685-4000, Fax 908/685-4181) is marketing its RE-THERM VF systemto oxidize volatile organic compounds (VOC's) and other airbornepollutants.  Nicholas Coppola, Senior Vice President - Sales, toldus that the technology offers destruction efficiencies of 96-99%.During operation of the RE-THERM VF system, contaminated processair enters the unit through an inlet manifold.  Flow control valvesdirect the exhaust into those regenerative chambers that have justswitched to the "inlet" mode.  These chambers contain hot ceramicstoneware that has absorbed most of the heat energy from a previousbatch of exiting cleaned air.  When the incoming, contaminatedexhaust is drawn through the hot stoneware bed, its temperatureincreases.  This causes many pollutants and odor-causing compoundsto auto-ignite even before they reach the main purificationchamber.  Gas or oil burners in the main chamber maintain therequired purification temperature.  If the incoming gas streamcontains enough VOC's, the unit can self-sustain, keeping fuelcosts very low.  The purified air is channeled out through astoneware bed that has switched to the "outlet" mode.  There, itdeposits most of its heat energy which is transferred to yetanother batch of incoming, contaminated process exhaust.  In mostapplications, warm, clean air is then vented to the atmosphere.Another option is the return of the warm exhaust to the plant toheat dryers, ovens, or other equipment.  In some units, wastesolvent can be used as auxiliary fuel, further reducing operatingcosts and alleviating the plant's solvent disposal problem.  Singleunits with a horizontal flow design can treat up to 500,000ft3/minute.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Fate of VOC's in Municipal Activated Sludge Plants  InvestigatedThe fate of volatile organic compounds (VOC's) in municipalactivated sludge plants has been investigated at pilot and fullscale.  Wayne J. Parker, Doug J. Thompson, John P. Bell, and HenrykMelcer found that more than 80% of the mass flow of non-chlorinatedcompounds was biodegraded while less than 20% was removed bystripping.  Conversely, 46% of the mass flow of chlorinatedcompounds was biodegraded and 47% was removed by stripping.Adsorption of VOC's onto waste sludge was not a significant removalmechanism.  The pilot plant used effectively emulated the liquid-gas phase partitioning and overall compound removals of a full-scale plant.  There was little difference in liquid-gas phasepartitioning for coarse and fine pore diffusers in spite ofdiffering mass transfer characteristics as demonstrated by oxygen-transfer measurements.  This implies that equilibrium between theliquid- and gas-phase concentrations was achieved with bothdiffuser types.  Stripping of VOC's increased with air flow, butthe extent of stripping increased at a declining rate.  Theresearchers summarized their work in a paper published in WaterEnvironment Research Vol. 65, No. 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993ICI Paints Reduces VOC's with Water-Based FormulationsIn an effort to reduce volatile organic compound (VOC) emissionsfrom paint solvents, ICI Paints (Slough, UK) has developed what itssays is the first water-based metallic paint for automotiverefinishing.  About 15% of the 800 million liters/year of paintsold by ICI goes to the auto refinishing market.  The product isscheduled for introduction in both Europe and the U.S. later in1993.  The company estimates that European auto repairs account forabout 117,000 metric tons/year of VOC emissions.  ICI has beenactive in the Canadian auto refinishing market for many years andentered the U.S. arena in September 1992 with its existing organicsolvent-based product line.  The new water-based product, whichadapts a microgel latex paint system used in car manufacturingsince the early 1980's, contains only about 15% organic solventsinstead of the 85% or so contained in conventional metallic paints.ICI hopes to reduce the organic solvent content below 10% by 1994.The price of the new paint will be 5-30% higher than the existingproduct line, but ICI points out that users will be able to avoidthe installation of VOC emissions control equipment.  The companyis manufacturing the new paint at Stowmarket, UK and is undecidedabout U.S. manufacturing plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Influence of Landscape Variability on Atmospheric  DispersionUsing idealized distributions of surface moisture, Roger A. Pielkeand Marek Uliasz (Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado StateUniversity, Fort Collins, CO) have shown that with a significantsynoptic prevailing flow over regions of surface variability,dispersion is generally enhanced over heterogeneous surfaces ascompared to horizontally homogeneous conditions.  The importance ofheterogeneity becomes less as the large-scale wind speed increasesand/or the spatial scale of the heterogeneities become less.  Thework demonstrates that the use of Gaussian regulatory models inareas of landscape variability is inappropriate.  The researcherspublished the results of their work in Air & Waste, Vol. 43, July1993,989-994.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Atmospheric Sulfur Oxidation Influence by Droplet Size in Cloudsand FogCloud and fog have traditionally been assumed to be composed of achemically homogeneous population of droplets.  Model predictionsand experimental investigations by Xin Rao, Aaron Bator, and JeffCollett, Jr. (Institute for Environmental Studies, University ofIllinois, 1101 West Peabody Drive, Urbana, IL 61801) indicate thatthis assumption may not be correct.  Variations in chemical dropsizes across the drop size spectrum have been predicted andobserved in a number of environments.  The researchers examined theinfluence of such variations on aqueous phase oxidation of S(IV) inthe atmosphere.  Measurements of the composition of various dropsize fractions in clouds and fog often reveal differences in pH.Measurements of S(IV) and H2O2 concentrations in radiation fogs inCalifornia's central valley revealed a dependence on drop size aswell.  Simultaneous variations of pH, S(IV), and H2O2concentrations across the drop size spectrum complicate predictionsof net rates of sulfur oxidation.  The researchers believe that itis unlikely that the average rate of sulfur oxidation across thedrop spectrum will be equal to the rate predicted based on averagecloud or fog drop compositions.  They summarized their work in apaper, Chemical Variations Across the Cloud Drop Size Spectrum andTheir Influence on Sulfur (IV) Oxidation in the Atmosphere,delivered at the 206th American Chemical Society (ACS) NationalMeeting in Chicago, IL August 22-27, 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Software Models Processes and Tracks Chemical UsageModelVision Software, Inc. (13186 Trail Hollow, Houston, TX 77079;Tel 713/461-0043) has commercialized a process modeling and toxicchemical tracking system.  The software, Visual Chem Track ,provides both integrated process simulation and lifetime trackingfor more than 1100  chemicals.  "PC-based simulation and accountingwithin individual processes and facility-wide meets the criticalneeds of managers," said John Shaffer, ModelVision President, whoadded, "Federal, state, regional, and local environmental, health,and safety regulations mandate precise documentation and reporting.At the same time, good management practice calls for constantanalysis and revision, both of individual operations and entireprocesses.  Since businesses must keep accurate information forcompliance, our software builds on that base by means of a dynamicmodel."Shaffer said that the software is user-friendly and that the on-line "help" feature allows users to master the software at theirown learning pace.  Each engineer or process manager describes indetail the facility, production unit, and component operationsincluding the names and quantities of chemicals involved.  Once themodel is built, the system provides continuous, accurate trackingof all chemicals, showing where efficiencies can be obtained inboth chemical use and by-product generation.  Using Visual ChemTrack, engineers and process managers describe facility andindividual production units in visual, process flow diagrams; enterchemical substances involved in each step of facility operation;track chemical consumption, processing, and by-product generationat both the production unit and total facility levels; fine tuneoperations using a mass balance transfer function to automaticallytabulate and balance chemical inputs and outputs; track more than1100 compounds by CAS number, usage, or generation threshold,regulation, and/or type of operation; provide a basis for comparingoperations with plans, assuring that both the total facility andindividual production units and sub-units operate optimally.Visual Chem Track prepares federal and state environmental forms,and produces reports tailored to management's specifications toanalyze trends and aid decision making.  The software requiresMicrosoft Windows 3.1, an 80386 or higher microprocessor, and atleast 2 megabytes of RAM.  Visual Chem Track is priced at $2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993German Technology Cuts Toxic Incinerator ResidueGSB mbH (Munich, Germany), a waste disposal company, has pilottested a process to cut the amount of toxic residue from 4500metric tons/year to 3900 metric tons/year at a 70,000 metrictons/year incinerator in Ebenhausen, Germany.  In the process,fluegas from the incinerator first passes through an electrostaticprecipitator (ESP) to remove the dust.  Sulfur dioxide is thenremoved from the fluegas in a 2-step washing process.  Bydissolving the dust from the ESP in the acidic wash water from thefirst step of the fluegas cleaning process, GSB can transfer up to80% of the dust  collected by the ESP to the wastewater stream,which is then neutralized with calcium hydroxide or calciumcarbonate.  The undissolved material, including the metalhydroxides, is filtered and vitrified in 2 stages at 500 C and1000 C, respectively.  The dissolved salts, mainly calciumchloride, go to a wastewater treatment plant.Back to Headline List CopyrightATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION & ABATEMENT NEWS via NewsNetSEPTEMBER 1993Vitropore Ceramic Candles Clean Hot Flue GasPall Corporation (2200 Northern Boulevard, East Hills, NY 11548;Tel 516/484-5400 or 800/645-6532, Fax 516/621-3976) Vitroporeceramic filter candles are intended for hot gas solid separationprocesses.  Hot combustion gas is too corrosive and contaminated tobe filtered by any media other than ceramics.  If not adequatelyfiltered, solid particles and acid gases will cause erosion andfouling of energy recovery system components.  Vitropore ceramiccandles combine high burst strength and thermal shock resistancewith high permeability, high filtration efficiency, and corrosionresistance in a rigid silicon carbide medium.  They can removeand/or recycle catalysts from any catalytic reaction.The candles are made of finely-ground silicon carbide grains.During manufacturing, grain size is carefully controlled to achievean even pore size distribution throughout the candle's length.After blending the grains, the candles are isostatically pressedand machined to specific dimensions.  Porosity and permeability areuniform throughout the entire length of the candle, which providesconsistent filter performance during blowback operations.  Pallclaims that its Vitropore candles collect more than 99.9% ofinfluent solids on the surface of the filter medium.  The companysays that this high removal efficiency is due to the candle's topsurface layer which is a thin, du rable, fine-pore membranecomposed of one or more layers of bonded ceramic material.  Thissurface membrane is supported by a thicker, coarser substrate whichenables the candles to function as barrier filters.  They areespecially suited to pulse cleaning or blowback operations, sinceparticle penetration of the filter body is minimized.  The resultis quantitative solids separation, free of migration or unloadingof particulate matter and consistently good effluent quality.  Poresays that a major advantage of Vitropore candles is their abilityto withstand heat up to 1000 C due to a proprietary bindingmaterial highly tolerant of thermal shock.Vitropore candles remove contaminants and/or recover product inhalogenated hydrocarbon, petrochemical, catalyst activator, fluidcatalytic cracking (FCC), hazardous materials incineration, andfluid bed coal gasifier applications.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-29IA086-000616-B016-62http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev36.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002322 text/html 41989HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:21:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:09 GMTContent-length: 41802Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev36.html Sample Issue Copyright BUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet September 1, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *** FOCUS REPORT *** The Changing Climate of Collaboration (1283 words) *** INVESTMENT WATCH *** European Environmental Venture Fund Reaches First Round Funding Goal; Will Make Commitments By Year's End (384 words) Internal, External Forces Affect Earnings at Big Waste Collectors (415 words) Regulatory Uncertainty Whipsaws a New Public Company (397 words) *** REGULATORY AND POLICY TRENDS *** Taxes on Carbon Proposed on Two Continents (218 words) EPA Announces Stringent Sulfur Reduction Rule for Diesel Fuel (384 words) Superfund Changes Put EPA (and Taxpayers) Between Banks and Environmental Groups (371 words) *** BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES *** California Firm Ready for Expanded Pollution Rights Sales, But Some Companies Won't Sell (323 words) Regional Center Will Build Foundations for Environmental Action in Central and Eastern Europe (518 words) *** COMPANIES AND CASES *** European Automakers Lead in Recycling (242 words) Du Pont Paired with Industry Council to Reduce Delaware Waste (209 words) Trans-National Corporate Progress Against Ozone Depletion (464 words) Flakt Will Retrofit Taiwanese Power Plant for $115 Million (275 words) *** HOTLINE *** State judges in New England will get training in (113 words) CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990The Changing Climate of Collaboration     One dividend of our exploration of space has been thatseries of photographs of earthrise over the moon -- of ourblue-green planet, fragile and entire in space.  As part of itscopyrighted series of op-ed ad pieces in the New York Times andWall Street Journal, Mobil Corporation (MOB-NYSE) last monthinvoked the earthrise image to call for a new era ofcollaboration between the camps of business and environmentalism.Mobil says business "gets the picture."  That we are indeed allin it together on spaceship earth and that changing times havebrought business to an understanding of environmentalresponsiveness and activism.     Mobil isn't alone.  A rising tide of collaborative studies,initiatives, and projects large and small indicate a trend awayfrom confrontation and toward cooperation.     Jim Middaugh, spokesman for the US Environmental DefenseFund (EDF), told BATE "After twenty years of litigating, we'refinding that the carrot of improved profits is as compelling asthe stick of legal action."  And, true to that promise, EDF isworking with McDonald's Corp. (MCD-NYSE) in a major study to findways to reduce, reuse, recycle, and compost the solid waste fromthe 11,000 McDonald's around the world.     The EDF-McDonald's joint task force, a first between a majorenvironmental group and leading fast food retailer, will spendsix months looking at every step in McDonald's business.  Thejoint announcement lists redesign and reduction in use ofpackaging and shipping materials, increased use of materials withless environmental impact, increased recycling and use ofrecyclable packaging, composting of organic wastes, increased useof reuseables shipping containers and foodware, and increased useof recycled materials as possible areas of examination.     The consultancy is distinctive because of the potentialleverage from its findings and the nature of the relationship.In addition to the 11,000 McDonald's stores, there are another130,000 fast food outlets and 330,000 restaurants in total in theU.S. that stand to gain  from what is learned.  And every day,McDonald's serves 22 million customers.   That's 22 millionchances every day to implant an environmental responsibilitymessage in the public mind.     The agreement is carefully structured.  The study will bemade public and the feasibility of the recommendations assessed.McDonald's says that, where feasible, they will implement therecommendations.  If EDF and the hamburger maker disagreematerially, each has the right to issue a dissenting or separateopinion.  Either party can end the project if no agreement lookspossible, and each is paying its own share to ensureindependence.     So . . . within a week of one another, we have US$50 billionMobil saying "We don't see two camps.  Energies that ought to bejoined in collaborative efforts are far less productivelyemployed when slinging gibes or lawsuits.  When we work in tandem-- or at least pull in the same direction -- a lot gets done."And we have Fred Krupp, executive director of EDF, saying hisorganization is "hopeful that this process (with McDonald's) willillustrate ways in which business and environmental groups thathave significantly different perspectives can nevertheless worktogether to achieve environmental improvements that are in thepublic interest."     Mobil's public call for conciliation and the EDF-McDonald'sventure are both discrete news events and points in a growingtrend.Changing the Minds of Utility Regulators     Other examples of corporation-environmental organizationcollaboration are beginning to produce measurable results.  Inthe summer of 1988, the US Conservation Law Foundation (CLF) andNew England Electric (NES-NYSE) agreed to work cooperatively onconservation and load management programs and the attendantregulatory and rate adjustments in the face of reduced sales.     The transition from an adversarial to a cooperativerelationship has had an appreciable impact.  Armond Cohen, asenior attorney on the CLF staff told BATE that in 1990, "NewEngland Electric will spend US$56 million on conservation,exclusive of load management.  Over the life of that investment,the NES outlay will yield savings to customers of $154 million incurrent dollars."  Cohen reports that of the net $98 million poolof savings, $80 million will be returned to the ratepayers, $10million will cover costs, and $8 million will be returned to theshareholders -- a .5% addition to the stockholders' return onequity.  Cohen calls that an "attractive incentive to encouragecontinued investment in conservation.  And," the Boston lawyercontinues, "those numbers don't reflect the reduced societalcosts of fewer dirty windows, less air pollution, fewerrespiratory problems."     In 1991, says Cohen, the utility's conservation investmentwill jump to $80 million, with $180 million in resulting savingsover the life of the investment.  The success of the CLF-NEScollaboration, particularly with state regulatory commissions,has now been extended to 12 retail electric companies in NewEngland and New York and the development of a nationalelectricity conservation program for Jamaica.  $40 million wasinvested across New England in conservation in 1987.  That figurejumps to $200 million for this year, in part the result of theinitiative between New England Electric and CLF.  And theinvestment will rise to $250 million in 1991.  The result?  Inwhat Cohen calls a conservative estimate, one third of otherwiseneeded power plants in the region out to the year 2010 won't haveto be built, freeing that capital for other uses.     At the National Audubon Society, Senior Scientist Jan Beyeareminds that the Coalition of Northeast Governors (CONEG) hasbrought together representatives of environmental organizations,the various states' agencies and most importantly, 12 corporatemembers in an extended collaborative effort to hammer outstandards and definitions of environmental terms -- leading to anenvironmental seal for consumers.  In addition to his CONEGparticipation, Beyea says he is often consulted informally bycorporations seeking Audubon's advice or opinion on new packagingor product introductions.European, Pacific Examples Surfacing     While BATE's sources in Europe and Australasia all concedethat they are not aware of collaborative examples as remarkableas the lion and lamb union of McDonald's and EDF, new initiativesare surfacing.  In the United Kingdom, 30 non-governmentenvironmental organizations have formed a coalition to fosterco-operation and environmental advocacy.  The Environment Councilcalls its Business and Environment Programme "a major element" ofits work.  Steve Robinson, Chief Executive of the EnvironmentCouncil, numbers more than 300 corporations on the program'smembership rolls.  In an interview, Robinson told BATE the aim ofthe Business and Environment Programme is "to promote the conceptthat environmental sense is commercial sense."     Robinson cites a recent exercise with 3M U.K. PLC duringwhich "50 environmental practitioners from our memberorganizations sat down with 3M to talk about the benefits of acomplete corporate environmental policy -- how to prepare,formulate, and most important, implement a company-wideenvironmental policy.  As a result," said Robinson, "3M has justadopted and made public a comprehensive environmental policy."     On the Pacific Rim, Phil Noyce of Australia's Commission forthe Future (and soon to head Greenhouse Action Australia) advisesthat his agency has been advising the international accountingand management firm of Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu on a potentialexpansion from financial to environmental auditing.     David Stephenson, an environmental strategist and seniorcounsel at the Boston marketing communications firm of Agnew,Carter, McCarthy, sees more strategic collaborative alliancesahead.  "There are probably thousands of saplings out there thissummer dying from neglect.  They were planted by companies whowanted or needed an Earth Day press release, and then forgotten."McCarthy thinks one-shot environmental gestures are fading.  Assenior managers incorporate environmental considerations intoevery step of planning, budgeting, producing, and selling, theexpertise and experience of environmental groups will offer anattractive opportunity for synergy.  Measurable new profits andimmeasurable public benefits can result.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990European Environmental Venture Fund Reaches First Round FundingGoal; Will Make Commitments By Year's End     A European venture capital fund based in the United Kingdomhas exceeded its first round funding goal and is already in duediligence on a variety of startups aimed at solving Europeanenvironmental problems.  The fund, the first of its kind inEurope, is called the TR ECOTEC Environmental Fund.  The venturefund is a limited partnership combining the skills of Touche,Remnant & Co. in London and ECOTEC Investment Service Limited ofBirmingham.  ECOTEC is an independent corporate strategy,economics, and marketing group specializing in the environmentalprotection and waste management industry.  Touche, Remnant'sspecialist technology investment team is seven years old and hassome 190 million pounds under management.     The fund's objective is to secure high total returns throughcapital growth, by investment in emerging companies engaged inthe environmental protection and waste management industry in allof Europe.     Richard Haines, Director of ECOTEC, told BATE the fund has16 million pounds in hand, 1 million pounds more than theirinterim goal.  "Within two years, we seek to have raised 30million pounds," said Haines.  The fund is an unrecognizedcollective investment scheme under the UK's Financial ServicesAct.  Which means investment by private individuals isprohibited.  Haines says "pension funds and blue chipcorporations predominate among the subscribing institutionalinvestors."     Asked to characterize the proposals the fund has gotten sofar, Haines called them "all over the lot as to technology,strategy, and polish -- as you might expect.  The greatest numberare water and waste water treatment schemes, tertiary processesin membranes and other advanced filtration processes where thetechnology is just emerging.  Next in quantity," Hainescontinued, "are the land remediation companies.  And we're seeinga lot of joint ventures between Northern European and UScompanies on the one hand and Southern European companies on theother.  An example is proposal by a Danish air pollutionmanagement company and a Spanish engineering firm for a jointventure in Spain."     No investments have yet been made, but, says Haines, "We'redown to a dozen or so in due diligence and we expect to make twocommitments by the end of the year."     For more information -- Richard Haines, ECOTEC InvestmentServices Limited, Tel: +44 021 616 1010, or Peter Wolf, ToucheRemnant Investment Management Limited, Tel: +44 071 643 0281Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Internal, External Forces Affect Earnings at Big WasteCollectors     The New York-based Value Line investment service ranks theUS environmental companies first among 97 sectors for relativeshare price performance over the next 12 months.  In an era ofrising environmental awareness and expectation, these growingcompanies can count on continued public and private scrutiny --on operations and on stock performance.     Houston-based Browning Ferris Inc. (BFI-NYSE) posted thirdquarter sales of US$767.562 million and operating income of$82.378 million, up 18.5% and 8.8% respectively over the similarperiod last year.  Analysts said BFI had reduced the out-of statewaste it accepted at its big Ohio landfill to appease regulators.Diminished volume there and eroding margins as competitionheightens abroad accounted for results below expectation.     For Waste Management Inc. (WMX-NYSE), it wasn't the secondquarter results -- earnings up 26%, to $178.872 million -- butrather how an article in Barron's looked at Waste Management'saccounting that created ripples.  An article by Abraham Briloffcites the booking of a non-taxable gain of $70.8 millionresulting from the unrealized appreciation of shares of itsChemical Waste Management after Chemical's initial publicoffering as an example of "liberal accounting."     Rollins Environmental Services (REN-NYSE) saw quarterly netgo from red to black ink as the Wilmington, Delaware company sawbig new incinerators begin to operate at close to capacity.Rollins netted $7,224,000 on $52,486,000 for the quarter ended 30June.  That compares to a loss of $33.5 million on sales of $39.6 million for the comparable quarter in 1989.  Rollins is ontarget for a $200 million year with earnings of $19.179 millionon sales of $146.492 million for the first three quarters of itsfiscal year.     The addition of used oil recycling and waste fluid recoveryto Safety-Kleen's (SK-NYSE) core business of automotive andindustrial parts and tool cleaning is producing steady gains.From Elgin, Illinois, Safety-Kleen reports second quarterearnings of $11,995 million -- 15% better than the same periodlast year.  Sales were $132.885 million for the quarter and$258.488 for the first six months of 1990.  Net earnings rosefrom 31 cents to 35 cents per share quarter to quarter over '89.     Chemical Waste Management (CHW-NYSE), 78% of which is stillheld by Waste Management, added four cents to its per-shareearnings for its second quarter.  The largest of the US hazardouswaste handlers booked earnings of $43.081 million on revenues of$270.446 million for the period ended 30 June, lifting earningsfrom 17 cents to 21 cents per share over 1989.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Regulatory Uncertainty Whipsaws a New Public Company     Even after the worldwide dip in equity markets brought on bythe Iraqi crisis, U.S. shares of pure environmental companies areperforming better than other sectors.  Of five environmentalcompanies that have gone public this year, four are trading abovetheir IPO prices.  The shares of Mid-American Waste Systems Inc.(MAWS-OTC), Environmental Elements Corp. (NLCO-OTC), SanifillInc. (FIL-AMEX), and Tetra Technologies (TTRA-OTC) are allshowing gains.  Sanifill, which closed at US$25 as we went topress, was offered in April at $9.50, up over 150%.     The laggard is Horsehead Resource Development Company(HHRD-OTC) whose experience underscores the changing, expandingregulatory climate facing environmental remediation companies andthe need for investors and businesses to be both nimble anddiligent.  Horsehead, offered at $14.50 a share in July, rose to$22, but closed as we went to press at $13.75.  The companyrecovers zinc in steel mills in western Pennsylvania that recoversteel from scrap metal.  Horsehead resells the zinc and alsorecovers lead and cadmium from the steelmaking dust and sellsthat to other processors.  The recycling produces a slag and theslag is the problem.  The US Environmental Protection Agency(EPA) doesn't regulate the slag, and indeed the PennsylvaniaDepartment of Transportation is a Horsehead client and uses theslag on icy roads.  Because the process isn't regulated, thecosts are low compared to regulated landfills and other wastetreatment and recovery operators.     The trace lead, cadmium, and chromium in the slag hasproduced an unusual alliance.  Environmental groups and theHazardous Waste Treatment Council, the waste treatment operators,have joined to challenge the EPA to regulate the slag.  A federaldistrict appeals court in Washington, D.C. said last month thatthe EPA does indeed have the power to regulate the slag and askedthat it begin to do so.     Only in its final offering document did Horsehead mentionthe federal court case, saying even then that the ruling wasimmaterial.  Horsehead contends that its recovery technology isthe industry standard and that the EPA accepted that notion.     The company is at work on a process to use the slag toreclaim more heavy metals from waste water, but the regulatorypressure is there.  Reports on all these developments by DebraCoy, an analyst for County NatWest subsidiary Washington AnalysisCorp. and the volatile price of zinc have combined with marketvolatility to move Horsehead's shares lower.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Taxes on Carbon Proposed on Two Continents     Businesses operating in the European Community may soon besubject to a carbon tax.  The notion is part of a position paperon potential economic and fiscal instruments of EC environmentalpolicy.  Action may come as soon as next month.  The paper callsgreenhouse gases "one of the most pressing problems of the energysector."  The carbon tax would be based on the amount of carbondioxide produced by each kind of fuel.  And presumably wouldreduce greenhouse emissions by increasing efficiency and spurringconservation and non-carbon based alternative energy research.Depending on the array of conservation measures and energyperformance standards for buildings and appliances, a carbon taxcould increase fossil fuel prices by 20-30%     The ideas raised in the EC paper will be on the agenda of aninformal meeting of EC environmental ministers in Rome next monthand may be acted on in formal session in October.     The carbon tax idea is surfacing on the other side of theAtlantic as well.  In an op-ed piece in the New York Times onAugust 6, David Doniger of the Natural Resources Defense Counciland Alan Miller of the University of Maryland's Center for GlobalChange, the authors urge President Bush to adopt a carbon tax,saying the measure "would yield billions while sharply reducinggreenhouse emissions."Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990EPA Announces Stringent Sulfur Reduction Rule for Diesel Fuel     In 1988 US petroleum refiners and diesel enginemanufacturers prepared a joint proposal to the EPA for on-highwaydiesel fuel modification.  That landmark collaboration is thebasis for an EPA measure to reduce sulfur by 80% in diesel fuel.Earlier rules resulting from the industry initiative limit heavyduty particulates.  This new standard, to be met by 1 October1993, reduces sulfur content of diesel fuel from 0.25 percent to0.05 percent by weight.     The rule will add as much as 2.3 cents per gallon to dieselprices.  The EPA estimates annual costs to refiners betweenUS$380 and $910 million in 1995, and as much as $1.3 billion by2010.  The measure will reduce the cost of emissions controldevices, saving buyers $60 to $325 per vehicle.  Fuel savingsfrom the newer more efficient catalytic technology will amount to$200 million in 1995 and $465 million in 2010.  The measure maycut engine wear, bringing the direct economic benefit above theincreased cost per gallon.  Nevertheless, expect the fuelincreases to be passed on by transit authorities and everyshipper using diesel trucks to virtually all of the nation'scommuters and consumers.     The US measure is projected to reduce sulfate particulatesby 196,000 tons by 1995 and reduce sulfur dioxide levels by580,000 tons annually.  Sulfur dioxide further oxidizes in theatmosphere to form sulfuric acid and ammonium sulfates,components of acid rain.     European pressure to match the US standards has prompted acost study by CONCAWE , a consortium of 36 petroleum companiescontrolling 90% of Western European refining capacity.  CONCAWEfinds, depending on diesel demand and the availability of lowsulfur crude, that to produce 0.05% sulfur content diesel fuel,the 12 EC countries could expect to make an additional capitalexpenditure of between US$3 billion and $4.3 billion; that thecost per ton of sulfur removed would range between $6,000 and$9,000; and that the total manufacturing costs would reach tobetween $12 and $18 per ton of diesel fuel.  (These are metrictons, which equal 1.102 US tons.)     For more information on the EPA rulemaking, the contact isMartha Casey at +1 202 382 4378.  Information on the CONCAWEstudy can be gotten from Denis Lyons, CONCAWE, Madauplein 1,B-1030, Brussels Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 2203111; Fax: +32 2 2194646Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Superfund Changes Put EPA (and Taxpayers) Between Banks andEnvironmental Groups     The US Superfund is a two-pronged federal tool to clean uptoxic sites.  The law sets a standard of liability for those whopollute that is strict, joint, and federal.  That means a personor corporation can be liable regardless of fault, and that thegovernment can go after cleanup costs from any one defendant.The other prong is the pool of money, Superfund itself.  Thosedollars can be used to clean orphan sites where thoseresponsible cannot or will not pay.     Although Superfund can cast a wide net, lenders havetypically been protected from the law's reach.  Merely holdingcollateral or other security interest, typically a mortgage, in acontaminated property will not set off Superfund liability.     In return for this protection, banks and savings and loaninstitutions are obliged to exercise due diligence in evaluatingenvironmental risks as part of their lending.  That has souredsome deals, but more importantly produced heightened awarenessand environmental protection, possibly staving off some futureSuperfund sites.  In the Senate, S.2827 exempts lenders "from anylaw imposing strict liability for the release . . . of hazardoussubstances from property (1) acquired through foreclosure; heldin fiduciary capacity; or (3) held, controlled, or managedpursuant to the terms of an extension of credit."     That, says William J. Rogers of the Environmental DefenseFund, guts Superfund's powers and preempts state laws.  Lenders,the environmental groups testify, will look the other way,avoiding the diligence current law mandates.  A similar bill,with 273 co-sponsors, awaits the House Transportation andHazardous Waste subcommittee when Congress returns.     Bankers, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC), and theResolution Trust Corp. (RTC) all say they need the safe haven ofthe new law's protection.  FDIC chairman William Seidman told theSenate panel pollution liability is a major impediment togovernment sale of properties acquired in the S&L bailout, withthe delay raising costs to taxpayers.   The EPA has recently saidthat the banks and federal agencies have legitimate concerns.And taxpayers, in framing advocacy, must decide whether they wishto pay higher taxes for more Superfund relief or higher taxes forincreased costs in the S&L bailout.  The economics will bethrashed out in September when the Congress reconvenes.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990California Firm Ready for Expanded Pollution Rights Sales, ButSome Companies Won't Sell     On the list of market-based incentives against acid rain,one of the wildest is pollution rights.  The US EPA hasestablished a practice of creating and granting rights to pollutethe air.  Robert Beck of the Edison Electric Institute inWashington, DC told BATE power plants are assigned a fixed numberof allowances.  "Allowance" in this case means a ton of sulfurdioxide that the plant is allowed to emit annually.  "They'reassets," says Beck.  "Companies can lease them, trade them, buyand sell them.  They can only be used forward in time and they'rerecognized on a calendar year."     Markets crave efficiency; pollution rights are no different.Enter AER*X,  a pollution rights brokerage firm in Los Angeles,the brain child of John Palmisano, who started the system whilehe worked for the EPA.     AER*X has just been sold by WPL Holdings to NaTec Resources(NATC-OTC), which in turn is 44.8% held by CRSS Inc. (CRX-NYSE).The $1.4 million company may benefit from expanded pollutionrights in the clean air bill that will move out of conferencewhen the US Congress returns in the fall.     But there are uncertainties.  Tom Zosel, manager ofpollution prevention at Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing(MMM-NYSE), cautions that "the EPA is tightening its marketmechanisms in non-attainment areas.  Companies that use thecredits are essentially going forward and modifying as they go.For a time, the EPA was making policy in response to specificinstances, so the initiators were ahead of the curve . . . buteveryone learned to live with a high degree of ambiguity."     Zosel reports that 3M is no longer selling emission credits,but is buying.  "3M has spent $160 million to implementsubstantial emissions reductions.  If we turn around and sell therights to what we've gained, we've done nothing for theenvironment.  We're keeping the rights for future growth or toreturn to state and local agencies as improvement in airquality."Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Regional Center Will Build Foundations for Environmental Actionin Central and Eastern Europe     That the governments of Eastern Europe did not provide cleanair and clean water contributed in part to their overthrow.  Now,as these new governments move away from command economies, theyare inundated by sellers of environmental remedies.  Because theproblems are so large, so are the opportunities to profit.     One international initiative on the environment that standsto rationalize the process is the Regional Environmental Centerfor Central and Eastern Europe in Budapest.  The center's charterwas signed earlier this summer by the US, The Netherlands,Hungary, and the European Community.  Other nations in the regionare expected to sign on.     The Center will operate as an independent, not-for-profitnon-governmental organization under a 15-member internationalboard.  BATE asked Helen Petrauskas, vice president forEnvironment and Safety Engineering at Ford Motor Company and oneof three US board members, where the board will begin.     "We're starting from scratch," said the Ford executive,"defining the kinds of institutions and the level of democraticparticipation.  You must remember those nations must draft wholenew sets of environmental laws and create and staff environmentalministries."     "I hope we can create a credible neutral meeting place forgovernment, industry, and the environmental NGOs to cometogether," Ms. Petrauskas continued.     The Center's charter calls for work in four areas:collection and dissemination of data; development ofinstitutions; education; and matching available resources withregional needs -- a clearing house.  Asked whether this functioncould be viewed as a trade mission, Ms. Petrauskas said, "There'sno doubt we're in the role of exporting economic expertise,getting help on what's worth buying.  Poland, for instance isbesieged by environmental vendors and is trying to sort out theclaims.  But we have to be careful not to assume our way is thebest way."  Asked what she meant, Ms. Petrauskas said that aregional model similar to the European community might offer thebest solutions.     Philip Warburg, director of the Central and East EuropeanEnvironmental Program for the Environmental Law Institute inWashington, DC, echoed Ms. Petrauskas's observations. "First,credible environmental protection regimes must be put in place,and that raises issues of appropriate public involvement, thepublic right of access to information, citizen suits, and therole of the judiciary."     Warburg cautioned environmental businesses that would go tothe region to be aware of "considerable differences inreceptivity in different countries.  Where the Hungarians areentrepreneurial, Czechoslovakia, for instance, is emanating acertain ambivalence to industrial perspectives.  In their vision,they don't feel the need for a carbon copy of western values.But," continues Warburg, "that skepticism shouldn't be penalized,but understood."     In succeeding issues, BATE will look at the public andprivate initiatives under way in the region, identifying what andwho is working and why.  The US contact for the regional centeris Stephen Wassersug, the newly appointed program director.  Hisphone number at the EPA office in Philadelphia is +1 215 5978131.  In Budapest, the contact is Peter Hardi, ExecutiveDirector, Regional Environmental Center for Central and EasternEurope, Budapest III, Miklos Ter 1, Budapest, Hungary.  Tel: +361 168 6284.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990European Automakers Lead in Recycling     For decades, rebuilt parts were an example of Yankeeingenuity -- the reuse of durable, well-designed parts.  But U.S.OEMs are struggling to catch their competition, particularly inEurope, where a longer look at the lifecycle of all the materialsin cars is yielding interesting innovations.  Cars are beingdesigned to be reused and recycled, from bumper to bumper.  Inthe face of stiffened recycling rules pending for EC members, theGerman automakers are especially active.  BMW is building arecycling plant in Wackersdorf.  Volkswagen is recyclingthermoset plastic sheet molding from its front ends on Golfmodels and using it on engine shields in the same car.  Thethermoset technology is particularly interesting because thethermosets, unlike the easily meltable thermoplastics, arecreated from strong interlocking compounds, and therefore resisteasy handling.  Grinding and pyrolysis -- high heat (760 degreesC) and no oxygen -- are beginning to produce results.  MercedesBenz has built a demonstration car with all its recyclablecomponents in green.  Mercedes is recycling excess plastics fromtrunk floor production, reprocessing thermoplastic andpolyurethane panels to fabricate cable wrappings and wheel wells,extracting and reusing the "noble" metals -- platinum, rhodium,palladium, and cerium -- from catalytic converters.     VDA, the German automobile manufacturing association, hasdeveloped a labeling program for automotive plastics.  The planis designed to ease sorting and recycling.  Volvo, perhaps themost environmentally proactive car maker, has joined the Germansin adopting the VDA standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Du Pont Paired with Industry Council to Reduce Delaware Waste     In another public-private partnership, Du Pont (DD-NYSE) andthe Council for Solid Waste Solutions are each giving the stateof Delaware grants of US$20,000 to fund a computer softwaresystem for the statewide reduction of solid waste.  The software,called WastePlan, was designed by Tellus Institute, a publicinterest consulting firm.  The system is in place as a statewideplanning tool in Michigan and New York and as a municipalplanning tool in Boston.  The system helps state and localplanners assess the economic and environmental impacts ofcollection and disposal systems.     Du Pont's share will pay for the software license.  Thecouncil's half will go for training and continuing technicalsupport.  Du Pont's Paul Wyche put the Delaware initiative incontext, telling BATE "Du Pont has pilot solid waste projects inFlorida, Tennessee, Texas, and Illinois.  In Illinois, we'reworking with the state department of transportation to makehighway safety barriers from high density polyethylene.  Thatproject is up and running."     Asked whether the money for the Delaware and other solidwaste initiatives came from a corporate giving budget or a linebudget, Wyche said the grants came from operating funds, and thatthe set-asides for such projects were growing as Du Pont's andthe communities' awareness grew.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Trans-National Corporate Progress Against Ozone Depletion     Company by company, CFCs and other ozone-depleting compoundsare being eliminated around the world.  Some recent developments:     Intel Corp. (INTC-OTC), the Santa Clara, Californiasemiconductor maker, has plants in Ireland, Israel, Singapore,Penang, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and the USA.  Intel says itwill eliminate chloroflourocarbons (CFCs) from its worldwidemanufacturing processes by 1992.  The company began tracking CFCuse in 1987.  Using conservation and alternate technologies,Intel has reduced its CFC usage some 30% to date.  Intel hassubstituted an aqueous-based cleaner for CFC-113 on its circuitboards and targets not only CFC-113, but also CFC-11, 12, 114,115, TCA, and carbon tetrachloride for elimination by the targetdate.  The company announcement calls the program "one of themost aggressive in the industry."     The Big Three Japanese carmakers are making inroads onCFC-12, the automotive air conditioning refrigerant.  Honda hasbegun a worldwide program to get cfc recycling units in the handsof its authorized dealers.  The units capture CFC-12 from the carsystems for purification and reuse.  Each unit will cost 260,000yen or some US$1,700.  In Japan, Honda says 2,000 of its 2,600dealers will have the units by this fall.     Toyota set up its CFC Action Committee in April 1989.Toyota says it will have CFC recovery and recycling units in itsservice shops worldwide by next summer.  Toyota targets theelimination of CFC-based foaming agents in its upholstery by theend of 1991, and like every car manufacturer, is testingsubstitute refrigerants and reconfigured A/C systems using HCFCand other more ozone-benign compounds.     Nissan says its CFC recycling hardware will be in place atall its dealerships and service centers worldwide by March of1992.  And Nissan will phase out CFCs in its autotomotive airconditioners by the end of 1995.     Lockheed, (LK-NYSE), the aeronautics and space manufacturer,was stung in June by a Greenpeace allegation that the company wasa "laggard, failing to halt its use of ozone-destroyingchemicals."     Lockheed's internal timetable calls for elimination ofozone-depleters by the year 2000, a policy it points out isconsistent with Montreal Protocol targets.  In the last twoyears, Lockheed has reduced its CFC-113 emissions 39% and TCA(1,1,1 trichloroethane) emissions by 43%.     Lockheed's government relations manager, Katherine Strehl,pleads that the company's requirements "are often more stringenttechnically and operationally . . . because ours frequentlyinvolve spacecraft that must function for years without repair orreplacement of parts."     In Toronto, Northern Telecom (NT-NYSE) says it has reducedCFC use by half in the last 18 months.  The communications gianthas saved US$1.5 million in CFC-113 reduction and another $1million in US CFC consumption taxes avoided.  The company hasjoined with the US EPA to publish a manual on CFC managementpractices for small and mid-sized CFC-113 users.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990Flakt Will Retrofit Taiwanese Power Plant for $115 Million     The ABB Environmental Systems Division of Flakt, Inc., a USsubsidiary of Asea Brown Boveri, will design, engineer, and builda wet flue gas desulfurization (FGD) system for Taiwan PowerCompany's Lin Kou station near Taipei.     Robert A. Agonis, vice president -- FGD systems for theABB/Flakt unit, is the project manager and just back from Taipei.Agonis told BATE that a rising tide of democracy after thelifting of martial law in Taiwan has produced a vocal, involvedpopulace with environmental concerns a high priority.  "With airpollution going wild in Taipei," said Agonis, "the prime ministeris under considerable political pressure to make a success ofthis plant."  Agonis's division won the job in competitivebidding with contractors from Japan and West Germany.  Flakt Inc.is the world leader in installed capacity for FGD systems.  TheUS division accounts for US$500 million of the Stockholm-basedcompany's $2.8 billion in sales.  And Flakt's volume in turn ispart of ABB's $20.56 billion in global sales.     The Taiwanese contract calls for the retrofit of two 350 mwgenerating units -- the delivery of a turnkey FGD system.  Thetechnology will reduce sulfur dioxide emissions by 90% in aprocess that combines limestone and a water spray with the fluegas from the coal-fired plant.  As a by-product, the systemproduces a commercial grade of gypsum for use in construction,road building and concrete manufacture.     The contact comes as the Republic of China's EconomicsMinistry is launching a nation-wide energy conservation campaign.Add the Republic of China to the list of countries, many of themin Eastern Europe, where environmental technology vendors canfind new markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS AND THE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1990     State judges in New England will get training in     State judges in New England will get training inenvironmental law.  A series of seminars beginning early nextyear responds to what Andrew Savitz, general counsel of theMassachusetts Office of Environmental Affairs, calls "tidal waveof environmental litigation about to break over the courts."  Theprogram is being developed by the Environmental Law Institute,the Massachusetts Office of Environmental Affairs, and theFlaschner Judicial Institute, an arm of the state barassociation.  The initiative is funded by a $46,500 grant fromthe Jessie B. Cox Charitable Trust.     Contact the BATE Hotline for more information on any newsitem covered in this issue.  Tel: +1 617 641 5123; Fax: +1 617648 8707.Back to Headline List WT02-B36-30IA086-000616-B016-96http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev23.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002346 text/html 68442HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:21:42 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:12 GMTContent-length: 68255Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev23.html Sample Issue Copyright CALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LOCAL PLANNING RESEARCHERS CALL FOR CEQA REFORM (1419 words) ADELANTO PAYS PRICE FOR BASE, WATER FIGHTS (1454 words) SACRAMENTO FINALLY GETS OUT OF HYATT HOTEL DEAL (1014 words) ENVIRONMENT WATCH FISH & GAME FEE TO BE REINSTATED (928 words) BASE WATCH PACKARD BELL DEAL LOOKS GOOD--BUT COMES AT A PRICE (1141 words) LEGAL DIGEST LISTING OF SPECIES STALLED (625 words) STATE SUPREME COURT LAYS DOWN CC&R RULE (1203 words) APPELLATE COURT STRIKES DOWN FRESNO-AREA ARTS TAX (585 words) SUPP EIS NOT NEEDED FOR DOPPLER WEATHER STATION (730 words) NUMBERS ECONOMYUS UP, BUT CONSTRUCTION ISNUT (639 words) PLACES REMAKING DOWNTOWN FRESNO (495 words) CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RESEARCHERS CALL FOR CEQA REFORM  The California Environmental Quality Act should permit wide-ranging discussion of environmental issues at the planningstage but provide tightly focused analysis at the project level,according to a new report from a team of researchers at theUniversity of California, Berkeley.  "Fixing CEQA," a report published by the California PolicySeminar, is the latest in a long series of documents suggestinghow CEQA might be reformed. It comes on the heels of a recentpolicy report by the Little Hoover Commission, which alsoproposed some changes to CEQA. But the Berkeley report alsocontains a great deal of data on how CEQA is used by planningpractitioners in California.  Underlying both reports is the ongoing question of what therelationship should be between CEQA and the planning process.Comparing CEQA to the National Environmental Policy Act and17 other "mini-NEPAs" around the country, the research teamconcluded that CEQA is much more widely used at the projectlevel than its counterparts P a fact that often makes it the"driver" on many planning issues. Only the mini-NEPAs inWashington and New York are used in so wide a range ofsituations, but development activity in those states is a fractionof what it is in California.  Like the Little Hoover Commission report, the Berkeley teamrecommends greater involvement of state and regionalagencies in the CEQA process and incentives to provide greatercertainty all along the line. "The fundamental problem withCEQA," the researchers report, "is that it fails to encouragefairness and consistency in the review process or in therequired impact mitigations." This problem is reflected in whatBerkeley planning professor John Landis, the lead researcher,calls "the 90%/10% problem." "For 90% of the projects whichare not controversial, CEQA works fine," he said. "For the other10%, it falls apart."  Unlike the Little Hoover Commission report, however, theBerkeley report does not recommend that CEQA be used as theprimary tool for environmental decision-making on a regionaland state basis. (For more information on the Little HooverCommission report, see CP&DR, December 1995.) "They want toregionalize CEQA," Landis said. "I'm not sure that's the rightthing to do." Landis acknowledges that four regional issuescontinually pop up in CEQA analyses: air quality, water, wildlifehabitat, and traffic. Instead of using CEQA as a regional tool tosolve these problems at the project level, the Berkeley teamrecommends using CEQA in a different way at the plan leveland the project level. The Berkeley researchers alsorecommended a series of improvements to cumulative impactmonitoring to handle regional issues.  "At the planning stage," concluded the research team, "CEQAshould encourage a broad and open-ended discussion ofalternatives and environmental impacts. This discussion shouldbe integrated with ongoing local, regional, and state planningprocesses. Environmental review of specific projects, bycontrast, should focus on the impacts of that project in relationto all underlying adopted plans, still attempting to establishfeasible mitigation measures for all significant adverseimpacts."  The Berkeley team's five specific recommendations are:  1. Improving the involvement of state and regional agenciesin the CEQA process. This is similar to the Little HooverCommission's recommendations and it draws from the researchteam's observation that state and regional agencies areunpredictable players in the CEQA process.  2. Increasing the certainty and consistency of local CEQAreview. Like the Little Hoover Commission, the Berkeleyresearchers noted that a lack of consistent thresholds and otherstandards makes it difficult for applicants to know how theprocess is going to move forward. Among other things, theBerkeley researchers propose that localities be forced to adoptstandardized thresholds and standardized mitigation measuresto be used in mitigated negative declarations.  3. Improving mitigation and monitoring of cumulativeimpacts. To overcome CEQA's chronic project-orientedapproach, the research team recommended such steps as anexpanded use of tiered environmental impact reports,standardized mitigation measures to deal with regionalcumulative impacts, and greater use of pro-active regionalplanning and conservation efforts.  4. Making alternatives analysis better or else eliminating it.The researchers characterized current alternatives analysis aslittle more than a "scaling exercise" that shows howenvironmental impacts can be reduced if the scale of theproject is reduced. The researchers proposed expandedalternatives analysis at the plan level and a more fine-grainedalternatives analysis at the project level. But if these cannot beachieved, the researchers concluded, the alternatives analysisis not worth keeping.  5. Creating more consistency and predictability in CEQAlitigation. The research team concluded that CEQA currentlycontains few incentives to mediate disputes and/or avoidlitigation. The team recommended that the Governor's Office ofPlanning and Research create a series of guidebooks toestablish "best CEQA practices" in areas where judicial directionhas not been clear or consistent.  "Fixing CEQA" is available by contacting the California PolicySeminar at (510) 642-5514.  What distinguishes the Berkeley study from previous CEQAanalyses is the huge amount of data collected by theresearchers. Among other things, the researchers surveyedlocal governments in California and quantified their use ofCEQA; did an in-depth comparison between CEQA and the other"mini-NEPAs" around the country; and a case study analysis ofCEQA use in 14 local jurisdictions ranging from CalaverasCounty to Rancho Cucamonga. (Some of the survey data,analyzed by University of Illinois planning professor RobertOlshansky, was discussed in the October 1994 issue of CP&DR.)  Here are some of the research team's most interestingfindings:  CEQA Is More Widely Used Than Comparable Laws Elsewhere.  The researchers compared the use of CEQA in California to theso-called "Mini-NEPAs" in other states. Mini-NEPAs exist in 15other states plus Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia. YetCEQA is more widely used in California than in any other state Pand, in fact, it's more widely used than NEPA, the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act.  Whereas California undertook some 1,300 environmentalimpact reports in 1990, the equivalent figure (in 1992) wasonly 364 in New York, 126 in Washington, and 69 inMassachusetts. Connecticut undertook no environmental impactreports/statements in 1992. Even the federal government,operating under NEPA, initiated only 456 EIS's in 1992.Similarly, while California processed more than 25,000negative declarations in 1990, the equivalent figure (for 1992)was 1,800 in New York, 7,500 in Washington, and only 12 inConnecticut.  Part of the reason for the difference is that the breadth ofCEQA's application is greater. But part of it is simply thatCalifornia's construction activity is so much greater than anyother state. When adjusted for the amount of constructionactivity, the researchers found that only Washington and NewYork have approximately the same amount of CEQA-typeactivity. Hawaii and Minnesota lag far behind, while all otherstates are barely even on the radar screen.  EIRs and EIR Litigation Is Rare In Statistical Terms  The researchers found that, statewide, well over 90% of allCEQA actions result in negative declarations. Only about 6% ofCEQA cactions lead to EIRs in cities and 3.5% in counties. Andonly one in every 354 CEQA reviews (less than 1/3 of 1%)results in a lawsuit. But because CEQA is so widely applied, theraw numbers are high even though the percentages are low.The Berkeley numbers indicate that somewhere around 1,300EIRs were being undertaken in 1990, while more than 400CEQA lawsuits were filed in the five-year period between 1986and 1990.  The case studies revealed large variations in these numbers,however. In Santa Barbara County, for example, 21% of allCEQA reviews led to an EIR P a figure almost three times higherthan any other case study jurisdiction.  The researchers also discovered that EIRs are far morecommonly used on residential projects than on commercial orindustrial projects. On a per-capita basis, more than twice asmany EIRs are initiated for residential as opposed tocommercial projects, and this finding holds true for both citiesand counties.  Thresholds Are More Common for Counties Than Cities.  The Berkeley researchers found that 80% of counties usedstandardized thresholds in CEQA review compared to only 12%of cities.  Mitigated Negative Declarations Are Commonly Used  The researchers found that mitigated negative declarationsare used more than half the time in CEQA reviews, though theynoted this includes a wide variety of different situations. Thisfigure was considerably higher for counties (66%) than forcities (48%). More than 70% of all jurisdictions reported thatthey have a mitigation monitoring program in place.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ADELANTO PAYS PRICE FOR BASE, WATER FIGHTSBy Morris Newman   The City of Adelanto in San Bernardino County finds itselfisolated and on the brink of municipal bankruptcy, partly as aresult of longstanding fights with its Victor Valley neighborsover control of a closed military base and the regional watersupply.  The city is running a $4 million deficit and, until recently,appeared in danger of defaulting on its bond payments.Adelanto is also facing a $5 million settlement on a lawsuitwith San Bernardino County, and must borrow money from thecounty to make its debt payments on redevelopment bonds.The financial problems have also forced Adelanto to abide by aregionwide water allocation that the city initially resisted.  The story of this High Desert city is a worst-case example ofwhat happens when one city decides to resist regionalcooperation. It is also an extreme example of the trend inCalifornia for jurisdictions to conduct business with each otherthrough the courts, and the consequences of doing so. Whilemost of the blame seems to lie squarely with the city's electedleadership, recent news reports suggest that San BernardinoCounty, the City of Victorville, and the Mojave Water Districteach played a role in chastening the maverick city.   Currently, Adelanto is desperately trying to avoid defaultingon its bonds. In October, the city's bond underwriter, TonyWetherbee, disclosed at a council hearing that the city wasrunning a $4 million deficit after having spent more than $9million in lawsuits againstneighboring jurisdictions. As of December, the redevelopmentagency was $760,000 short of a $2.4 million payment on abond issue of $46 million.  Wetherbee is refinancing the redevelopment agency's bondsby structuring a new issue of $55 million that would allow thecity to make its bond payments while allowing enough extra topay off the hefty settlement to San Bernardino County.  Adelanto's path to near-ruin began in 1989, when the federalBase Realignment and Closure Commission listed George AirForce Base on its closure list. Adelanto, which borders the base,wanted to annex the entire base and rejected the option ofjoining the local reuse authority, the Victor Valley EconomicDevelopment Authority (VVEDA), which includes SanBernardino County and the neighboring cities of Victorville,Hesperia, and Apple Valley.  At one point, Adelanto offered the Air Force $25 million tobuy the base outright. The Air Force, however, recognizedVVEDA as the local reuse authority, and Victorville eventuallyannexed the former base in 1994.   Refusing to take the decision lying down, Adelanto foughtback with a host of lawsuits challenging the environmentalimpact report for the reuse of George. At the height of the courtbattle, there were a total of 34 lawsuits that cost the parties atleast $11 million in legal fees, according to the Base ReuseReport, a Sacramento-based newsletter. Adelanto'slitigiousness, however, ultimately backfired by dragging thecity through a series of costly legal defeats. In 1994, aRiverside Superior Court judge ruled that Adelanto could notuse redevelopment money in its effort to acquire George. Andin a court-ordered settlement conference in January, 1995,Adelanto finally stood down and relinquished its claim onGeorge.   At the same time, however, Adelanto got into another disputewith its neighbors over the water rights at George. WhenGeorge was an operational military base, the state created aspecial arrangement for the city and the base to share acommon allocation of water. However, last fall, at theinstigation of the Mojave Water Agency, a Riverside Countyjudge issued a comprehensive settlement of all water rightsclaims in the area. Under the agreement, all water users wererequired to reduce their water use and the Mojave WaterAgency, which sells water to 250,000 residents in the HighDesert, was named special master. (CP&DR, November 1995.)  Adelanto did not agree to the settlement, continuing to claimit had a "prior and paramount" right to the waters of theMojave River. At this point, however, the Mojave Water Agencyshrewdly used Adelanto's financial troubles on theredevelopment front as a lever to get the city to buy into thewater agreement.  Adelanto's redevelopment troubles began in 1993, when theSan Bernardino County Grand Jury audited the city's attempt toacquire George. The Grand Jury found that the city wasborrowing money from its well-funded redevelopment agency(most of Adelanto is carpeted in redevelopment project areas)while the redevelopment agency attempted to keep itself afloatby issuing new bonds with interest rates higher than the citycould afford. In its report, the Grand Jury found that theredevelopment agency had "exhausted all available resourcesfor operations," while lacking "any financial plan detailing itsprojected expenditures, bond proceeds and other revenuesover the next several years."  Based on the Grand Jury's findings, San Bernardino Countysued Adelanto in November 1993. The suit alleged that the cityhad spent more than $4.2 million to acquire George, and hadillegally dipped into redevelopment funds for city operations.The suit requested a group of city officials, including then-Mayor Mary Scarpa, five city councilmembers and CityManager Patricia Chamberlayne to pay the redevelopmentagency $6.34 million for the tax increment used to pursueGeorge and other non-redevelopment purposes. The settlement,signed in October, required Adelanto to pay the county $5million by the end of 1995, while allowing the AdelantoRedevelopment Agency to borrow $100,000 of the county's"fair-share" cut of the city's tax increment revenues to make itsbond payments. The settlement also authorizes Adelanto tofloat the $55 million bond issue, which would enable the city torestructure its existing bond portfolio and raise the additional$5 million to pay off the county.  Adelanto city officials were angered, however, when newsreports revealed that the City of Victorville had quietly lent thecounty $800,000 to fund the lawsuit against Adelanto.Victorville's role was surprising, because it appeared to violatea January 1995 settlement agreement between the two citiesnot to engage in further litigation. But Mike Rothschild,Victorville Mayor Pro Tem, said in an interview Adelanto hadbroken the peace by prosecuting the water issue, which he saidwas part of the "total settlement package."   The final humiliation for Adelanto, however, came inNovember, at the hands of the water agency. The city clearlyneeded to move ahead as quickly as possible on the new bondissue. But the city could not move forward without theapproval of the Mojave Water Agency. The water purveyor,however, threatened to sue Adelanto over a crucial part of therecovery plan P the merger of two redevelopment areas in thecity P unless the city agreed to the regional water-sharing plan.Advisers to the city pleaded with the mayor andcouncilmembers to give into the water agency, and avoidcatastrophe.  "Adelanto is insolvent," bond underwriter Tony Wetherbeetold the council. Said City Attorney Robert Corrado at the samemeeting: "Municipal bankruptcy is an ugly, ugly thing. We'regoing to be in litigation forever." Later, when the councilappeared adamant against the water deal, he pleaded, "This is amistake of cosmic proportions and it means the end ofAdelanto as we know it."  Notwithstanding those pleas, Mayor Judy Crommie and twoother council members voted against accepting the water plan.Almost immediately after the meeting, according to local newsaccounts, Crommie changed her mind, and scheduled anemergency meeting for the following Thursday, when sheswitched her vote.   Adelanto had attempted to complete the restructuring of itsredevelopment bonds by December 31, 1995, which was thedeadline for the $5 million payment to San Bernardino County.Because Standard & Poor rated the issue (BBB-) P an importantprecondition of the bond sale P only in the closing days of theyear, the county granted the city an additional 10 days to thecity to make its payment; the new bond issue was scheduled toclose on January 9, according to the Victor Valley Daily Press.Michael Sakamoto, acting city manager and the only Adelantoofficial who would agree to be interviewed for this story, wasreluctant to comment on whether he thought the city had donewisely in spending so much of its treasury fighting for Georgeand the Mojave River. "I don't want to comment on theappropriateness or inappropriateness of any city action. TheCity Council has instructed me to look for, and try to fashion, aplan for the city to go forward," he said.  Contacts:  Michael Sakamoto, acting city manager, City of Adelanto (619)246-2300.  Larry Rowe, general manager, Mojave Water District, (619)240- 9201.  Tony Wetherbee, Chilton & O'Connor Inc., (714) 717-2000.  Michael Rothschild, Mayor Pro Tem, City of Victorville, (619)955-5000.  Robert Corrado, contract city attorney, (310) 908-7800.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SACRAMENTO FINALLY GETS OUT OF HYATT HOTEL DEAL  The City of Sacramento has finally cut all ties to the HyattRegency Hotel, a 15-story luxury hotel across the street fromthe State Capitol that the Sacramento Housing andRedevelopment Agency helped subsidize. The deal releases theredevelopment agency from its obligations without laying outany cash.  In December, the city agreed to surrender title to the landunder the hotel and the adjacent parking garage (of which theredevelopment agency owned 48%) to Mutual Life InsuranceCo. of New York, the hotel's current owner. In exchange, theredevelopment agency has been released from its obligation toprovide a $1.5 million annual subsidy to the hotel's owners forthe next 68 years.  The Hyatt opened in 1988 as part of a public-privatepartnership between the redevelopment agency and severalprominent private developers in Sacramento including JoeBenvenuti and Gregg Lukenbill. It was designed as acenterpiece project for downtown Sacramento. The Hyatt is themost luxurious hotel in downtown Sacramento by far, and itsmeeting room facilities are located close to the downtownconvention center. The city invested $13 million in the projectand agreed to the annual subsidy for 75 years, retainingownership in the land and part ownership in the parkinggarage.  But Benvenuti and Lukenbill ran into financial trouble whenthe real estate market went sour in the early '90s, and MONY Pthe primary lender on the project P assumed ownership in1992. Ever since, MONY and the city have sought to reach anagreement that would take the city out of the projectaltogether.  In 1991, on the eve of MONY's foreclosure, the city offered$11 million in order to be released from its obligations butMONY rejected the offer. Earlier this year, one consultantsuggested that the city offer MONY $7.7 million and the hotelland. But Mayor Joe Serna and some other members of the CityCouncil were reluctant to agree to a deal that called for theredevelopment agency to turn cash over to MONY.  Under the deal as agreed, the redevelopment agency will notbe required to provide any cash to MONY. In fact, MONY willactually pay the redevelopment agency $196,000 for a smallparcel of land at the southwest corner of the hotel. And ifMONY seeks to sell the property, the city could profit. Underthe deal, the city will receive 25% of any sales price over $62million. MONY officials said they have not decided whether tosell the hotel.ACCORD REACHED ON VERMONT AVENUE  Los Angeles's leading politicians have reached an agreementwith First Interstate Bank to reduce the city subsidy on thecontroversial mixed-use project proposed for the corner ofVermont Avenue and 81st Street.  A city loan to buy the property was approved by the CityCouncil in November but vetoed by Mayor Richard Riordan.(CP&DR, December 1995.) Subsequently, however, the councilpassed a unanimous override of Riordan's veto. In the ensuingweeks, Riordan, Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas, and FirstInterstate agreed to a new financial agreement which calls forthe bank to put more money into the project so the city'ssubsidy will drop from $90,000 per housing unit to $70,000per housing unit.  Riordan opposed the project for two reasons: opposition froma nearby homeowners association and the high subsidy perunit. Riordan became interested in the project afterneighboring homeowners P U.S. Rep. Maxine Waters amongthem P said they are opposed to any housing developmentalong the commercially zoned Vermont Avenue corridor. Healso questioned the $90,000 subsidy, which is close to doublethe typical subsidy in a city-assisted housing project.  Under the agreement with Riordan, the project still retains 35moderate-income townhomes. Yet Riordan claimed victory forthe neighborhood, saying that he, unlike other politicians, hadlistened to a group of residents who have traditionally beendisenfranchised.  The Vermont proposal arose from a design/build competitionfor affordable housing sponsored by First Interstate after the1992 riots. The project is to be built on a mostly vacant 1.7-acre site that served as the original location of PepperdineUniversity. As currently designed, the project will include 35townhomes (selling for between $88,000 and $130,000 each),six small retail storefronts, and a satellite office of the USCBusiness Expansion Network, to be located in an historic art-deco building on the site. The project was strongly embracedby Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas, who represents the area.MALIBU PASSES GENERAL PLAN  Facing a deadline from the Governor's Office of Planning &Research, the City of Malibu has finally approved a generalplan that many council members claim is not restrictive enougheven though outside critics call it too restrictive.  Approval of the general plan came more than four years afterthe city's incorporation. The city has been engaged in a highlypolitical dispute with OPR last year over a time extension forapproving the plan. OPR denied a time extension after claimingthe plan does not provide affordable housing choices. Propertyowners are likely to challenge the city's general plan in courton housing element grounds.  The plan calls for one-acre lots (or lower density) on 95% ofthe undeveloped residential property in the city. A fewresidential properties will be permitted to build four to sixunits per acre. The plan also prohibits construction in areaspreviously designated by Los Angeles County as"environmental sensitive habitat areas" (about 9% of the cityaltogether) and discourages development of sidewalks, streetlights, and other typical suburban infrastructure.  The plan calls for permitting the construction of one hotelnear Pepperdine University, which city officials hope willproduce enough revenue to keep the city solvent.  Property owners and state officials were not the plan's onlycritics. Officials in nearby Santa Monica also complained aboutthe plan, which says Malibu's homeless will probably have tofind shelter in Santa Monica. Mayor Paul Rosenstein told theLos angeles Times: "There have been rumors for yers that othercities have been sending their homeless people to SantaMonica. This is the first time I have seen a city admit it."Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FISH & GAME FEE TO BE REINSTATED  After a new legal challenge, a Sacramento judge has orderedthe state Department of Fish & Game to resume collection of theFish & Game environmental review fee. But the state has notyet begun collection of the fee and the judge has not yetdecided whether to make collection retroactive.  However, Fish & Game may seek a legislative solution byasking the legislature to repeal the law that instituted the feein the first place. Fish & Game General Counsel Craig Mansonsaid the agency has spoken to some legislators and legislativestaff members but no bill has been introduced yet.  The latest set of developments are the most bizarre yet in thecontroversial history of the fee. On the one hand, SacramentoSuperior Court Judge Jeffrey Gunther has ordered Fish & Gameto start collecting the fee once again even though he hadpreviously ruled the fee unconstitutional. And on the otherhand, Fish & Game has taken an official position against the fee,even though the agency benefits financially from it.  Last summer, Fish & Game agreed to stop collecting the fee aspart of a legal settlement with several plaintiffs whochallenged the fee as an illegal tax. (CP&DR EnvironmentalWatch, July 1995.) The legal settlement came after Gunther hadinitially ruled against the fee. But the settlement wassubsequently challenged by the California Association ofProfessional Scientists (CAPS), the union that represents mostof the biologists who work for Fish & Game.  CAPS argued that a state department cannot stop enforcing astate law unless ordered to do so by an appellate court.Gunther agreed and ordered the state to begin collecting thefee again. However, in early January, the Fish & GameDepartment had not yet begun to collect the fee becauseGunther had not issued a final written ruling.  The Fish & Game fees were instituted by a bill that passed thelegislature in 1990. Local development applicants subject to theCalifornia Environmental Quality Act must pay $850 for Fish &Game to review environmental impact reports and $1,250 forthe department to review negative declarations.  As Fish & Game's revenue from hunting and fishing licenseshas declined, the fees have provided a new source of revenue,bringing the agency approximately $3 million per year, orabout 2% of its total budget. The fees have always beencontroversial because no other state agency has statutoryauthority to collect such fees and because local governmentswere required to collect the fees for Fish & Game.  The fee was originally challenged in 1991 by Reddingproperty owner Albert Mills. Mills claimed that the fee was nota fee for service and therefore constituted a tax. He furtherargued that as a tax, the fee was invalid because it did not passthe Legislature by a two-thirds vote. Mills later formedCalifornians for Fair Government Fees, representing 112 otherapplicants who had paid the fees. Mills's lawyer, Walter McNeillof Redding, filed a separate suit because of a Fish & Game feehe had paid personally.  Last March, Gunther ruled in favor of Mills, saying that thefees were really taxes because the state had never determinedthe actual cost of reviewing environmental documents beforepassing the law. Pessimistic about the chances of success onappeal, the agency agreed to a settlement which called forrefunds to Mills, McNeill, and members of Mills's group, as wellas a ban on further collection of the fees.  Craig Manson, Fish & Game's general counsel, said thatcollection of the fees would not begin until Gunther issued hiswritten ruling. He also said Gunther's ruling would address thequestion of whether Fish & Game should collect feesretroactively from applicants who had not paid the feesbecause of the legal settlement.  Contacts:  Craig Manson, general counsel, Department of Fish & Game,(916) 654-3821.  Dennis Moss, attorney for California Association ofProfessional Scientists, (818) 246-0629.ORANGE COUNTY NCCP RELEASED   A wildlife habitat plan calling for preservation of 39,000acres of undeveloped property has been released in draft formby Orange County.  About half the preserve will consist ofcoastal sage scrub, the habitat of the controversial Californiagnatcatcher. The Orange County Planning Commission is now inthe process of reviewing the plan and the Board of Supervisorsis expected to act on the plan in March.  The plan is part of the "Natural Communities ConservationPlanning" program undertaken by local, state, and federalagencies in 1991 when the gnatcatcher was first proposed forlisting under state and federal endangered species laws.  Called the Central/Coast NCCP/HCP (habitat conservationplan), the plan calls for preservation of almost 20% of allproperty in a 325-square-mile portion of Orange County thatstretches from Cleveland National Forest south and west to thePacific Ocean near San Juan Capistrano. Much of the land to bepreserved is owned by The Irvine Co. The plan is designed toprotect a total of 42 species, most of which are not currentlylisted under the state or federal endangered species laws. Partof the plan's purpose is to provide property owners withassurance that they will have met their legal obligations if anyadditional species are listed in the future.  The Central/Coast plan is the first of three "sub-regional"plans dealing with different areas of Orange County. An NCCPplan for south Orange County is expected to be released laterthis year, and a third NCCP for north Orange County is also inthe works. Three NCCP plans are also under way in San DiegoCounty.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PACKARD BELL DEAL LOOKS GOOD--BUT COMES AT A PRICE  One year after the conversion of the Sacramento Army Depotinto a regional headquarters for Packard Bell, the deal isshaping up as one of the most successful conversions of amilitary base in California. Part of that success can be creditedto extraordinarily high subsidies provided by the City ofSacramento. Also sharing the credit is a base-conversionmethod known as an "economic development conveyance,"which allowed local authorities to acquire the base at no cost inreturn for sharing the profits of base reuse with the military.  To date, the conversion of the Army Depot has far surpassedinitial expectations of both job creation and tax revenues.Packard Bell had projected employment for 1,000 jobs at theend of its first year; the company currently employs 5,000people at the former depot, which is now an assembly plant forpersonal computers. In addition, the new plant has spurred thecreation of an additional 2,500 to 3,000 jobs in the communityat large. The payroll, initially projected at $60 million to $80million, is currently about $200 million. The plant alsogenerates about $1 million annually in local taxes. City officialsclaim that enterprise zone tax credits have encouraged agreater level of hiring and have taken several hundred localresidents off the welfare rolls.  The Army Depot is the first closed military base to use theeconomic development conveyance. Without it, Sacramento andthe Army might still be arguing about the value of the Depot,according to Bill Farley, the city's economic developmentmanager. "When we first met Army officials, it was clear in afew hours that we would never be able to agree on the value ofthis real estate," he said. Army officials based their valuationsof the Depot based on the money they had poured into the baseover the years. City officials saw a group of outmoded buildingsthat had to be rehabbed and marketed in a depressed realestate market. Although he would not disclose the Army'sasking price for the Depot, Farley acknowledged that "we weretens of millions of dollars apart. We could not even agree onhow to approach the method of valuing the property." Incontrast, "the economic development conveyance and theprofit-sharing provisions really took that extremelycontentious issue out of the equation," Farley said. Under theplan, the city can sell portions of the base to private businesses,and will eventually pass along $7 million to the Army in salesand/or lease proceeds.  Sacramento's initial reuse plan called for confining the Armyto a single portion of the base, while finding new uses for the2.5 million square feet of buildings on the site. The cityplanned to spend $19 million to clear out or refurbish oldArmy  buildings ("These buildings were built to very highstandards, and they cost a fortune to demolish," Farley said.) Tomarket the Depot to private businesses, the city wouldsubdivide the base into individual parcels of 40 to 80 acresapiece, and eventually to sell the parcels to private businessesfor a total of $15 million.  Sacramento's great stroke of luck was the Northridgeearthquake of January 1994, which dislodged Packard Bellfrom its plant in Northridge and sent the company looking forpotential new sites in less seismically active areas. In July,Packard Bell officials asked Sacramento officials to identifypossible locations. The strongest selling point for the depot  wasthe inclusion of the Army Depot in a State Enterprise Zoneprogram, which allows employers to take a tax credit of $6,000for every disadvantaged worker hired, according to DebraNyland, an assistant economic development director for thecity. The credits enabled the company to save between $2 and$4 million annually, according to Nyland.  The agreement between the city and the computer maker wasa 20-year lease for 2 million square feet of rehabbed space for$50 million. Annual lease payments began at $5 million anddrop to $2.5 million after the fifth year. In the tenth year thecompany has an option to buy the property for $7 million, orextend the lease for 35 years at $1.25 million annually. For itspart, the city provided a $17 million loan for tenantimprovements, plus a $9 million loan as a moving allowance.The rents are higher in the first five years, so the city canrecoup the moving loan, which "was fairly risky because it wasunsecured," Farley explained. The tenant improvement loan isbeing amortized over 12 years of lease payments.  The city also indemnified Packard Bell against any costsrelating to environmental issues. Although the military clearlyhas the responsibility for any environmental clean-up issuesunder CERCLA, the federal Superfund law, the companyapparently wanted additional assurance.  (Separate from the deal, the city also paid $800,000 torelocate Vietnam Veterans of California, which was using thesite under the McKinney Act. The city has also requested otherpublic agencies, which have priority to take space in formermilitary bases, to forego the depot.)  The Packard Bell lease negotiation was remarkable for itsspeed. The company and the city struck a deal in less than twomonths, and in September 1994 the deal was approved bystate lawmakers in 18 days. Packard Bell took occupancy of thebuildings in November, almost a month before it signed thelease in December.  The deal is all gravy to the Army, which spends nothing andactually saves $1 million annually in maintenance costs for thePackard Bell facility.  Farley describes the economic development conveyance as "agreat tool" for local governments. Cities, he said, are "in thebusiness of redeveloping properties through various programsthe state has created. We never had a tool to accomplish thesame tasks with military bases, so this really makes the cityinto a player in the redevelopment of the base."  Despite the national publicity on the success of the depotconversion, Farley was quick to add that the city's work is notdone. "As you start to build new facilities, and add onto theexisting infrastructure of the base, it leads to certain problems."One problem is a $1 million "catch up" fee that the SacramentoCounty regional sewer plant is attempting to charge the base.(When the Depot was a military base, it was exempted fromsewer fees. Now that the depot is under local control, thesewage plant is attempting to bill the depot for all the fees ithad not paid while it was still under military control.)  Listed for closure in 1991, the 480-acre Depot officially closedin March. The Army remains on 80 acres of the facility.  Contacts:  Bill Farley, economic development manager, City ofSacramento, (916) 264-7730.  Debra Nyland, business development coordinator, City ofSacramento Economic Development Office, (916) 264-7145.  Tish Kelly, Packard Bell spokesperson, (916) 388-0101.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996LISTING OF SPECIES STALLED  A Republican attempt to block new endangered specieslistings by denying appropriations for the listing process hasbeen upheld by the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. Thedecision is likely to hold up attempts to list more than 100species in California alone.  Overturning a district court judge's ruling, a three-judge panelof the Ninth Circuit acknowledged that Interior Secretary BruceBabbitt missed the statutory deadline for making a decision onwhether to list the California red-legged frog as endangered.But the court found that Babbitt "is unable to comply with hislisting duty under the Act" because Congress rescinded listingfunds in last year's appropriation and has continued the ban onnew listings in the continuing resolutions during this fiscal yearas well.  The ruling came even though the statutory deadline for listingthe frog occurred before last year's appropriation bill waspassed.  The ruling, written by Judge Betty Fletcher, contained a sternwarning against legislation by appropriation and stated thatthe Endangered Species Act is still in full force despite theappropriation bill. Quoting TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (the so-called "snail darter" case), Fletcher said: "Repeal of legislationby implication is disfavored," especially when "the claimedrepeal rests solely in an Appropriations Act."  Ultimately, however, Fletcher concluded that Babbitt wasprohibited from making a final determination by the terms of arider to the 1995 appropriation bill. "The use of anygovernment resources P whether salaries, employees, paper, orbuildings P to accomplish a final listing would entailgovernment expenditure," she wrote. "The government cannotmake expenditures and therefore cannot act, other than byappropriation."  The red-legged frog case was widely watched because thelisting process has been halted on 120 species in California and240 nationwide.  The 1995 appropriation bill specifically rescinded $1.5 millionallocated for listing and determination of critical habitat andalso stated that the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service cannot use anyother funds for this purpose. Originally passed on April 10,1995, this rider has been contained in the continuingresolutions passed to keep the government operating duringthe recent budget negotiations.  At the time the rider was passed, the Fish & Wildlife Servicewas already engaged in lengthy litigation with theEnvironmental Defense Center of Santa Barbara over the listingof the red-legged frog. Under the Endangered Species Act,Babbitt should have made a final determination on whether tolist the frog by July 19, 1993. When Babbitt missed thedeadline, EDC sued, but the two parties eventually agreed to asettlement agreement requiring a final decision by November1, 1993.  Babbitt missed that deadline also, however, and EDC suedagain. Finally, the Fish & Wildlife Service published a proposedlisting on the Federal Register on February 2, 1994. Under theEndangered Species Act, Babbitt then had one year P untilFebruary 2, 1995 P to make a final decision on the listing.Babbitt missed the deadline again, and EDC sued in May of1995. By then, however, the appropriations rider was in effect.  U.S. District Court Judge Manuel Real in Los Angeles issuedsummary judgment in favor of the EDC and ordered Babbitt totake a final action by September 15, 1995. However, the U.S.Supreme Court issued a stay of this order and the Ninth Circuitheard the case on an expedited schedule.  In Fletcher's ruling, the Ninth Circuit ordered the final listing"delayed until a reasonable time after appropriated funds aremade available" and ordered Real to establish the time frame.  The Case:  Environmental Defense Center v. Babbitt, No. 95-56255, 95Daily Journal D.A.R. 16341(December 12, 1995).  The Lawyers:  For EDC: Neil Levine, Environmental Defense Center, (805)963-1622.  For Interior Secretary Babbitt: Lynn Penman, U.S. Departmentof Justice, Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STATE SUPREME COURT LAYS DOWN CC&R RULE  The California Supreme Court has ruled that CC&Rs(covenants, conditions, and restrictions) in two Woodsidesubdivisions should be enforceable even though they are notmentioned in the subdivisions' property deeds. In the process,the court majority laid down a sweeping new rule to governthe enforceability of private property covenants: If restrictionsare recorded before the sale of property, "the later purchaser isdeemed to agree with them."  The controversial ruling may be the first step toward clearingup a complicated real property law issue and is likely to havean important impact on private land-use restrictions. "It's agood decision," said UCLA law professor Susan French, one ofthe leading scholars in the area of private covenants.  But it may also lead to further confusion, because the courtdeclared that the new rule should be applied retrospectivelyand because it declares that all information about a piece ofproperty need not be included in the deed. In a strong dissent,Justice Joyce Kennard wrote that the ruling will transformdeeds "that on their face are unrestricted conveyances of thelandowner's entire interest into deeds conveying only a portionof the landowner's interest." (French disputed Kennard's view,saying that the restrictions will turn up in title reports.)  The case drew the attention of many outside groups, includingthe California Association of Realtors, the California BuildingIndustry Association, and the Coastal Commission, all of whomintervened on behalf of the neighbors seeking to enforce theCC&Rs. The Coastal Commission argued that if all CC&Rs must beincluded in deeds, the agency's many not be able to enforceconditions it imposes on new development projects along thecoast.  The role of CC&Rs in land-use planning and regulation isgrowing. Especially in California, more and more plannedcommunities are created with a "private" municipalgovernment made up of homeowner associations that enforceprivate deed covenants.  However, as CC&Rs have grown in number they have alsogenerated a lot of complicated litigation about how, when, andby whom they can be enforced. French has called the lawsurrounding CC&Rs "the most complex and archaic body ofAmerican property law remaining in the 20th Century." Severalrecent appellate court rulings have dealt with CC&Rs. LastSeptember, the Court of Appeal ruled that a homeownerassociation may record a notice of violation with the countyrecorder even though such actions are sometimes takenbecause they are cheaper than suing the homeowner.(California Riviera Homeowners Association v. Superior Court,CP&DR Legal Digest, October 1995.) The Supreme Courtdecertified this case shortly before issuing its ruling in theWoodside case.  The new case involves Jared and Anne Anderson, who boughttwo parcels of property in Woodside and obtained a conditionaluse permit from the city to operate a winery. The two parcelswere originally part of two separate subdivisions, each ofwhose subdividers had recorded CC&Rs restricting the propertyto residential use. Claiming that the Andersons had violated theCC&Rs, a group of neighbors organized as the Citizens forCovenant Compliance and sued the Andersons. However, theAndersons claimed they had no knowledge of the CC&Rsbecause there was no reference to them in the deeds of eitherparcel they had purchased.  San Mateo Superior Court Judge Harlan K. Veal ruled that theCC&Rs were not enforceable, and the First District Court ofAppeal affirmed. But on a 6-1 vote, the Supreme Courtoverturned the lower ruling and declared the covenantsenforceable despite the defects in the deed, establishing thenew rule in the process. "The CC&Rs of this case were recordedbefore any of the parcels were sold ... they state an intent toestablish a general plan for the subdivisions binding on allpurchasers and their successors; and they describe theproperty they are to govern," wrote Justice Armand Arabianfor the majority. "...Therefore ... the fact that the individualdeeds do not reference them is not fatal to their enforceability."  To arrive at the new rule, Justice Arabian's majority opinionreached deep into the legal history of easements, covenants,and equitable servitude (sometimes known as restrictivecovenants), all of which seek to govern the enforceability ofprivate land use restrictions. Traditionally, a covenant is arestriction that "runs with the land" because it affects the useof the land in some way.  Beginning in the 19th Century,English and then American courts adopted the doctrine ofequitable servitude, which permits enforceability of covenantsthat would not be strictly enforceable under the doctrine ofcovenants. Because the Woodside covenants impose a burdenon the property P rather than simply a benefit P and becausethey are agreed to between grantor and grantee P rather thanbetween landowners P they fall under the doctrine of equitableservitude and not covenants.  Legal scholars have noted that legal doctrines surroundingcovenants and equitable servitude are similar and perhapsshould be combined. California law treats them similarly, andin the majority opinion Arabian stated that the SupremeCourt's new rule should apply equally to both doctrines.  In reaching his conclusions on the Woodside case, Arabiansaid that the basic issue was not whether the restrictions runwith the land but whether they ever took effect in the firstplace given the fact that they are not mentioned in the deeds.The Andersons argued that the CC&Rs never took effectbecause they were not mentioned in the deeds. But Arabiansaid that accepting this argument would lead to "byzantine"results. What if some deeds included the CC&Rs and others didnot? According to case law, he concluded, any property soldsubsequent to the first property whose deed mentioned theCC&Rs would be subject to the CC&Rs P even if the particulardeed in question did not mention them. Claiming that thisgreatly complicates title searches, Arabian said the resultwould be a "crazy-quilt pattern of uses."  In laying down the new rule, Arabian stated: "The overallplan, and not individual deeds, should determine whatrestrictions are in effect, and between whom." He alsoconcluded that the rule should apply retrospectively.  In her dissent, Justice Kennard wrote that the new rule "blastsa gaping hole through the structure of real property law thathas been painstakingly erected by the Legislature and by thecourts over the past century." She said that the rule will allow"for the unilateral creation of enforceable land use restrictions,contrary to established law," and that it will deny constructivenotice to land purchasers under state law. She also stated thatretrospective application of the new rule will wreak havocthroughout the state. Noting that land subdivision in Californiadates back to the 1860s, she said: "If the subdivider of any ofthese thousands of lands recorded a plan of commonrestrictions for the lots but conveyed the lots by unrestrictedgrant deeds, retroactive application of the majority's new rulewill now bring those restrictions to life no matter how longthey have lain dormant."  The Case:  Citizens for Covenant Compliance v. Anderson, No. S043578,96 Daily Journal D.A.R. 79 (January 3, 1996)  The Lawyers:  For Citizens for Covenant Compliance: Debra Summers, Wilson,Sonsini, Goodrich & Rosati, (415) 493-9300.  For Anderson: Roger Bernardt, Cooley, Godward, Castro,Huddleson & Tatum, (415) 666-3343.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996APPELLATE COURT STRIKES DOWN FRESNO-AREA ARTS TAX  Fresno's so-called "Arts-to-Zoo" tax violates the Californiaconstitution because the organization that administers the taxis a private entity, the Fifth District Court of Appeal has ruled.  The Fresno Metropolitan Projects Authority was created bythe state legislature in 1993 as a vehicle for administering a1/10-cent sales tax in the Freno area for cultural facilities.Fresno-area voters approved the tax by a 57% majority in1993. Under the Government Code, half of the tax proceeds aredistributed to the local zoo, the philharmonic orchestra, andtwo museums, 25% are distributed for cultural programs, and25% are distributed for a variety of other purposes includingcapital improvements for cultural facilities. The authority isgoverned by a 13-member board. As specified in the law, thecity and the county each choose one board member. The other11 members are selected by such organizations as the ParentTeachers Association, the Chamber of Commerce, the localtaxpayers association, the Farm Bureau, the Fresno-MaderaCentral Labor Council, the League of Mexican-AmericanWomen, the West Fresno Ministerial Alliance, and the localdivision of the California Retired Teachers Association.  The Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association sued and claimedthat the state law creating the authority was a violation ofArticle XI, section 11 of the state constitution, which prohibitsthe legislature from delegating the power to tax to a privateentity. Fresno County Superior Court Judge Stephen J. Kaneruled in favor of the Jarvis group and the Fifth District affirmedhis ruling.  Before the Fifth District, the Metropolitan Authority made aseries of arguments, including the argument that it is a publicbody because it performs public functions. But the courtpointed out that only two of its 13 board members areappointed by public bodies. "The electorate cannot removethose who are chosen as director of the Authority and theelectorate cannot remove those who choose," wrote PresidingJustice James Ardaiz for the court. "But the electorate mustbear the consequences of the decisions of those who composethe authority. ... As we see it this is a distinction that marks theAuthority as a private body."  The Metropolitan Authority also argued that the tax waslevied by the people and not by the Authority, but the courtrejected that argument, stating that the law specificallyauthorizes the Authority to levy the tax. The court alsoconcluded that voter approval did not render the constitutionalprovision inapplicable to this particular tax, as the Authorityclaimed.  "The voters have no say in the matter of fund distribution forthe next 20 years short of repeal of the entire tax," wroteArdaiz. "This appears to us to be precisely the type of situationthe framers sought to avoid by prohibiting the delegation to aprivate body of the power to tax."  Finally, Ardaiz rejected the Metropolitan Authority'sargument that its "regional" nature exempts it from theconstitutional provision in question. The court's review of caselaw, he concluded, "leads us to conclude that the present articleXI, section 11 means just what it says: that the  Legislaturemay not delegate to a private person or body the power to levytaxes. The section does not contain any exception for anyparticular type of tax, 'regional' or otherwise."  The Case:  Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association v. Fresno MetropolitanProjects Authority, No. F023727, 95 Daily Journal D.A.R. 16419(December 13, 1995).  The Lawyers:  For Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association: Jonathan M. Coupal,(916) 444-9950.  For Fresno Metropolitan Projects Authority: Gene Livingston,Livingston & Mattesich, (916) 442-1111.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SUPP EIS NOT NEEDED FOR DOPPLER WEATHER STATION  The federal government did not need to prepare asupplemental environmental impact statement for a Dopplerweather radar tower atop Sulfur Mountain in Ventura County,the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled.  Environmental review of the weather station was challengedby the Environmental Coalition of Ojai and two individual Ojairesidents including actor Larry Hagman. Among other things,the Environmental Coalition claimed that the federalgovernment should have prepared a supplemental EIS just forthe Ojai site and that other environmental documents shouldhave been updated to reflect new research about theenvironmental health dangers of radiation from the weathersystem. However, the Environmental Coalition has lost the caseall the way down the line and the Sulfur Mountain facility isnow in operation.  The Sulfur Mountain station is part of the National WeatherService's national modernization program known as NEXRAD(for Next Generation Weather Radar). The system is beingconstructed jointly by the Commerce, Transportation, andDefense departments. Doppler radar systems must be locatedaway from "electronic pollution" contained in metropolitanareas.  The Environmental Coalition originally asked U.S. DistrictCourt Judge Terry Hatter to enjoin construction of the projectbut he refused and eventually he granted summary judgmentin favor of the government. The Court of Appeals affirmed hisruling.  The NEXRAD system has been the subject of a long series ofenvironmental documents, including a programmatic EIS and asupplemental environmental assessment, which examined theenvironmental impact generally and the radiation issuespecifically. Based on this information, the government chosenot to produce a supplemental EIS for the NEXRAD programand instead filed a finding of no significant impact, or FONSI, in1993. (A FONSI is the equivalent of a negative declarationunder the National Environmental Policy Act.)  With regard to the Sulphur Mountain site, the governmentproduced an initial environmental assessment in 1986 and anin-depth site survey in 1987 and as a result of thosedocuments issued a FONSI for the site in 1989.  The Environmental Coalition's case contained two keycomponents. First, the Coalition argued that the governmentshould have prepared a site-specific EIS for the SulfurMountain site. And second, the Environmental Coalition arguedthat the government should have done a supplemental EIS forthe whole NEXRAD program after new research on the radiationbecame known.  In ruling for the government, the Ninth Circuit relied heavilyon the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in Marsh v. Oregon NaturalResources Council, 490 U.S. 360 (1989). In that case, the courtconcluded that the federal government need not prepare a site-specific EIS for every federal project. In the Sulfur Mountaincase, Judge Arthur Alarcon, writing for the Ninth Circuit, said:"In its 1986 and 1987 site-specific EAs (environmentalassessments), the Government considered the environmentalimpact of the NEXRAD installation on Sulfur Mountain. Havingdetermined that the Sulfur Mountain NEXRAD installationwould have no significant local environmental impact, thegovernment reasonably issued a FONSI in 1989 instead ofpreparing a site-specific EIS."  On the question of a supplemental EIS on the radiation issues,Alarcon listed a long set of materials reviewed by thegovernment in its supplemental environmental assessment. "Ineach instance," Alarcon wrote, "the Government found thatalthough initial studies suggested an association between RFR[radar radiation] and ... diseases, more rigorous subsequentstudies either failed to confirm the initial results or yieldednegative findings." Based on this review the governmentconcluded that the radiation would not be an environmentalhealth hazard. "Accordingly, its previous conclusion that theweather stations would have no significant adverseenvironmental impact (published in the preliminary EIS)remained valid," Alarcon wrote. "Therefore, the Governmentdetermined that it was not necessary to prepare asupplemental EIS."  The court also rejected the Environmental Coalition'sargument that the government had failed to provide adequatenotice for the environmental documentation on both the radarsystem generally and the Sulfur Mountain facility. The NinthCircuit concluded that Ojai citizens were not required to receivespecific notice on the nationwide system issues, and that thegovernment had satisfied notice requirements on the localissues by filling documents  with state and local clearinghouses.  The Case:  Environmental Coalition of Ojai v. Brown, No. 94-56164, 96Daily Journal D.A.R. 40 (January 2, 1996).  The Lawyers:  For Environmental Coalition of Ojai: Dale G. Givner, (805) 485-4454.  For the federal government: Patrick J. Walsh, Assistant U.S.Attorney, (213) 894-2451.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ECONOMYUS UP, BUT CONSTRUCTION ISNUT  After showing signs of a rebound in 1994, California'sconstruction industry slid back into decline in 1995, reviving afive-year dip in building activity in California. The renewedslump confirms the break in relationship between building andthe rest of the economy here, and draws into question a rangeof community development dictums that revolve aroundgrowth.  Two years ago, we announced that the sector that once set thecourse of economic trends had instead become a follower(CP&DR Numbers, January 1994). Last year, we reported thatconstruction experienced its first growth year in the last six(CP&DR Numbers, January 1995.) All three sectors (residential,non-residential, and heavy) experienced increases in totalconstruction dollars in 1994 relative to 1993, indicating that, atlong last, the building industry had rebounded.  As it turned out, 1995 was the year that entertainment andbio-tech replaced a goodly portion of the jobs lost in theaerospace/defense industry, the year that home prices actuallybegan to climb in some of the state's zip codes, and the yearwhen even aerospace/defense saw some job growth linked to arevival of some B-2 and  McDonnell Douglas passenger jetorders. But the building industry took a dive again. With 10months of data in hand, the Construction Industry ResearchBoard is forecasting a retraction year in total constructiondollars, led by slides in residential and heavy construction.  If there is any economic bright spot, it is that the $29.9 billionspent last year did not drop to the 13-year record low year of1993, when only $28.8 billion were spent. The other positivestatistic is the employment data: though total constructiondollars are down, construction jobs enjoyed a second straightyear of growth.  This is all quite confounding for industry watchers such asBen Bartolotto of the CIRB. After all, a year ago he hadpredicted an 11.8% increase, rather than the 1.7% drop he nowestimates. (Final numbers will be available in March. ) "All ofthe dynamics were in place: job growth, drops in vacancy P thedrop is frustrating," Bartolotto said. The job growth dataapparently reflects ongoing reconstruction or renovation thatdoes not show up in regular construction figures.  Bartolotto suspects that the disconnect between employmentand housing demand may be resulting from lower levels of realpersonal income compared to, say, 10 years ago. And this time,L.A. cannot be blamed for holding the state back: of the 25markets surveyed by CIRB, Los Angeles-Long Beach, along withSan Francisco and Santa Barbara County, were the only housingmarkets that increased housing construction from 1994 to1995. Rates from other types of construction varied widely beregion, but one thing has emerged as constant: the buildingindustry is not a reliable indicator of economic health inCalifornia. And a healthy economy does not necessarilytranslate into a booming building industry.  The lesson may be an important one for planners, who shouldP now more than ever P think about implementing communitygoals in ways that do not rely on new construction activity.  Which brings us to the forecast for building in 1996: Doesanybody still care? Once again, the CIRB calls for a comebackyear, with an 11.9% increase in overall dollar spent. This isexpected to be paced by a strong surge in housing construction,with a 29.8% increase in activity over 1995. Cynical as one istempted to become about such forecasts, it is true that thehousing industry seems to be poised for some kind ofturnaround. Analysts have been saying that the pent-updemand for housing may find an outlet as potential buyerscome to market in order to avoid the 2.5% increase in pricesexpected in 1996. But one thing we have learned: We won'tdraw any conclusions about the larger economy based on theconstruction industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightCALIFORNIA PLANNING DEVELOPMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REMAKING DOWNTOWN FRESNO  The Fulton District in Downtown Fresno has much in commonwith other aging city centers across the state: high vacancyrates in older buildings, out-of-date infrastructure, inadequateparking, a perception of crime, and a general lack of vitalpedestrian activity. The district also has a number of positiveattributes, including a number of existing cultural institutions,most notably the Fresno Metropolitan Museum, which attracts250,000 visitors annually.  The "Met," as it is known locally, is in an expansion mode, andmuseum directors have acknowledged that a bigger and betterMet needs to be supported by other institutions in theimmediate area. The notion of a cultural district was alreadysuggested in the downtown master plan created in 1993 bydeveloper Wayne Ratkovich, and some city officials view thearea as the cultural center not only for the city but for a 125-mile radius of the San Joaquin Valley. A team of consultants,made up of Keyser Marston Associates, Barry Howard Limited,and RTKL Associates Inc., have proposed a cultural district,with the Met serving as the nucleus, surrounded by at least sixother museum or museum expansion sites, including newlocations for the Afro-American Museum and Arte deAmericas.  The cultural district would be buttressed by anentertainment/retail district immediately southwest, anchoredby that tried-and-true generator of urban foot traffic: a multi-plex cinema, which is expected to bring in 1 million peopleannually. The pedestrian quality of the cultural district couldbenefit from another proposal to convert one-way streets totwo-directional traffic. Neo-traditional designers favor two-way traffic as a means to slow traffic and make streets morecomfortable for pedestrians, although few cities have had thegumption to convert one-way streets P a favorite of trafficplanners P back to two-way traffic.  A strength of the plan is the high number of existing andproposed museums oriented on Van Ness Avenue. The planidentifies at least two vacant lots on important thoroughfaresas parking sites, which could blight the experience forpedestrians, unless the parking structures incorporate street-level retail. The plan has been approved by the museum'sboard of directors, and is awaiting a vote by the Fresno citycouncil.  1. The Fresno Metropolitan Museum. This well-attendedinstitution is the anchor of the area, and seeks to expand intoneighboring buildings (2) and (3).  4. A multi-plex theater is the "traffic generator" of the FultonDistrict, and is hoped to attract up enough visitors to activate"the downtown district. To handle the parking, the museumsand other buildings would make parking available to thetheater on evenings and weekends.  5. Multi-plex parking.  6. Proposed future site of the Asian Museum.  7. Proposed future site of the Afro-American Museum.  8. Proposed future site of Arte de Americas.  9. Fulton Street. Two-way traffic is proposed for this one-waystreet.  10. Van Ness Avenue.  11. Existing theaters: the Wilson and the Warnor.  12. Proposed museum/museum expansion sites.  13. Proposed surface parking.  14. Fulton Street.Back to Headline List