WT02-B37-1IA086-000616-B016-113http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev50.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002359 text/html 6841HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:22:07 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMTContent-length: 6655Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev50.html Sample Issue Copyright CLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- Group Says Agriculture Helped by RFG Increases (267 words) ----------------- Higher Speeds May Increase Smog Potential in CA (293 words) -------------------- Europe Reduces Duty on Imported Methanol (298 words) CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Group Says Agriculture Helped by RFG IncreasesA correlation between increased ethanol usage and the reformulated gasoline (RFG) program is clearly shown in the most recent gasolineutilization numbers made available by the U.S. Department of Transportation.States where RFG rules have been in effect show that the market percentage for ethanol blends has increased compared to the sameperiod in 1994, said Gary Goldberg, American Corn Growers Association president.In traditional farm states, demand for ethanol has dropped, but ithas increased in midwestern states that are part of the RFG program.While usage has dropped in Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio and a whopping 46 percent in Oklahoma, it has increased by even larger amounts in Illinois, Kentucky, Minnesota and Wisconsin.Nationally, RFG use is credited for a nine percent increase inethanol demand.  Said Goldberg, "To those in the ethanol industrythat have tried to downplay the importance of the Reformulated Gasoline program, these numbers speak for themselves...[and] clearly show that increased demand for ethanol and increased market penetration is driven by access to the RFG program."Earlier in the year, the Energy Information Agency predicted thatyearly ethanol demand will increase from 1.6 billion gallons todayto 3.03 billion gallons by the year 2010.  The increase could mean a 700 million bushel increase in yearly corn use.  But the increase will only occur if RFG programs remain in place, ACGA predicts.Goldberg said different ways are suggested to expand ethanol's role,but it is clear that "the RFG program is the most logical andcost-effective means to grow the market."(ACGA RELEASE: 12/18)Back to Headline List CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Higher Speeds May Increase Smog Potential in CAWith increased speed limits in California -- from 55 mph to 65 mph -- the California Air Resources Board (CARB) is predicting that increased tailpipe emissions will cause the amount of ozone forming pollutants in the air to rise from one percent to three percent almost immediately.But stronger regulations appear unlikely, since "We already have the nation's most effective motor- vehicle control," according to Jerry Martin, air board spokesman.  He agreed new regulations were possible, but were not being planned at the moment.Worst hit would be the Los Angeles basin, which ironically had justcelebrated the cleanest air in more than two decades.  Two keypollutants -- volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitrogen oxides -- are expected to create the increase in ground level ozone.The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) said itexpects that between 12 and 18 tons of VOCs will be addded daily tothe 588 tons projected for 1996, and that nitrogen oxides would add 14 tons daily to the projected 466 tons.In the state capital, Sacramento, itself a bastion of bad air,discussions are under way on whether the state will drop itsrequirement that all cars sold in the state in 1998 be zero-emissions (electric) vehicles.  Another 14 tons could be added to pollutants if the requirement is dropped, the Coalition for Clean Air lamented.All of the estimates, however, are based on the premise that alldrivers will ratchet up the speed they drive.  The California Highway Patrol (CHP) reports that since the new limits went into effect people continue to drive much as they had before -- at around 70 mph.  A "creep" may manifest itself in time, CHP concedes.(ORANGE COUNTY REGISTER: 12/26)Back to Headline List CopyrightCLEAN AIR NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Europe Reduces Duty on Imported MethanolA recent European Union (EU) announcement said the first million metric tons of methanol to come through customs in EU countries willonly require duty of less than half the normal amount.Not much impact is expected on the amount of methanol imported, nor on exporting countries, industry analysts say.Users of methanol in the industrial sector wanted a duty-free quotafor methanol, as was permitted last year, but the EU chose insteadto cut the tariff to four percent rather than 8.1 percent on the first million metric tons.Judith Speed, international methanol manager for ICI IndustrialProducts, Inc., a European methanol producer, said that "Duty-freeand reduced duty quotas were designed to work in specific, abnormal situations."  She added that "If quotas are continually allowed, they set a precedent and then you may as well have them all of the time."Speed said that last year's quota was regarded by European methanolproducers as "quite reasonable," but noted that by the time thequota went into effect, prices had begun to drop and "there really wasn't any need for the duty-free shipments."One methanol producer who ships to Europe said "A four percentreduction in the European duty is not enough for us to divert ournormal export patterns."Added Jim Thomas, vice president of market analysis for Houston'sBonner & Moore Associates, "You can get all the methanol you want inEurope right now."Speed says that European producers are not worried about the quota,but nonetheless the European Methanol Producers Association isasking for an investigation into the quota on principle because "There is a lot of 'horse-trading' going on between countries, and we think that should be looked into," said Speed.(OXY-FUEL NEWS: 12/18, p.1)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-2IA086-000616-B016-134http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev44.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002419 text/html 55093HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:22:20 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMTContent-length: 54906Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev44.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet November 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ***MEXICO*** Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution (534 words) ***BRAZIL*** Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted Tiete River (445 words) ***THE SOUTHERN CONE*** Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992 (614 words) Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health (336 words) Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study (425 words) Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones (254 words) Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry (424 words) ***THE ANDEAN NATIONS*** Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake (510 words) Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions (574 words) Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap Exploration Plans in Peruvian Nature Reserve (437 words) Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future (352 words) Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution (392 words) Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota (293 words) Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters (406 words) Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End (576 words) ***CENTRAL AMERICA*** Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports (362 words) "Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US Pharmaceutical Firm (333 words) Hotline: (93 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Mexico Is Undergoing Environmental Protection Revolution     The Mexican government, headed by President Carlos Salinas deGortari, is starting to seriously address a myriad of severeenvironmental problems that 40 years of uncontrolled industrialdevelopment have created.  Salinas' speeches, including his 1November "State of the Nation" address, sound more like speechesfrom "Green" conventions than those of a president of a thirdworld country, say political analysts.  Until recently theenvironment had not been much of worry for Mexicans and theirgovernment -- economic growth, illiteracy, and malnutrition werethe top priorities -- but Mexico's environmental problems --especially in Mexico City -- are beginning to wake people up, sayobservers.  For example, television programs, radio reports, andbanner headlines about the environment are commonplace in Mexicotoday.  Mexico's intellectuals are also putting pressure ongovernment and industry to clean up and protect the environment."We have a silent disaster under way that is threatening Mexico'sdevelopment," Homero Aridjis, Mexican novelist and president ofthe Group of 100, a group of prominent Latin Americanintellectuals working to protect the region's environment.     Mexico's environmental problems include Mexico City'spermanent blanket of brown smog -- the result of five million tonsof pollutants spewed into its air yearly by three million cars and36,000 factories -- rivers and lakes polluted with untreated humanand industrial waste, rapid deforestation, and the pollutedUS-Mexican border area littered with "maquiladoras," or inboundassembly plants.     The country's first environmental legislation controllingemissions was passed in 1988, and the Ecology and UrbanDevelopment Secretariat (SEDUE) showed industry it meant businessby conducting spot checks in April and May.  Two-thirds of theindustries inspected failed, resulting in hundreds of factoriesbeing temporarily shut down and fined.  SEDUE kicked off thecampaign in March by closing a major state-owned oil refineryoperating in Mexico City.  "Industry didn't think it would happen;they didn't believe we would enforce the law," said SEDUEspokesman Eduardo Garcia.  The crackdown involved not onlyMexican firms, but also such multinationals as German chemicalgiant BASF AG and US-based Dow Chemical Co.  "The law is beingenforced, and it's causing Mexican companies to run around likechickens looking for help with and information on cleaning updirty emissions," said Alfonso Cipres of the Mexican EcologicalMovement.     The Mexican government is also working closely with USEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) authorities to develop waysto clean up and protect the Mexico-US border area from furtherenvironmental contamination, which some critics fear is apossibility if trade and industrial activity are allowed to flowfreely across the border.  President Salinas has acknowledged thatMexico's border area needs cleaning up, but has steadfastly vowednot to allow Mexico's environment to deteriorate further and"become a haven for polluters" when, and if, trade barriers areremoved.  Mexico -- out of necessity -- is undergoing anenvironmental protection revolution that promises to radicallychange how things are done in Mexico, particularly the waybusiness is conducted.  In coming issues, EWLA will examine indetail how environmental protection laws and regulations in Mexicoare affecting industrial operations.     For more information: Eduardo Garcia, SEDUE, AvenidaConstituyentes 947, Colonia Belen de las Flores, Mexico, D.F.0110, Mexico.  Tel: +525-271-8765; Fax: +525-271-6614.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Brazil Awaits Financing to Clean Up Sao Paulo's Polluted TieteRiver     The state of Sao Paulo is preparing to start a US $1 billionproject to clean up the state's most important -- and polluted --river, the Tiete, by the year 2005.  On 4 October, Sao PauloGovernor Luiz Antonio Fleury, accompanied by other Brazilianofficials, discussed the cleanup plan and possible financingarrangements with the president of the Inter-American DevelopmentBank (IDB) in Washington, DC, USA.  Brazilian officials hope theIDB will finance about half the cost of the project, or about US$500 million.  According to IDB officials, the bank is studyingthe request and putting it through the normal review process,which could take up to several years, before any decision is made.However, one IDB official told EWLA that the bank feels it's aworthwhile project that should be funded.  The rest of the fundsneeded for the project are slated to come from Brazil's federalgovernment, Sao Paulo's state government, and private groups.     The Tiete River runs from the Atlantic highlands in easternSao Paulo through the Sao Paulo metropolitan area, where itbecomes highly polluted from 3.5 billion liters of mostlyuntreated domestic (two-thirds) and industrial waste (one-third)dumped into it daily, and then feeds into the river Parana.Brazilian officials say that only about 16% of the wastedischarged into the river is currently treated.  Discharginguntreated waste in Brazil isn't illegal yet, but governmentofficials say that is about to change.     The project's initial goal, according to Fleury, is to cut by50% to 60% the amount of untreated effluent entering the river by1994.  The funds are to be spent on constructing water-treatmentplants along the river to treat domestic waste.  The plan willalso require the more than 1,000 industries operating along theriver to clean up their own effluent; many industries plan to worktogether and build common water-treatment plants to save money.When the project is completed in the year 2005, "it will bepossible to fish once again in the river," said the governor.     Despite Fleury's optimism, it appears the project may alreadybe heading for problems.  According to the state's constitution,the first water project in the state of Sao Paulo must be thecleanup of the Billings Dam area, a seriously polluted reservoirthat provides much of metropolitan Sao Paulo's water.  Inaddition, environmentalists have criticized the governor's planbecause they say he will simply use the money to giveantipollution equipment to private industries to clean up theireffluents.     For more information on the project's technical aspect:Companhia de Tecnologia de Saneamento Ambiental, Praca R.A.Cortez, 67, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.  Tel: +5511-246-4411.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Argentina to Create Environment Secretariat by Early 1992     Argentina plans to have its first ministerial-levelenvironment secretariat in place and operating by early 1992.President Carlos Menem, seeking to be Argentina's "environmentpresident," recently created the secretariat by presidentialdecree because the current constitution allows for only eightministries, and the environment had never been one of them.  "Weare in the process of amending the constitution to allow for asecretariat of the environment at the highest level," said AlbertoBarbuto, president of the National Commission for EnvironmentalPolicy.  The presidential decree allowed the Menem government tolegally circumvent the constitution until it's changed;administration officials are working with legislators in bothhouses of Congress and expect routine passage of the proposedconstitutional amendment when it is brought before Congress.     The new secretariat, which will employ approximately 200people, will be in charge of national environmental policy, helpCongress write modern environmental laws, and ensure that the newlaws are enforced, Barbuto told EWLA.  The secretariat will workwith the country's 23 provincial environment ministries onenvironmental matters of overlapping jurisdiction.  Committees arenow writing coordinated environmental laws that will carrypenalties for offenders.  "Today, for example, there is no penalcode in Argentina for contaminating water, only for deliberatelypoisoning it," said Barbuto.  A general environmental law willoutline basics, such as a requirement that all constructionprojects conduct environmental impact studies.  More specific lawswill protect natural resources and establish toxic waste penalcodes.     Critics charge, however, that in reality the Argentinegovernment has no real environment policy and is simply trying toimprove its "green" image by creating another government agency."If this government really wanted to come up with a nationalenvironmental policy, it would be consulting with nongovernmentalorganizations and industry, and would not be picking Maria JuliaAlsogaray, a person with no environmental protection background,to head up the new secretariat," said Patricia Gay, executivedirector of Friends of the Earth Argentina.  Environmentalists saythat instead of creating more agencies, the government shouldconcentrate on enforcing environmental laws and regulations, whichare now being "totally ignored by industry in Argentina."  PedroTarak of the Foundation for Natural Resources and the Environmentdoubts this new secretariat will ever write any environmental laws -- or enforce them -- because the existing agency, he said,doesn't write laws or enforce them now.     "The private sector in Argentina is starting to takeenvironmental protection more seriously, although the topic isn'tas intense here as it is in other parts of the world," saidindustrialist Federico Zorraquin, president of Grupo Zorraquin, agroup of large industrial companies.  According to Jorge Rivara ofDuPont Argentina, there is indeed a group of industries --especially chemical and petrochemical -- that are starting toworry about the changes to come.  "However, they are waiting tosee how this new environment secretariat will operate and, aboveall, how much power it will have," he told EWLA.  Zorraquin isalso a member of the Business Council for SustainableDevelopment, an international group of business leaderscoordinating industry's contribution to the United NationsConference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in1992.  He said the reason environmental protection isn't very highon the business agenda in Argentina is because "Argentina'senvironmental problems aren't very visible."  For example,environmental degradation in Buenos Aires is mainly a problem inthe poorer sections of the city and doesn't directly effect themajority of the population, according to Zorraquin.  Nevertheless,he does believe that the government needs to strengthen itsability to enforce environmental regulations.     For more information: Alberto Barbuto, National Commissionfor Environmental Policy, Corrientes 1302, 1 piso, Buenos Aires1043, Argentina.  Tel: +541-406-721; Fax: +541-451-817.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Argentine Leather Processor Threatens Public Health     The Argentine leather processing factory Inducuer, located inthe city of Florencio Varela (30 km southeast of Buenos Aires), isthreatening the local population's health as it continues toallegedly discharge chromium illegally into nearby streams andland.  (Chromium is a toxic metallic chemical element.)     Although Florencio Varela officials have occasionally fined -- recently US $25,000 -- and temporarily closed down the plantseveral times over the past two decades for local environmentallaw violations, they have not closed down the plant permanentlydue to economic considerations.  Company sources say privatelythat they would prefer to close down permanently, putting 180people out of work, before investing US $2 million needed toremove chromium from its wastewater and properly dispose of thewaste material.  The federal government has not been involved withthis case because there is no federal law in Argentina prohibitingthe discharge of chromium, but this may soon change (see previousstory).     Since the plant opened in 1974, many of the city's 6,000residents have suffered from skin infections and lung and kidneyproblems due to high levels of chromium in the water and air.  Inearly October, two newborn infants in a neighborhood close to thefactory died from chromium poisoning.  The neighborhood's drinkingwater, recently tested by local water officials, was determined tobe highly contaminated with chromium.  "The water even came of thespout green, the color of chromium," said one water official.Carlos Bralo, a lawyer representing the affected community, toldEWLA that new tap water standards are beginning to improve thequality of water somewhat, but the air continues to be pollutedwith chromium.  "We are breathing in chromium," he said as hepointed to deteriorating metals on houses in the area.  Bralo hasfiled a suit against Inducuer on behalf of the families who losttheir children, but observers say it will be years before there isany justice.     For more information: Martin Drozzo, Director General ofInspections, Municipality of Florencio Varela, Buenos Aires,Argentina.  Tel: +541-255-1003.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Spanish Bank Funds Santiago Air Pollution Study     The Banco Santander, a Spanish bank with subsidiaries inChile, is currently assembling a team of internationalenvironmental experts who will collaborate with localenvironmental officials and scientists at the University of Chileto study Santiago's severe air pollution problem and come up withviable solutions.  The bank initiated and is funding the year-longproject, which will cost an estimated US $250,000.     Bank President Emilio Botin expressed the bank's desire toorganize and fund such a team to work on this problem whilevisiting Chilean President Patricio Aylwin on 2 September inSantiago.  Sources say Aylwin was appreciative and pointed out toBotin that Banco Santander was the first and only privateenterprise in Chile to donate economic support to help fight theair pollution problem.  At the meeting, Botin said: "I amconvinced that Santiago will resolve this problem, and we at theBanco Santander will be very proud to have actively participatedin it."  According to Federico Ysart, corporate communicationsmanager with the bank in Madrid, Spain, the idea came from bankemployees in Santiago, "who live with the smog daily."  "Thebank's management in Spain saw this as a good opportunity to sharesome of the benefits the bank has been enjoying from itsoperations in Chile recently," he told EWLA.     The environmental team, which begins work in November, willconsist of about 10 people.  "Although the team will principallystudy sources of air pollution, it will also look at sources ofwater and noise pollution," said Ysart.  Currently a steeringcommittee with members from the three institutions involved in theproject -- Banco Santander, University of Chile, andDecontamination Commission for the Metropolitan Area -- areselecting team members.  By this time next year, the team is topublish its findings and recommendations in a so-called "WhiteBook," which will be presented to government authorities and thegeneral public for review and comment.     According to Urban Air Pollution in Latin America and theCaribbean, a report published in September by the Pan AmericanHealth Organization, Santiago is the third most polluted city inLatin America, just behind Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil.According to the researchers, the air pollution problem inSantiago, while exacerbated by geographic and climatic conditions,is primarily caused by mobile sources.  Mobile sources areresponsible for 83% of the total nitrogen dioxide emissions, 78%of the hydrocarbons, and 98% of the carbon monoxide."     For more information: Federico Ysart, CorporateCommunications Manager, Banco Santander, Castellana 75, 28046,Madrid, Spain.  Tel: +341-581-3700; Fax: +341-581-3633.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Chilean Officials Review Environmental Laws and Plan New Ones     The National Commission for the Environment (CONAMA), Chile'sgovernmental agency responsible for coordinating environmentalpolicy, is currently preparing an inventory of existing envi-ronmental laws.  The objective is to better organize current lawson the books, and find out where more laws are needed.  CONAMAofficials say many of the environmental laws on the books in Chileare unknown, due to a lack of past enforcement.  Rafael Asenjo,executive secretary of CONAMA, estimates that the inventory willcome up with about 2,000 existing environmental regulations.     So far, CONAMA has found that current environmentalregulations do not adequately assure the protection of publicwaterways from industrial or municipal waste, nor do they requirethat toxic waste be treated and disposed of safely.  Asenjoconcedes that his agency has no information on how or where thecountry's toxic waste, mainly from industry and hospitals, is nowbeing disposed.  CONAMA officials have also discovered that thereare no laws requiring that environmental impact studies beundertaken before major projects are approved.  This will changeshortly.  Asenjo told EWLA that CONAMA expects to propose many newenvironmental laws by the end of the year, including one thatwill require such environmental impact studies.  Althoughenvironmental impact studies are not currently required, amajority of the large firms operating in Chile reportedly alreadyconduct environmental impact and feasibility studies on their own.     For more information: Rafael Asenjo, Executive Secretary,National Commission for the Environment, Av. Alameda BernandoO'Higgins 280, Santiago, Chile.  Tel: +562-222-2903; Fax: +562-222-2717.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Chilean Salmon Farmers Oppose Planned Aluminum Foundry     La Cooperativa de Salmoneros de Aysen (COSA), an associationof salmon producers, is alarmed at the prospect of having analuminum foundry built near salmon farms in the Aysen region insouthern Chile, about 1300 km south of Santiago.  Proyectos deAysen SA, a Chilean company, and Noranda Inc. of Quebec, Canada,want to construct an aluminum foundry and a 360 megawatthydroelectric facility in the Aysen region, which would cost US$1.2 billion.     Salmon farmers argue that the pristine fjords in the Aysenregion, where most of the salmon farming is done, wouldundoubtedly become contaminated, hurting both salmon harvests andthe environment, with an aluminum foundry operating nearby.  TheAysen fjords are one of the few ideal places in the world forraising Coho salmon.  The region is expected to produce 4.5million tons of Coho salmon next season, worth approximately US$140 million.     COSA officials point to instances in Canada and Argentinawhere aluminum foundries have contaminated waters and damagedsalmon farms.  Alcan Ltd. in British Columbia, Canada, is runningan aluminum foundry similar to the one Projectos de Aysen intendsto construct in Chile.  Alcan's foundry has been discharging 400metric tons annually of fluorine gases into the atmosphere.  COSAsays tests conducted on the Columbia River in Canada in the early1980s indicated the presence of fluorine in the water.   Fluorineis the principal chemical associated with the production ofprimary aluminum, and adversely affected the health and survivalof salmon there.  A similar situation occurred in Argentina.  Inthe early 1970s, Aluar SA built an aluminum plant in PuertoMadryn, which has needed more than US $70 million worth ofenvironmental protection equipment installed in recent years.Salmon producers also say that even with the best purificationsystems only 98% of the fluorine produced can be removed fromwaste effluents, and typically the percentage is much lower.  Morealumina and chemicals are also lost to the environment in theloading and unloading of ships at the docks, they warn.     Proyectos de Aysen, however, is trying to assure the salmonproducers that they plan to take every precaution to protect theenvironment.  For instance, they intend to use a closed circularsuction system to load and unload materials to avoid anythingescaping to the environment.  In addition, Proyectos plans toconduct a comprehensive environmental impact study, and says itwill be in "constant contact" with salmon producers.     For more information: Hernan Contreras, Director, LaCooperative de Salmoneros de Aysen, Casilla 309, Puerto Aysen,Chile.  Tel: +56-67-332-967.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Venezuela Takes Steps to Clean Up South America's Biggest Lake     After years of studying the problem, it appears that theVenezuelan government is now taking concrete steps to begin thecleanup of South America's largest -- and possibly dirtiest --freshwater lake, Lake Maracaibo located in northwestern Venezuela.Venezuela's Ministry of the Environment and Renewable NaturalResources (MERNR) recently contracted with Delcan InternationalCorp., a Canadian environmental engineering firm, to design andmanage the construction of two sewage treatment plants and sixpump stations for the lakeside cities of Cabimas and Ciudad Ojeda,at a total cost of about US $52 million.  The cities, which have acombined population of approximately one million people, have beendischarging untreated sewage into the lake for decades.  Inaddition, an Israeli firm is currently building two sewagetreatment plants at the lake's biggest city, Maracaibo, which hasmore than a million inhabitants.     According to Pablo Emilio Colmenares, president of MERNR'sInstitute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo, theVenezuelan government began looking into the need to clean up thelake as early as 1977.  The government spent years conductingstudies, coming up with grand plans and writing environment laws,but in essence accomplished nothing concrete until now.  "The lakeshould be healthy and cleaned up to international standards by theyear 1999 with the installations of municipal sewage treatmentplants, and new, tough environmental laws in the works that willstop industry from polluting the lake," Colmenares told EWLA.Government officials concede that industry has found it easy topollute the lake over the years because the weak environmentallaws on the books haven't been enforced much.  Governmentofficials say that will change soon.  (EWLA will examine in thenext issue the new penal environmental law the Venezuelan Congressis drafting.)     Environmentalists are very skeptical of the government'splan.  "For 30 years we have been hearing about projects to cleanup the lake, and so far we have seen nothing," said AldemaroRomero, executive director of the Venezuelan Foundation for theConservation of Biological Diversity.  Romero said that becausenothing has been done, the lake is "a complete disaster, filledwith mercury, sewage, agrochemicals, and oil."  As far as he isconcerned, the government is all talk and no action.  "I don'tbelieve that the government is going to sanction or close downstate-owned enterprises, and I will have to see these sewagetreatment plants up and running -- not plans on paper -- before Ibelieve it," he told EWLA.  Meanwhile, business leaders say thatalthough the program has been delayed for years, they believe thatgrowing public pressure on government and industry is gettingthings moving.  Said Guillermo Cardenas of PetroquimicasVenezuela, a state-owned petrochemical firm: "Environmentalconsciousness is growing in Venezuela, especially around theMaracaibo lake, and industry realizes it has to take steps toclean up."     For more information: Pablo Emilio Colmenares, President,Institute for the Control and Conservation of Lake Maracaibo,Calle 72 con Ave. 2B, Urbanizacion Virginia, Edificio San Jacinto,Sector del Lago, Maracaibo, Estado Zulia, Venezuela.  Tel: +58-61-913-873; Fax: +58-61-914-089.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Peruvian Officials Push US Copper Mining Company to Cut Emissions     Peru's Ministry of Energy and Mines recently ordered theSouthern Peru Copper Corporation (SPCC) to completely clean up itssulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions and other pollutants within thenext five years by building sulfuric acid plants and taking otherenvironmental remediation steps at its main site in the southerncoastal city of Ilo.  Such action will cost the company anestimated US $90 million.  (Sulfuric acid plants capture SO2emissions from smelters and turn them into sulfuric acid -- amarketable commodity itself -- resulting in less atmosphericpollution.)  SPCC, 52% of which is owned by the North Americancopper giant ASARCO Inc., mines 60% of Peru's annual copperproduction, making it the country's largest copper mining outfit.     SPCC officials say, however, they were involved in initiatingthis project as well and therefore are not being "ordered" toclean up emissions.   "When the government of Peru issues anorder, it does so only after things have been agreed to," said anASARCO official.  But the same official admitted that "LatinAmerican countries are all becoming much more environmentallyaware, and this whole effort is an outgrowth of that."     A multisectoral commission was convened in 1989 to study thepollution problem at SPCC and develop a solution.  The commissionissued a report, which then became a supreme decree in 1989,outlining short-, medium-, and long-term steps that SPCC needed totake to rectify the situation at Ilo.  SPCC cooperated andoutlined steps it would take, including construction of a 140,000ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant, at a cost of US $76.6 million,which will treat 35% of the SO2 emissions produced at its Ilofoundry.  SPCC will also pipe the tailings from the Cuajone andToquepala mines offshore at the bay of Ite, at a cost of US $16.93million plus yearly operating costs of US $500,000.  The companyhas also promised to build a water-treatment plant to treat thesewage from its camp, Ciudad Nueva, in Ilo.  The commissiondetermined that a 140,000 ton-per-year sulfuric acid plant wouldnot be enough to clean up the emissions, and told SPCC that itwould have to double the capacity of the plant to 300,000 tonswithin five years to take care of all the emissions.  "SPCC wasn'tplanning to use all the emissions from its smelters to producesulfuric acid," said Manuel Pulgar Vidal, an environmental lawyerat the Peruvian Environmental Law Society.     SPCC has appealed the commission's decision.  The coppercompany is reluctant to increase the sulfuric acid plant'scapacity to 300,000 tons per year because, company executives say,the domestic market for sulfuric acid isn't large enough to absorball of the sulfuric acid that would be produced by such a largefacility.  They also say SPCC isn't well-positioned to compete inthe international sulfuric acid market.  However, SPCC is comingup with uses for their sulfuric acid.  Sources told EWLA that SPCChas begun working on a heap leaching project, which will requirethe use of sulfuric acid to exploit several million tons of copperoxides and secondary sulfates that have accumulated at theirToquepala and Cuajone mines.  Officially, however, government andcompany officials are currently negotiating to resolve theirdifferences.     For more information: John J. Youle, Vice President ofInstitutional Relations, Southern Peru Copper Corporation, AvenidaCaminos del Inca No. 171, Chacarilla del Estanque, Santiago deSurco, Lima 33, Peru.  Tel: +5114-36-1565; Fax: +5114-35-6619.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Environmentalists Force Texas Oil Company to Scrap ExplorationPlans in Peruvian Nature Reserve     Texas Crude Exploration Inc. of Houston, Texas, USA, decidedin September not to explore for oil in Peru's Pacaya SamiriaNational Reserve, even though the Peruvian government hadtentatively approved in early April a US $24 million oilexploration contract between Texas Crude and Petroperu (the stateoil company) for a one million-hectare northern jungle oil block,known as Block 61.  Texas Crude's decision came in the wake ofprotests by environmental groups and congressmen in Peru and theUS who argued against oil exploration in the wildlife reserve.The company received over 1,000 protest letters, and anenvironmental group picketed its Houston offices.     Environmentalists bolstered their campaign with environmentallegislation enacted in September 1990 by President AlbertoFujimori.  The legislation outlawed exploring for or exploitingnonrenewable resources in a reserve.  The government, however, wasinterpreting the law its own way and was set to give Texas Crudethe go-ahead.  After Texas Crude gave up its exploration plans,the Ministry of Energy and Mines and the Ministry of Agriculturerepealed this law, known as article 71, due to pressure from localinvestors.  Environmentalists, who are working to restore it, saythat foreign oil companies will still look carefully at where theydrill in the future.  Texas Crude said the whole episode has costthem at least US $1 million: $500,000 on seismic data it boughtfrom Petroperu and another $500,000 it will now have to spend toclean up its image in the US.     The block was especially attractive to Texas Crude because ofits potential oil-bearing structures and its proximity to theNorth Peruvian Pipeline.  The 856-km-long pipeline takes Amazoncrude oil from producing fields to Petroperu's marine terminal atBayovar on Peru's north coast.  Created in 1982, Pacaya Samiria isa vast, swampy 2.08-million-hectare network of oxbow lakes,lagoons, and flooded forest that is also home to the almostextinct Amazon manatee and the pink river dolphin.  In the 1970s,exploration companies pulled out of the area after drilling threedry wells and making one noncommercial find.  Petroperu, however,still operates in the reserve.  The cash- strapped state oilcompany's environmentally unsound operations are a result of poormaintenance and sloppy management, say environmentalists.According to the Iquitos-based Institute of Amazonian Research,over 200 hectares of jungle surrounding Petroperu's wells inPacaya Samiria are already contaminated by untreated water andtoxic chemicals used in drilling operations.     For more information: Scott G. Baum, Vice President, TexasCrude Exploration Inc., 801 Travis, Suite 1200, Houston, TX77002-5764, USA.  Tel: +1-713-228-8888; Fax: +1-713-228-0494.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Peruvian Green Law Faces Uncertain Future     Peruvian environmentalists fear that a new private investmentlaw being drafted by the government could sabotage sweepingenvironmental legislation signed by President Alberto Fujimori inSeptember 1990.  Undermining the green law, Peru's first, wouldn'tbe new to the Fujimori administration.     Earlier this year the Fujimori government repealed twoimportant articles in the environmental law when it passedpetroleum and agrarian investment laws.  The agrarian law, forinstance, repealed article 71 of the environmental law, whichprohibited the exploitation of nonrenewable resources in protectedareas.  Article 71 formed the legal basis for environmentallawyers' arguments that stopped Texas Crude Exploration Inc., apetroleum company based in Houston, Texas, USA, from exploring foroil in the Pacaya Samiria National Reserve.  (See previous story.)     Industry in general, and the mining and petroleum sectors inparticular, have been especially critical of the controversialgreen law.  For example, Luis Rodriguez Mariategui, formerpresident of the National Society of Mining and Petroleum, seesenvironmental impact studies, which are stipulated in the law, asjust one more obstacle to starting up business ventures in Peru."The cost of an environmental impact study carried out by a localcompany can run anywhere from US $20,000 to US $120,000, dependingon the size and complexity of the job," he said.  However,Environmental Services of Fort Collins, Colorado, USA, which hascarried out environmental impact studies in Peru for suchcompanies as Mobil Exploration & Producing Peru, a division ofMobil Corp., New York, USA, is telling its clients that "to meetthe full letter of intent of the environmental law anenvironmental impact study would cost from US $400,000 to US$500,000."     Meanwhile, efforts by a multisectoral commission appointed byFujimori to outline regulations for the environmental law havebeen stymied at the cabinet level.  Jorge Caillaux, president ofthe Peruvian Environmental Law Society (SPDA) and a former memberof the commission, blames the impasse on the Fujimoriadministration's "lack of political will" to make environmentalprotection a priority.     For more information: Jorge Caillaux, SPDA, Plaza Arrospide9, San Isidro, Lima 27, Peru.  Tel: +5114-22-4033; Fax: +5114-42-4565.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Environmental Articles Included in Colombia's New Constitution     Environmental protection is on the front burner in Colombia,as evidenced by the passage in August of the country's newconstitution containing 43 articles specifically addressingenvironmental protection.  The old constitution did not mentionthe environment.  The environmental articles range fromprohibiting nuclear and toxic waste from entering the country torequiring the government to protect the nation's biodiversity andundertake environmental awareness campaigns.  The constitutionalso mandates that the principles of sustainable development beadhered to when exploiting natural resources, and givesindividuals, even though they may not have been directly affected,the right to bring legal action against polluters.  According toGuillermo Perry, Colombia's ex-minister of mining and energy, thismeans that companies or individuals damaging the environment inColombia will now be held legally responsible, and will pay finesand be forced to clean up their environmental damage.     A new Congress, to be elected by December, will develop thespecific laws and regulations needed to comply with the newconstitution.  However, the government in power has already takensome concrete steps to bridge the gap between the idealenvironmental goals set forth in the constitution and what reallyoccurs.  According to Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, director ofInderena, Colombia's environmental protection agency, thegovernment approved in August the National Environmental PolicyPlan (NEPP), which outlines how the government plans to enforcethe environmental articles mandated in the constitution.  "TheNEPP calls for the complete overhaul of the government's existingenvironmental protection sector, which is currently very weak,uncoordinated, and operates on a shoestring budget," saidRodriguez.  The new budget should about double, with money comingfrom new taxes on firms exploiting nonrenewable energy sources,and fines for violating environmental laws.  Rodriguez says thegovernment intends to create a Ministry of the Environment and aNational Environmental Council, which will include representativesfrom all government ministries.   The government also will createa series of decentralized regional environmental protectionoffices throughout the country to carry out protection programsand law enforcement.     The environment will also become an important factor in themarketplace, say government officials.  For example, the NEPPproposes pollution taxes for polluters and subsidies for companiesthat switch to cleaner, more environmentally benign technologiesand undertake reforestation and conservation projects.     For more information: Manuel Rodriguez Becerra, Director ofInderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.  Tel: +571-283-3562.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Columbian Salt Plant Shut Down for Polluting the Rio Bogota     In September the Colombian government decided to permanentlyshut down Alcalis de Colombia, an old state-owned sodium chlorideprocessing plant that operated along the Rio Bogota, just a fewkilometers from downtown Bogota.  The reason was that anenvironmental impact study performed by the US-based consultingfirm Arthur D. Little concluded that the factory was responsiblefor most of the pollution found in that river.  Alcalis, whichproduced 18,000 metric tons of sodium chloride yearly, wasdischarging about 680 metric tons of chloride into the river eachday, five times the permitted level.     The Public Interest Defense Foundation, which demanded thatthe government close down the factory three years ago, said theextremely high concentration of chloride in the river (213 partsper million, against a permissible level of 150) was a serioushealth threat to the local population, as well as nearby farmingand pasture lands.  Sources say that some pastures and cows in thearea may have been contaminated by the river's polluted waters.     The National Council of Social and Economic Policy (NCSEP), ahigh-level interministerial council operating under the presidentof the republic, Cesar Gaviria, made the final decision to closethe factory.  NCSEP authorities admit that the plant was closeddown for economic, as well as environmental reasons.  "Alcalis wasusing old technology, in debt, and losing money," said oneofficial.  NCSEP calculated that the state would have had toinvest more than US $10 million in new, cleaner technology forAlcalis to meet the current environmental regulations.  The 300workers who lost their jobs due to the closing are demanding thatthe government help them.     For more information: German Sarmiento, Director, PublicInterest Defense Foundation, Calle 71 #5-83, Bogota, Colombia.Tel: +571-211-7077.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Texas Petroleum to be Fined for Polluting Colombia's Waters     Colombian environmental protection authorities arethreatening to fine Texas Petroleum Company, of Dallas, Texas,USA, for not properly treating drilling operation wastewater fromits Velazquez fields.  Authorities say the wastewater is pollutingthe Magdalena River, Colombia's most important river.  "There is astrong possibility that Inderena [the government agency in chargeof protecting natural resources and the environment] will besanctioning Texas Petroleum for contamination of waters near itsVelazquez fields," said Alfonso Avellaneda, head of theenvironmental department at Inderena.  "Our legal department willbe announcing the sanctions shortly, and these may include a fineor the closure of the Velazquez fields."     Inderena officials claim that Texas Petroleum, knowing thatInderena officials could not (until quite recently) inspect thearea because it was controlled by paramilitary groups, wasdeliberately discharging untreated effluent into two streams.Furthermore, Texas Petroleum allegedly tried to deceive Inderenaofficials when they inspected the area.  Avellaneda said TexasPetroleum stopped the discharge of all effluent to one of thestreams and tried to convince Inderena authorities that the streamwith no effluent was the one that received all the treatedeffluent.  Texas Petroleum maintains that the Inderena inspectorconfused the two streams due to a lack of familiarity with thearea.  "We clean up effluents as a matter of course, as you wouldsweep and clean your house," said Joaquin Escobar, chiefenvironmental officer for Texas Petroleum in Columbia.Furthermore, Inderena says there's a big difference between theway Texas Petroleum and Colombia's oil company (Ecopetrol) operatein the area.  "We want to demonstrate with these sanctions thatit's possible to exploit the oil in this area withoutcontaminating its waters, as Ecopetrol does," said Avellaneda.Despite all the rhetoric from the government, Texas Petroleum saysit has yet to be officially contacted about the matter, and arguesthat it is innocent.  "Our conscience is clear, and we are certainthat once the technical information is examined, the company'sworldwide reputation for environmental excellence will beconfirmed," said Escobar.     In 1987, Texas Petroleum was admittedly involved incontaminating La Cienaga de Palagua, a freshwater lake near itsVelazquez fields.  It discharged into the lake salty wastewatersloaded with chlorides, strontium, vanadium, lead, and mercury,resulting in the death of millions of fish.  Ecopetrol was alsoimplicated in this environmental disaster.     For more information: Alfonso Avellaneda, Departamento deMedio Ambiente del Inderena, Carrera 10 #20-30, Bogota, Colombia.Tel: +571-283-3562.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Bolivia to Enact Sweeping Environmental Legislation by Year's End     The Bolivian Congress is putting the finishing touches on thecountry's first-ever piece of comprehensive environmentallegislation.  The environmental bill, which is expected to becomelaw before the end of the year, will also create aministerial-level National Environment Secretariat responsible fordeveloping appropriate regulations and seeing that they areenforced.  "The principal goal of this legislation is theprotection and conservation of the environment and naturalresources in Bolivia," said Gerardo Aguierre, Bolivia's SecretaryGeneral of the Environment and one of the bill's authors."Bolivia needs to develop economically, but not at the expense ofthe environment; therefore, there will be incentives forbusinesses to protect the environment as well as penalties fornoncompliance," he told EWLA.     When this bill becomes law, say its drafters, the conduct ofbusiness will change drastically in Bolivia.  For example, finesand prison terms of up to 10 years will await those who import ortraffic in toxic waste in Bolivia, and for those who bring intothe country contaminating technologies that have been outlawed intheir country of origin.  In addition, the law will establishpenal codes for polluting the air, water, and land.  Environmentalimpact studies will be required for all new projects, both publicand private, before authorities grant approval.     Bolivian environmentalists are generally pleased with thebill, although they say developing regulations and enforcing themwill be a tough task.  "The fact that there is an environment billthat will soon become law is a big step in the right direction,but we have to make sure that the laws and regulations areenforced," said Christian Vallejos of the Friends of NatureFoundation, based in Santa Cruz, Bolivia.  Luis Alberto Rodrigo,director of the Environmental Defense League, an umbrellaenvironmental organization in Bolivia, praised the government forhaving the political will to work with many diverse groups to comeup with the comprehensive environmental bill, but likewiseexpressed reservations about how effectively the new laws will beenforced.  "I feel that it will be very hard for the governmentto enforce the laws and regulations without adequate mechanismsand funds," he told EWLA.  He believes that industries operatingin Bolivia will have to start taking environmental protection veryseriously.     The legislation originated about a year and a half ago in theEnvironment Committee of the House of Deputies, the lower house inthe bicameral parliament.  For the executive branch, the office ofthe Secretary General of the Environment was also involved indrafting the bill.  Two previous environmental bills did notsurvive, according to Aguierre, because they tried to cover toomuch and thus were too vague.  The current bill, however, isexpected to survive the process and become law.  "A general draftof the bill unanimously passed in the House in early October, andnow legislators are carefully reviewing each of the 121 articlesand making any needed changes," Aguierre told EWLA.  Once theHouse passes the entire bill, including all of the articles, itwill go to the Senate for a similar process.  But if the Senatemakes any changes, then it will have to be approved again by theHouse.  The exact same bill has to be approved in both chambersbefore it can go to the president of the republic, Jaime PazZamora.     For more information: Gerardo Aguierre, Secretary General ofthe Environment, Av. Camacho 1471, Edificio Maca, La Paz, Bolivia.Tel: +591-2-361-647; Fax: +591-2-357-535.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Central American Nations to Ban Toxic Waste Imports     The Interparliamentary Central American Commission ofEnvironment and Development (ICACED), which convened with all its42 members for the first time 23-26 October in Guatemala City,Guatemala, urged all member nations to ban the importation oftoxic waste.  "We recognize that we have serious environmentalproblems to address, the principal one being to protect CentralAmerica from the industrialized nations' intent on making us theirtoxic waste dump," said Arturo Amiel Escobar, a Guatemalanlegislator and the general coordinator of the event.  Thecommission, which is made up of legislators from each country'scongressional environment committees, also called for steps to betaken to clean up Central America's cities, and halt deforestationon the Central American isthmus.     Panama and Belize are the only two Central American countriesthat have already outlawed toxic waste imports, but sources saythe remaining five are not far behind.  "Following the meeting,the Guatemalan Congress began working on modifying the nation'senvironmental law to include the prohibition of any type of toxicwaste from entering this country," Amiel told EWLA.  In additionto calling for a ban on toxic waste imports, the participants atthe meeting also called on Central American industry to worktogether with the governments to protect the environment.  "Ourobjective is to give the private sector incentives to protect theenvironment, and work toward a consensus between government andindustry on how to protect the environment, because otherwise itwon't work," said Amiel.     The ICACED was created in August 1990, with the ratificationof the Central American Environmental Protection Agreement by themember nations.  The Central American presidents decided at asummit in February 1989 to create the pan-Central Americanorganization to allow the region's governments to work together todevelop coordinated environmental laws.  The commission'sexecutive committee, which consists of the presidents of eachcountry's congressional environment committee, meets every threemonths to discuss legislative initiatives in the areas ofenvironmental protection and economic development and takes backthe commission's recommendations to their colleagues for action.     For more information: Lic. Arturo Amiel Escobar, Congreso dela Republica, 9a, Avenida 9-44, Zona 1 Guatemala City, Guatemala.Tel: +5022-21-260/69.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991"Chemical Prospecting" Unites Costa Rica and US PharmaceuticalFirm     Merck & Co., Inc., one of the word's largest pharmaceuticalfirms, has agreed to pay a Costa Rican conservation group US $1million to provide Merck with plant and insect samples that mightlead to the development of new products.  The two-year renewableagreement is believed to be one of the first in the world, saidRodrigo Gamez, director of Costa Rica's nonprofit NationalInstitute of Biodiversity of Costa Rica (INBio).  INBio willsupply Merck with the chemical makeup of environmental samplesexhibiting desirable characteristics, such as freedom from fungusor other biologically destructive organisms.     The agreement calls for INBio to receive royalties from thesales of any marketable products that result from the research.INBio will use some of the US $1 million to pay for certainstart-up expenses, but part of the money, and later a percentageof the royalties, will be earmarked for Costa Rica's conservationefforts, including its famed national parks system, which covers25% of the country.     "This agreement gives Merck access to the amazing collectionof biological specimens found in Costa Rica, while working with anorganization that will protect and conserve the habitats fromwhich these samples are drawn," said Merck's Pamela Adkins.  Gamezsaid other large companies are interested in the idea of "chemicalprospecting," but he was reluctant to reveal who they were.  Hewas optimistic, though, that agreements such as the one with Merckcould become a lucrative source of income to the country.  "Thiscould become as lucrative as the country's coffee and bananaexports," he said.     The INBio, created in 1989 at the recommendation of the CostaRican government, is currently engaged in the inventory,identification, and classification of the country's diverse wealthof flora and fauna.  At least a half a million species oforganisms exist in Costa Rica's tropical habitat.     For more information: Dr. Rodrigo Gamez, Director, InstitutoNacional de Biodiversidad, Apdo. 22-3100 Santo Domingo, Heredia,Costa Rica.  Tel: +506-40-9287; Fax: +506-36-2816.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetNovember 1991Hotline:     The Mexican government recently unveiled a three-year, US$460million environmental protection program for its northern border,which EWLA will examine in the next issue ... In July Venezuela'sgovernment created its first biosphere reserve, an area of eightmillion hectares in the Alto Orinoco region, to protect indigenouspopulations along with flora and fauna ... According toGuatemala's Ministry of Energy, unleaded gasoline is now availablein that Central American country ... For more information on anyarticle in this issue, contact the EWLA Hotline; Tel: +1-617-641-5108, Fax: +1-617-648-8707.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-3IA086-000616-B016-160http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev55.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002514 text/html 75417HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:22:39 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:06 GMTContent-length: 75230Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev55.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNet October 23, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord (2106 words) ***PACKAGING*** OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions (546 words) Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery (666 words) ***NORMS AND STANDARDS*** Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline (482 words) No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule (806 words) BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion (1223 words) ***ENERGY*** EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers (343 words) New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain (495 words) ***CLIMATE*** EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFC Phaseout (464 words) German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1 January (756 words) Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages (414 words) ***WATER QUALITY*** In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water (249 words) ***GENERAL POLICY*** Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in EC Presidency (424 words) Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar (306 words) British Look at the Big Environmental Picture (424 words) Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy (571 words) Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup (195 words) NEWS BRIEFS: (176 words) HOTLINE: (37 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC Breaks With Free Trade Dogma in Landmark Waste Accord     Shattering visions that Europe's giant single market forgoods should extend to trash too, the EC's environment ministerssealed an historic agreement on 20 October that allows governmentsto turn away shipments from other EC members of waste destined fordisposal in dumps or incinerators.     For the first time ever the ministers also convinced theEuropean Commission, the Community's executive, to let them basethe packet of new waste rules on the environmental provisions ofthe EC's treaty rather than on articles that promote open trade.The move represents an almost heretical departure from theCommission's long-standing dogma that waste should be consideredas a tradeable commodity, and opens the door for governments tooperate tougher national restrictions than the EC text foresees.     EC Environment Commissioner Karel Van Miert defended theCommission's capitulation as a one-off concession granted in theface of enormous political pressure for stringent waste traderestrictions from several governments, particularly France.  "Whatwe accepted was that the logic of the internal market should notprevail" when it came to combating "waste tourism," he said.  Thedecision did not signify any lasting change in the Commission'swaste policy, he argued.     But triumphant French officials hailed the executive'sdecision as a major victory for the environment over free trade,as well as a crucial precedent for the Community and, moreimportantly, efforts to reform the General Agreement on Tariffsand Trade (GATT).  "The text clearly gives preeminence toenvironmental protection over commerce," said French EnvironmentMinister Segolene Royal.     Secretary-General of the European Federation of WasteManagement Dieter Vogt told EWWE he expected that Germany wouldnow seek a similarly nonharmonized approach to proposed ECpackaging legislation so that Bonn could maintain its far-reaching national recycling rules, which other countries complainpose a barrier to imports.     Private court action seems likely to be launched sooner orlater to determine whether the text agreed by the Council ofenvironment ministers is legal under the EC's founding Treaty ofRome.  Although Van Miert told ministers that the Commission didnot intend to challenge its legality -- a categorical assurancethat took Commission waste experts by surprise -- waste industryofficials said they would consider taking legal action to have thelegislation annulled on the grounds that it breaches the treaty'sfree trade provisions.A Panoply of Rules     The regulation1, arduously negotiated over almost two years,amounts to a landmark panoply of new rules for controllingcross-border trade in waste not only within the 12-member bloc,but also with the rest of the world.     It covers virtually all kinds of waste except nuclearmaterials, for which the EC has separate rules.  A key aim is tobring EC practices into line with the requirements of the 1989Basel Convention, which seek to limit international shipments ofhazardous waste, so that the Community and national governmentscan ratify the pact.  Instead of distinguishing between hazardousand nonhazardous waste, the regulation tailors the severity of itscontrol mechanisms according to whether trash is destined forfinal disposal or for "recovery" -- meaning re-use, recycling, orincineration to produce energy.  Controls on waste for disposalare strictest.  The regulation bans the export of trash fordisposal to all countries except to European Free TradeAssociation (EFTA) states that are also parties to the BaselConvention.     Export of waste for recovery is also banned in principle butpermitted to three groups of nations: members of the Organizationfor Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that have agreedto apply a common system of controls on movements of such wasteamong themselves (so far Japan has not); parties to the BaselConvention; and nations with which the Community concludesagreements or arrangements guaranteeing, as the Basel Conventionrequires, "environmentally sound" management of the waste at itsdestination.     The inclusion of this last group allows the Community tocontinue exporting recoverable waste, including toxic materials,to many developing or newly industrialized countries as well as toeastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.  (This will not applyto 69 countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Rim, towhich the EC has banned all waste exports at their request).  Theenvironmental organization Greenpeace accused the ministers ofhypocrisy over this decision, arguing that all waste exports tothese states should be prohibited since unscrupulous traders wereincreasingly using the pretext of recycling to dump hazardousgarbage in nations with inadequate import controls.     The export rules also fall short of meeting the EuropeanParliament's repeated calls for a halt to all EC waste exports tocountries outside the OECD, the club of rich industrializednations, from the year 2000.  Ministers went some way towardsatisfying those demands, however, by building in a series ofsafeguards.  All exports will be forbidden when a country has notspecifically consented to receive the waste or when authorities inthe EC nation of dispatch suspect it would not be treated in anenvironmentally sound way.     Moreover, the Commission will periodically review thethird-party agreements -- for the first time by the end of 1996 --and can propose a ban on exports if the environmental guaranteesturn out to be insufficient.     The regulation's innovation, however, is that for the firsttime it explicitly permits public authorities within the Communityto entirely ban or systematically block imports of nonrecoverablegarbage from other EC states.     The provision is inspired largely by France's decision inAugust to ban imports of household waste for disposal in Frenchlandfills after potentially hazardous hospital garbage wasdiscovered mixed in with some consignments from Germany.  Bonn'ssupport for the ban -- once it had swallowed its anger at the lackof warning from Paris -- was vital in getting the rest of theCouncil to back France's restrictive approach.  Having exported astaggering 700,000 metric tons of household waste to French tipslast year, Germany is now having to redouble efforts to build upits waste disposal capacity after years of public opposition toconstruction of new facilities.Accord Cites EC Treaty     The text agreed by ministers stipulates that, to put intopractice the principles that waste should be disposed of as closeas possible to its source and that both the EC and its individualmembers should become self-sufficient in waste disposal, "memberstates may take measures in accordance with the [EC] treaty toprohibit generally or partially or to object systematically toshipments of waste."     Governments will not be allowed, however, to keep out importsof hazardous waste from other EC countries that produce so littlethat it would be uneconomical to build their own disposalinstallations.  This stipulation is intended to ensure that smallstates like Luxembourg, Ireland, Portugal, and Belgium getcontinued access to specialized disposal facilities elsewhere inthe bloc.     Van Miert said he had insisted that ministers insert thereference to the treaty, the EC's equivalent of the Bible, to lendthe regulation a stronger Community dimension and avoid giving theimpression that it allowed the "renationalization" of wastepolicy.  "It was important to have the reference to the treaty sothat we were not just reimposing national boundaries," he toldreporters.  Van Miert also persuaded the Council to declare thatdecisions between member states would be taken in a spirit ofcooperation.     A Commission spokesperson said that inclusion of the treatyreference would act as a constraint on authorities' scope forimposing bans by underlining that their import policy had toobserve the treaty's golden rule of nondiscrimination between ECmembers.     Another official told EWWE the phrasing meant that memberstates would have to be able to justify import restrictions on thegrounds that the waste shipments posed a particular environmentalthreat to them or could be treated nearer to their source.  Thetext would lead to waste policy being conducted on a regionalbasis since it would be virtually impossible to justify blanketbans on imports at the national level, he said.     In practice, the question of whether measures taken are "inaccordance with the treaty" is certain to give rise to differinginterpretations and lead to legal disputes, officials believe.These would be for member states and industry to sort out, sinceministers refused to grant the Commission power to vet measuresbefore they take effect.     Van Miert's decision to temporarily ditch the Commission'straditional line on waste marks his first significant policydecision since taking over as the EC's environment chief in July -- a job many believe he will retain when the 17-strong executiveis reshuffled at the start of next year.  But by going along withthe Council's thinking and pledging not to attack it in court,Commission and industry officials say the studious Belgian clearlyexceeded the mandate his peers in the EC executive had given him.     This mandate envisaged that Van Miert should reserve theright for the Commission to take legal action, as it has done inthe past whenever the Council has approved waste legislation onthe basis of environmental provisions instead of single marketrules.  The Commission's position was bolstered in July when theEuropean Court of Justice, the bloc's supreme court, upheld theview that all waste, even nonrecoverable garbage, is a tradeablegood.  As EWWE went to press it was uncertain whether Van Miert'sCommission colleagues would accept his decision or order him tobacktrack.     Commission officials said he could have to eat his wordsanyway if the Court of Justice again supports the Commission'sdogma in two cases against the Council that are currently beforeit.  Underscoring his claim that the Commission's fundamentalapproach to waste policy had not changed, Van Miert said theexecutive would not withdraw the cases.  France's Royal toldreporters it was now time for the Court to fall in with theCouncil's view that waste could not be considered a marketablecommodity like any other.     Though waste experts at the Commission consider the Frenchban on imports of household waste to be illegal, they do notexpect the EC executive, feeling frail as a number of governmentstry to cut back its powers, to take any action against Paris forthe time being.     Ministers hope to formally adopt the regulation at their nextmeeting on 15-16 December if the European Parliament, which has tobe consulted about the change in the legal base of the measure,can deliver its advisory opinion by then.  The regulation wouldtake effect 15 months after it is passed, although Germany maycall for more time to change the rules in its devolved system.Governments have yet to agree on how soon the Community shouldratify the Basel Convention.     Waste industry officials predicted that extra administrativeburdens resulting from the tighter controls on waste tradeforeseen under the regulation could prove too burdensome forsmaller companies and force them to sell out to powerfulmultinational waste groups.  "I see Waste Management Inc. andBrowning-Ferris picking up market share," said Vogt of theEuropean Federation of Waste Management.Tracking the Waste     The regulation lays down elaborate notification andinformation procedures for virtually all waste movements, whichgive authorities a month or more to decide whether to approve orrefuse a shipment.  Ministers agreed at the last minute to requirethat movements within the Community of waste for recovery includedon the OECD's so-called "green" (nonhazardous) list must beaccompanied by a tracking document giving details of where it isdestined and when.     Belgium insisted that transporters should carry suchinformation with them to facilitate spot checks aimed at ensuringthat such waste is actually recovered.  Investigations in theFlanders region had shown that 30%-40% of all green waste sent forrecovery never arrived at its destination, raising suspicions thatit was simply being dumped, Belgian officials said.     Under the regulation, exports of green list waste forrecovery would be subject to no special controls unless animporting country required them.  But ministers, largely at theinstigation of The Netherlands, agreed that the Community shouldbe able to impose controls on such waste if it proves to havehazardous traits.  Greenpeace argues that although the listprimarily groups inoffensive materials like glass and paper, theUS has succeeded in persuading its OECD partners to include heavymetals that could prove harmful in certain circumstances.NOTES     1 Based on COM(90) 415 and COM(92) 121 - Proposal and amendedproposal for a Council Regulation on the supervision and controlof shipments of waste within, into, and out of the EC.  For moreinformation, contact: EC Council of Ministers, InformationService, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2234 6111.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992OECD Report on Packaging Waste Favors Industry Solutions     A report on Reduction and Recycling of Packaging Waste,released this month by the Organization for Economic Cooperationand Development (OECD) and written by James McCarthy of the USCongressional Research Service, cites different definitions anddifferent ways of compiling data on waste and recycling as abarrier to effective waste reduction and management.  The OECDexpects the report to provide a common basis for regulators todevelop and refine national programs to reduce packaging waste.The report carefully avoids direct criticism of individual OECDmember countries, but seems to favor waste reduction programs thatplace the financial and logistical burden of reducing packagingwaste on industry rather than on local governments.     "There is no standard definition of recycling in use in mostOECD countries and certainly no definition accepted by the OECD asa whole," the report says.  "With many countries setting goals forrecycling ... and many wishing to make intercountry comparisons,improved data are now particularly important."  Recyclingstatistics vary widely by country; some include industrial waste,postconsumer waste, or contaminants, while others exclude them.Countries also use different methods to account for imported andexported waste.     The key issues mentioned in the report are:     * Application of the "polluter pays" principle.  Comparingthe US, New Zealand, and Japan (where "it appears that ... thegovernment will pay the additional costs of recycling throughlocal governments") with Europe (where "regulators favor placingthe financial and logistical burden of reducing waste onindustry"), the report concludes that "there are clear advantagesto holding industry responsible" for packaging waste management.If industry collects the materials, the report notes, there is anincentive to reduce waste generation through lighter materials orreusable packaging.  Governments are likely to be less responsivethan industry to market signals and may also run out of funding tosustain effective recycling programs.     * Primary opportunities.  Improved recapture rates can beachieved with all materials, according to the report, butcorrugated containers and glass offer the best opportunitiesbecause they do not pose major logistical problems and they makeup a large amount of packaging waste.     * Packaging restrictions.  The report points out that banningspecific packaging materials or using economic instruments tocurtail their use might be a controversial option.  "In freemarket economies, consumer choice is a fundamental value.Limitations of consumer choice are not taken lightly....Questions arise as to the extent to which other considerations(such as the protection of markets) have masqueraded as a concernfor protection of the environment," the report says.     The OECD is currently working on a report on packaging andfinancial instruments, OECD sources say.  That report could befinished and approved internally by the end of this year.  OneOECD source, however, termed the subject matter "very sensitive"(since the report will deal with taxation and other financialincentives and disincentives to waste reduction) and cautionedthat it might take longer.     To obtain a copy of Reduction and Recycling of PackagingWaste (OECD Environment Monograph Number 62), contact the OECDEnvironment Directorate, 2 rue Andre Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16,France.  Fax: +33 1 4524 7876.  In the US, contact the OECDPublications and Information Center, 2001 L Street NW, Suite 700,Washington, DC 20036-4910, USA.  Tel: +1 202 785 6323; Fax: +1 202785 0350.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Eco-Emballage Gains Approval to Handle Waste Recovery     Eco-Emballage, the system set up by the French private sectorto ensure compliance with France's new packaging decree, has nowobtained the official approval of French Environment MinisterSegolene Royal to contract to consumer goods producers andimporters.  To complete the approval process, it still needs thego-ahead from the Finance, Agriculture, and Industry Ministries,and the Secretary for Local Communities.     The so-called "Lalonde Decree" -- named for formerEnvironment Minister Brice Lalonde and set to take effect inJanuary 1993 -- gives companies a choice between setting up theirown retrieval and reduction schemes for packaging waste or joininga system such as Eco-Emballage.     Because of the financial and logistical problems associatedwith managing a nationwide collection, sorting, and recycling andenergy recovery program, many companies are expected to opt forparticipation in Eco-Emballage.  Wine and spirits producers,however, consider Eco-Emballage's participation fee too expensiveand have decided to establish their own system, Adelphe, to handlebottle glass recovery and recycling.  Adelphe has independentlyapplied for government approval and will have "a separateagreement" with Eco-Emballage to use some, but not all, of theother system's services, according to Eco-Emballage spokespersonNathalie Laine.  Eco-Emballage expects to charge 1 centime (0.2cents) per bottle during its first year of operation, and toincrease the fee during the following years.     Eco-Emballage came into existence in August and now groups 17companies, including Procter & Gamble France, Nestle France, andCoca Cola Beverages S.A.  In return for its participation fee,which is based on a company's annual packaging production, thesystem guarantees to develop sorting facilities and find recyclingor energy recovery outlets for the packaging waste it handles.     Eco-Emballage resembles the German packaging waste recoverysystem, Duales System Deutschland, but there are some keydifferences.  The French system relies on existing localgovernment collection authorities to collect and separate waste.It does not currently expect to install packaging return bins atthe point of sale, as the German packaging law requires.  Andunlike the Duales System, Eco-Emballage will be able to incinerateplastic waste for energy production.  The German system has hadproblems trying to find uses for the plastic waste it collects.     In September, Eco-Emballage signed an agreement with theDuales System to use the German system's "Green Dot" symbol tomark the product packaging of participating companies.  Thisagreement will allow companies selling into both the French andGerman markets to adhere to the collection and recyclingrequirements of both countries by participating in one of thesystems.  The two will jointly use the "Green Dot" to avoidconfusion.  Laine says that Eco-Emballage expects similar systemsin other neighboring countries to eventually use the same symbol.     Though the French decree does not set specific quantitativetargets, they are likely to follow once the proposed EC directiveon packaging waste is approved.  Quantitative targets will then"fill out the rest of the framework" provided by the EC, saysClaude Reny, a French packaging industry expert.  For the timebeing, "no one expects an effective system to come right away,"says Claude Perrin at the French National Federation of Waste andthe Environment, adding that full implementation "is likely totake several years."  Eco-Emballage's general target is to recover75% of all packaging.  It plans to recycle three quarters of thatamount and incinerate the rest.     With regard to the EC packaging proposal, which the EuropeanCommission issued in July, Great Britain, which is president ofthe EC's Council of Ministers until the end of this year, wantsthe 12 environment ministers to hold a first debate on it at theirnext scheduled meeting on 15-16 December in Brussels.  In themeantime, it aims to get negotiations on the proposed directivestarted between officials from the member states.     For more information: Nathalie Laine, Regards InternationalRP, 10 rue Pergolese, 75016 Paris, France.  Tel: +33 1 4417 9000;Fax: +33 1 4067 9488.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Dutch Eco-Label Misses Deadline     The national environmental label that the Dutch EnvironmentMinistry hoped to introduce next month will be several months latein coming.  Although the independent foundation charged withpreparing it is busy defining criteria for six product groups, thecriteria will not be ready until the end of this year, andeco-labeled consumer goods will be available in stores by spring1993 at the earliest.     Development and administration of the eco-label, initiatedthis summer by the Dutch Environment Ministry and the Ministry ofEconomic Affairs, is in the hands of Stichting Milieukeur, afoundation in which producers, retailers, consumers, andenvironmental groups as well as the government are represented.The foundation owns the label, defines the criteria used inawarding it, and controls its use.  In considering a productgroup, Stichting Milieukeur takes into account all phases of aproduct's life cycle, from production to the waste stage.  Foodand pharmaceutical products are excluded from the eco-labelsystem, because in these categories rules for product informationalready exist.     Establishing the criteria for the first six product groups istaking more time than expected, says H.G.M. Giezeman, generalmanager of the foundation.  Stichting Milieukeur is currentlyworking on criteria for cat litter, shower heads, paints, gypsumboard, light sources, and paper.  According to Giezeman, "we'll behappy if we set criteria for two or three of these product groupsby the end of the year.  Our plan is now to have the firstproducts with an eco-label in the stores sometime in the spring of1993."     Producers and consumers alike can make a request to setstandards for a certain product group, and the foundation hasalready received a few requests to include additional groups.After the criteria have been defined and published, a producer orimporter can present a product for examination.  The tests arecarried out by recognized certifying institutions, not by thefoundation itself.  If the applicant is awarded the label, he hasto pay Stichting Milieukeur a turnover-based amount for the use ofit.  The label is then valid for two to five years, depending onthe product group.     The Dutch label will show a hand holding a stamp that prints"Milieukeur," or "Eco-label."     The EC has also approved an eco-label scheme, but "theEnvironment Ministry and the Ministry for Economic Affairs optedfor a Dutch eco-label in addition to the planned EC label for tworeasons," says Giezeman.  "First, because the EC label is a longtime coming, and second, because it is quite possible that theEuropean standards will be less severe.  Of course we aim at onelabel, but with 12 parties involved, [less stringent] compromisesseem likely."     For more information: H.G.M. Giezeman, General Manager,Stichting Milieukeur, Eisenhowerlaan 150, 2517 KP Den Haag, TheNetherlands.  Tel: +31 70 358 6300; Fax: +31 70 350 2517.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992No Green Christmas as EC Eco-Label Also Falls Behind Schedule     Manufacturers hoping to win the EC's new environmental labelfor their "green" products will have to wait until the start ofnext year at the earliest.  Governments had hoped to get the firstgoods bearing the long-awaited eco-label into stores this fall,but the plans have fallen several months behind schedule,officials from the EC and interest groups told EWWE.  "The truthis that no products with an eco-label can appear in the shops in1992," said one.     Getting experts to agree on the cradle-to-grave criteria thatproducts should meet is proving slow going: to date they haveproposed standards only for washing machines and dishwashers.  Butthe scheme has also been held up by teething troubles in thecreation of a 12-strong "consultative forum" of nongovernmentalinterest groups that has to give its (purely advisory) opinionbefore environmental standards for each group of products can befixed.     Industry, the retail trade, consumer organizations, andenvironmental groups have three seats each on the forum.  Tradeunions are angry that industry and retailers have refused toinclude labor representatives in their delegations, whileenvironmental groups have withheld their nominations to the forumuntil they receive financial assistance for participating.Officials from the European Trade Union Confederation and theEuropean Environmental Bureau, an umbrella grouping of some 140environment nongovernmental organizations across the EC, told EWWEthat both issues seemed likely to be resolved fairly soon withhelp from the European Commission, probably enabling the forum tostart work by the end of November.     Theoretically the forum could have been launched without theenvironmentalists -- the other three groups have already nominatedtheir members -- but in practice this could have undermined theeco-label's credibility.  Such credibility is widely seen ascrucial to the success of the scheme as it seeks to bring order toa rash of claims to "environmental friendliness" by manufacturersand to help the growing numbers of concerned consumers choosegoods that are genuinely "greener."  Some officials hope that inthe long term it will supplant the national schemes operated byGermany and getting under way in France and The Netherlands,leaving Europe with a single eco-label.     If getting the first eco-labeled goods into the shops byChristmas seems out of reach, there are hopes that at least thecriteria for the initial product groups can be agreed by then.Proposed standards for washing machines and dishwashers weresubmitted by a British-led working group of EC experts in August.Once the consultative forum delivers its opinion on the proposal,the way will be clear for the Commission, aided by a committee ofEC government officials, to fix the standards.  Assuming the forumstarts work soon, "I still see some prospect that the firstcriteria can be adopted by the end of the year," one EC officialtold EWWE.  "At the moment we're still building the slipway tolaunch the ship, but once the year turns we're likely to seethings rolling forward quite quickly."     That should mean producers and importers of washing machinesand dishwashers will be able to apply for an eco-label early in1993.  Under the decentralized awards procedure decided bygovernments, producers or importers need apply in only one ECmember state for a label valid across the whole Community of 340million people.  Specially designated agencies in each of the 12countries -- due to be set up by early November -- will beresponsible for awarding or refusing the label on the basis of thestandards set at EC level.     After washing machines, paper is likely to be next in line toget the eco-label logo, a flower made up of 12 stars enclosing alop-sided "E."  EC officials said a Danish-led group of experts isclose to proposing criteria for various paper products.  Afterthat may come detergents, although controversy has erupted overthe criteria: self-styled "environmental detergent makers" havecriticized draft standards produced by a German-led expert groupas far too lax and have set up their own trade association toensure they get a say in the rest of the drafting process.Criteria for other goods are further off.  French-led work onstandards for paints and varnishes is months overdue and anItalian-chaired group is still debating norms for packagingmaterials.  Hairsprays, light bulbs, soil enrichers, and textilesare further back still in the pipeline.     For more information: European Commission,Directorate-General for Information, 200 rue de la Loi, B-1049Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 235 1111.  (The Commission's localoffices around the world can also help).  Raymond van Ermen,European Environmental Bureau, 26 rue de la Victoire, B-1060Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 539 0037.  Joseph Roevens,Environmental Detergent Manufacturers' Association, Industrieweg3, B-2390 Antwerp, Belgium.  Tel: +32 3 312 4373.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992BAT Definition Changes as EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion     Answering a key demand of industry, the European Commissionintends to remold its definition of "best" available techniques(BAT) for limiting pollution from industrial plants to takeaccount of the techniques' economic viability and environmentalbenefits.  The new definition will be written into the next -- andpossibly final -- draft of the European Commission's ambitiousupcoming directive on integrated pollution prevention and control(IPPC), a well-placed source in the EC executive told EWWE.  The17 Commissioners could formalize the proposal in the next fewweeks although it seems more likely that they will hold it overuntil early next year (see "Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax" onpage 13).  Once adopted by the Commission, the text will requirethe unanimous approval of the Council of EC environment ministersto get onto the Community's statute book, a process that seldomtakes less than a year.     The EC's industrial lobby has been irked that the approach toBAT taken by the Commission's directorate-general for environmentso far has not been based on cost/benefit analysis.  (This is acomplaint leveled at the department's work across the board by anincreasing number inside as well as outside the Commission.)  Thechange now envisaged means that the Commission's definition of BATwill be akin to what British requirements term BATNEEC ("BestAvailable Techniques Not Entailing Excessive Costs").  "Justbecause the latest technology can reduce emissions by 1% doesn'tmean you will have to use it if it costs three times as much,"explained the Commission source.  Though the concept of BAT willstill be multifaceted and open to differing interpretations, theexplicit inclusion of costs and benefits as factors to be takeninto account will make it easier for industry to resist beingforced into making frequent and expensive plant upgrades asBAT-driven standards are ratcheted up.     The IPPC directive would require new and existing plants in awide range of industries, from energy production to large-scaleanimal rearing, to obtain an operating permit from the relevantnational or local authorities.  It sets a framework of permitrules under which emissions to air, water, and soil would beconsidered in an "integrated" way, the aim being to prevent orminimize emissions and the creation of waste in all areassimultaneously instead of shifting pollution from one medium toanother.  BAT plays a central role in these rules.  The textstipulates that BAT must be used to limit emissions of a broadspan of substances listed in a technical annex, particularly thosethat are carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, toxic, persistent,or bioaccumulative, or that have a "bearing on global pollutionproblems."  BAT would also have to be employed to recover andrecycle waste where such operations made economic andenvironmental sense.Flexibility for Existing Installations     The permit would have to ensure that environmental qualityobjectives -- whether set at EC level or locally -- were met.Moreover, for each plant the competent authority would be requiredto fix limit values for emissions of substances listed in thetechnical annex.  The limits would have to be based on BAT and tobe at least as strict as those fixed by the Community (wherecommon EC standards exist).  There would be a degree offlexibility for existing installations, however: where they couldmeet the relevant environmental quality objectives without usingBAT, their emissions limit could be up to twice as high (thoughnot for the more harmful substances, and only if the lessstringent standards did not pose an unacceptable risk toecosystems or human health).     Any plan to increase emissions would require approval fromthe permit authority.  Furthermore, the authority would have theright to reconsider a permit at any time in the light ofdevelopments in BAT.  For plants where the relevant equipment hasbeen depreciated by 90% or more, the authority would be obliged totoughen up the permitted emission limit values into line withthose attainable by BAT at that time.  Operators unwilling orunable to upgrade an installation to meet revised standards wouldhave to close it within two years.     Under the proposed timetable -- which, if past experience isany indication, is quite likely to be stretched by ministers, atleast for some EC members -- the directive would enter force on 1July 1995.  New plants could not start operations after that datewithout a permit.  Existing installations would have until 1 July1999 to apply for a permit and until 1 July 2005 to comply withits requirements.  In practice this means that many plantsoperating today may not be affected by the rules.     Because BAT is about techniques, not technology, Commissionofficials say increasingly stringent BAT-led limit values could bemet in many cases through improved operating practices withouthaving to make costly new investments.  "The idea is not that(operators) would have to put in new equipment every five years,although that's not entirely impossible," said one.Industry Seeks to Freeze Permit Conditions     Industry is wary of such assurances, however, and wantspermits to be valid for a clearly defined period.  The Union ofIndustrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe (UNICE),European industry's lobby group, proposes that permit conditionsshould not be changed for 10 years "unless to do so would resultin a necessary improvement for the environment as a whole at anacceptable cost for an average operator in the relevant industrialsector."  It also rejects the yardstick of a 90% depreciation ofequipment, which in some countries could be achieved within aslittle as five years, Commission officials said.     The framework directive creates potential for an avalanche offollow-up legislation by stipulating that the EC executive maypropose Community-wide limit values based on BAT.  These wouldrequire approval by only a two-thirds majority in the Council ofMinisters.  The Commission source said, however, that hisinstitution was likely to hold off on proposing common normsunless differences in BAT-based standards from country to countryled to distortions in fair competition within EC industry.     Here, in brief, are other key details of the draft directive:     * Permit applications must detail measures proposed forpreventing or minimizing emissions and waste, as well as solutionsthat were rejected after consideration.     * Permits should normally be issued within six months of anapplication, though the deadline can be waived in certaincircumstances.     * The public must be given the right to comment onapplications for permits before the competent authority makes adecision.  The results of monitoring of plants' compliance withpermit requirements must also be available to the public.     * The Commission will organize information exchanges betweennational competent authorities on developments in BAT andmonitoring.     * A committee of member state representatives chaired by theCommission would have the power to revise EC emission limit valuesin the light of BAT developments.     Sectors covered by the permit requirement would be energy;metals production and processing; manufacture of nonmetallicmineral products; chemicals; waste management; pulp and paper;dyeing; treatment or finishing of fibers or textiles; productionof dyestuffs, pigments, paints, inks and enamels; production andtanning of leather; electrolytic or mechanical plating of metals;printing; application of paints and varnishes; food canning andprocessing; treatment or processing of animal waste; and intensiveanimal rearing.  In some sectors the requirement would apply onlyto installations above a certain size or annual throughput.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC Finalizes US-Style Energy Labeling Scheme for Consumers     Manufacturers and importers of a range of householdappliances sold in the EC will be required to supply prospectivecustomers with information on their energy consumption from thebeginning of 1994 at the latest.  Under the terms of a directive1recently finalized by the Council of Ministers, the EC'slegislative body, appliances will have to be labeled for theirenergy efficiency and product brochures must include energyinformation.     The scheme is the latest example of the Community's effortsto harness market forces in the cause of environmental protection.It aims to resuscitate a moribund energy labeling initiative thatdates from 1979 and was only ever applied to electric ovens.  Asgovernments look for new ways to limit carbon dioxide emissionsfrom power generation, the directive also seeks to prevent aproliferation of different national energy labeling schemes thatwould create new barriers to internal trade just as the EC and itsEFTA neighbors prepare to launch the giant European market on 1January 1993.     Initially, energy efficiency labels and information will berequired for seven categories of appliances:     * Refrigerators and freezers;     * Washing machines and driers;     * Dishwashers;     * Ovens;     * Water heaters and hot-water storage appliances;     * Lighting sources; and     * Air conditioners.     The text says, however, that other types of appliances couldbe added to the list later, though only those that use significantamounts of energy and afford adequate scope for improvedefficiency would be targeted.  The directive will apply whetherappliances covered are for use in the home or in nonhouseholdlocations such as restaurants and hotels.     The energy information must not only be displayed in shops,but it must also be provided in mail order catalogues and tocustomers who hire an appliance or buy one on hire-purchase terms.Details of information and labels and measuring methods will bespecified in "daughter" directives for each type of appliance tobe issued before the scheme begins.     For more information, contact: EC Council of Ministers, 170Rue de la Loi, 1041 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2 234 6111.NOTES     1 Directive 92/75/EEC.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992New Report Forecasts Lower CO2 Emissions for Great Britain     In the same week that British Rail announced a substantialincrease in long-distance rail fares, the British governmentpublished figures suggesting road transport will overtake industryas the principal source of rising emissions by the year 2000.     In its Energy Paper 59, the British government details itslatest range of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions forecasts andexplains the methodology and models used to arrive at thesefigures for the first time.     The new figures update those given in Energy Paper 58,published in 1990, and suggest Great Britain will emit around 10%less CO2 than was feared in the earlier forecasts.  However, theyalso indicate existing policies will do far less than therecession or the closure of the coal industry to combat globalwarming.     On the basis of the figures given in Energy Paper 59, GreatBritain could readily bring its CO2 emissions back to 1990 levelsby the year 2000.  The forecast of Energy Paper 58 for the year2000 was 174 to 206 million tons of carbon in emissions; EnergyPaper 59 only speaks of 157 to 179 million tons, compared with 160million tons actually emitted in 1990.  The report suggests thatthe earlier estimates have allowed the British government to setitself achievable -- if not lenient -- emissions reductiontargets.  Achieving them is now made even easier by a recessionand a rapid switch away from coal-fired electricity generation topower from natural gas.     The difference between the long-term forecasts is somewhatsmaller; Energy Paper 58 speaks of 188 to 316 million tons, andEnergy Paper 59 stays approximately within that range, with aforecast of 188 to 285 million tons.  These forecasts reinforcethe arguments that overall emissions will continue to rise ifenergy prices continue to fall, and that the proposed EC carbontax is unlikely to affect the two most important future sources ofCO2 emissions: transport and domestic households.     While the British government recently launched a publiccampaign aimed at householders to encourage energy saving in thehome, its road policies are the subject of vocal criticism fromenvironmental pressure groups.     At the recent review of the 1990 government "white paper" onthe environment, "This Common Inheritance," British EnvironmentMinister Michael Howard said he would be "looking at road pricing"to limit environmental damage, but could not promise any firmproposals in this direction before the end of 1994.     Greenpeace UK says the British government "has no policy totackle the rising environmental cost of road transport....  Withthe price of oil around US $20 per barrel, the economic cost ofmotoring in the UK is now cheaper than at any time since beforethe oil crisis.  But the EC carbon tax won't translate into asignificant price rise at the petrol pump."     Copies of Energy Paper 59, published by the BritishDepartment of Trade and Industry, can be obtained from the Britishgovernment publisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +4471 622 3316.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992EC to Push for Methyl Bromide Controls, May Further Accelerate CFCPhaseout     The EC is to join the campaign by industrialized countries,aimed toward next month's conference of parties to the MontrealProtocol, to impose controls on production and use of methylbromide, a gas widely used for fumigating soil and crops.  Thedecision reflects mounting scientific evidence that the chemicalis a hugely powerful destroyer of atmospheric ozone.     Greece had resisted the move but backed down and fell intoline with the rest of the Community at a meeting of the EC'sCouncil of environment ministers in Luxembourg on 20 October.  Theministers agreed that the Community should press other parties tothe protocol to bring methyl bromide into the list of controlledsubstances at the Copenhagen conference.  The EC will push forproduction and use of the pesticide to be frozen at 1991 levels by1995, and for more far-reaching limits to be set next year.     Molecule-for-molecule, methyl bromide is estimated to bebetween 30 and 120 times more destructive to ozone than chlorine.A scientific panel set up by the UN Environment Program has foundthat cutting atmospheric methyl bromide concentrations by 10%would be as beneficial to the ozone layer as speeding up thephaseout of CFCs by three years.  But many developing countriesare resisting the idea of limiting use of the chemical, arguingthat alternatives for crop fumigation are costlier and lesseffective.     Differences between the 12 EC members meant ministers had toleave open the question of whether the Community should push atCopenhagen for an even quicker phaseout of other ozone eaters bythe industrialized world than it has envisaged hitherto.  LastMarch the EC agreed to urge a 1 January 1996 deadline for a totalhalt to production and use of CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride,and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform) except for essentialuses for which no viable substitutes existed.  Now Germany,Denmark, and The Netherlands, with some support from Belgium,Britain, and the European Commission, want faster action.     Ministers decided to come back to the question at acoordination meeting just before the Copenhagen conference openson 18 November.  British Environment Secretary Michael Howard, whochaired the Council meeting, said governments had agreed that theMarch position "is not the last word."  EC EnvironmentCommissioner Karel Van Miert told reporters the situation wasstill evolving and the Community could even agree on a moreambitious position on methyl bromide before the conference begins.     After Copenhagen, the Council aims to decide at its nextmeeting on 15-16 December whether the EC should go faster inphasing out listed substances internally than whatever newtimetable emerges from the Montreal Protocol conference.  For moreinformation, contact: EC Council of Ministers, InformationService, 170 rue de la Loi, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.  Tel: +32 2234 6111.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992German Regulations Will Limit Gas Station Emissions Starting 1January     Two regulations seeking to limit hydrocarbon emissions at gasstations in Germany will come into force on 1 January 1993.  Onemandates the introduction of the so-called "balancing" system,which cuts down on emissions from the filling of gas stationstorage tanks.1  In this system, a hose runs between the gasolinetruck and the tank.  Gasoline flows into the tank, while vaporsfrom the tank that would otherwise escape into the atmosphere arepumped back into the truck, then taken back to the refinery to bereprocessed.  This system is already widespread, and Josef Lerach,an expert at the German Environment Ministry, expects it to be"fully functional" within five years.  For new gas stations,compliance with the regulation has been mandatory since 14 October1992, while others have a grace period.     The second regulation2 provides for gas stations to installdouble-barreled hoses on their pumps to limit emissions frompumping gasoline to cars.  Gasoline flows out, while vapors arerecovered.  The regulation does not specify the technical details,leaving room for development.  It seems fairly certain, however,that German gas stations will not adopt the US-type vapor recoverysystem, which petroleum industry representatives have described as"unwieldy" (and which would also not work well in Europe becauseits effectiveness depends on a degree of filler neckstandardization that does not yet exist there).     New gas stations will have to comply with the regulation asof January, which makes it particularly important for the formerEast German states, where many new stations are opening up.Existing fuel stations will benefit from grace periods in inverseproportion to their size to allow time for retrofitting. Largestations, selling more than five million liters per year, havethree years to comply, medium-sized ones four years and small onesfive years. Existing stations selling less than one million litersa year are exempted altogether.  Annual checkups are mandatory;every five years, an independent expert must inspect the system.     At the EC level, an initiative to combat hydrocarbonemissions is taking shape at the European Commission in Brussels.The proposal, which could be ready by the end of this year orearly 1993, would generalize the requirements that Germany andalso The Netherlands (where regulations requiring the installationof vapor recovery systems were recently introduced) are alreadyputting into law.     The plan, which like all legislative proposals would requireapproval by the EC's Council of Ministers before it could enterthe statute book, marks the second stage in a Commission drive toreduce hydrocarbon emissions from the fuel distribution chain.The EC executive launched the first stage in August by proposing adirective3 that seeks to cut emissions of volatile organiccompounds (VOCs) from storage facilities and distribution tankersby 90% over 10 years through use of vapor recovery systems andother measures.     Behind the strategy lie the twin goals of cutting pollutionby low-level ozone and reducing people's exposure to potentiallyharmful localized vapors of benzene and other hydrocarbons.Hydrocarbons are one of the main precursors of ozone, creating theirritant gas when they react in sunlight with nitrous oxides fromvehicle exhausts.     To the chagrin of the oil industry, Brussels has followed theUS's lead in deciding against requiring large carbon canisters tobe fitted on cars.  Vapor recovery systems will be pump-basedinstead.  The Commission's current thinking is to make fuelthroughput, rather than location, the key criterion: large servicestations would be the primary targets for installing vaporrecovery equipment.     A minimum of technical harmonization would also be needed tolay down essential specifications for pump and car equipment andvapor recovery efficiencies.  Whether location will also become acriterion remains to be seen.  An earlier suggestion that stationsin towns of fewer than 50,000 inhabitants should be exempted seemsto have faded.  Germany, with its approach based on the throughputof fuel stations, opposes such exemptions on the grounds thatemissions pose a health risk wherever they occur, Lerach toldEWWE.  In Germany, the location of the gas station plays a roleonly in that stations in more polluted areas (as defined by theLander, or federal states) have one year less to comply.     For more information: Josef Lerach, Bundesministerium furUmwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit, Bernkastelerstrasse 8,5300 Bonn 2, Germany.  Tel: +49 228 305 2424.NOTES     1 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionenbeim Umfullen und Lagern von Ottokraftstoffen (20.Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).     2 Verordnung zur Begrenzung der Kohlenwasserstoffemissionenbei der Betankung von Kraftfahrzeugen (21.Bundesemissionsschutzverordnung).     3 COM(92) 277.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Study Finds Biofuel Drawbacks Outweigh Advantages     A study commissioned by the German Federal Environment Office(Umweltbundesamt), and due to be released soon, comes to theconclusion that the environmental drawbacks of substitutingrapeseed oil for diesel fuel outweigh the advantages, and thatmoney subsidizing rapeseed production could probably be used tomore advantage elsewhere.     The study tries to take a comprehensive look at the differentways in which the use of rapeseed oil would affect theenvironment.  It takes into account emissions of variousgreenhouse gases -- in particular methane and nitrous oxide (N2O),fertilizer use and runoff in rapeseed production, and the extentto which rapeseed production (and the subsidies farmers can obtainfor it) interferes with a government program to let fields liefallow for a certain period to improve the soil.     Its overall conclusion is that while shifting to rapeseed oildoes have environmental benefits, they are too small to warrantsuch a shift.  Subsidies for rapeseed production, says JurgenLandgrebe, the author of the study, could be put to more effectiveuse elsewhere, for example in research on fuel-efficientautomobiles.  This conclusion is not likely to please theagricultural lobby, which considers rapeseed production one way ofhelping West European farmers at a time when they see agriculturalsubsidies in general to be in danger.     Experts at research institutes and in the German EnvironmentMinistry are currently commenting on the study, and challengingsome of the assumptions it is based on.  One main concern is thatthe N2O level that the study's conclusions are based on may be toohigh.  Reliable data on man-made N2O are relatively hard to comeby, compared with other greenhouse gases.     A second study, by Guido Reinhardt of the Institute forEnergy and Environmental Research (IFEU-Institute) in Heidelberg,Germany, focuses specifically on energy and carbon dioxide (CO2)emissions.  Reinhardt, whose study is being published separately,compared the overall amount of energy needed to produce enoughrapeseed oil or diesel to fuel a car for a given distance.  Hisconclusion is that, in terms of energy and CO2 emissions alone,the use of rapeseed oil offers significant environmental benefits,but that, if one wants to take all factors into account, more workneeds to be done.     For more information: Jurgen Landgrebe, Umweltbundesamt,Bismarckplatz 1, 1000 Berlin 33, Germany.  Tel: +49 30 8903 2083.Guido Reinhardt, IFEU (Institut fur Energie- und UmweltforschungHeidelberg GmbH), Wilhelm-Blum-Strasse 12-14, 6900 Heidelberg,Germany.  Tel: +49 6221 47670; Fax: +49 6221 476 719.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992In Britain, Better Pay for Better Water     Severn Trent Water Ltd., a British utility company, has madea deal with its employees that may give them a good reason tocomply with EC directives on water quality -- a persistent problemfor Great Britain -- and cut down on customer complaints.  Twoyears of negotiations between the company and the local unions ledto an agreement -- the first of its kind in the British waterindustry -- under which workers could see pay rises of up to 23%by 1994, provided that the quality of Severn Trent's waterimproves.     The basic annual pay increase for Severn Trent's maintenancestaff is 4%.  On top of that, workers have been promised "qualityperformance" bonuses of 5% in 1993 and 10% in 1994.  The bonusesare contingent upon the company's achieving its targets for waterand sewage treatment and customer services.     Severn Trent will not, however, tie the payments to theresults of water quality tests.  Instead, workers will receive thebonus when the number of customer complaints comes down.According to a Severn Trent spokesperson, "We want the waterpeople drink to be of the best quality.  The only way we know weare achieving this is if we see the number of complaints at aminimum."     Severn Trent employs 10,000 people and supplies water andtreats sewage for over 8 million customers in the BritishMidlands.     For more information: Terry Corner, Industrial RelationsManager, Severn Trent Water Ltd., 2297 Coventry Road, BirminghamB26 3PU, UK.  Tel: +44 21 722 4380.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Denmark Set to Push Carbon Tax, Ignore Packaging Directive in ECPresidency     According to a preliminary list of priorities drawn up by theDanish Environment Ministry, Denmark intends to push for agreementon an EC-wide carbon/energy tax but to cold-shoulder proposals forcommon rules on packaging during its term as president of theCommunity's legislative body, the Council of Ministers, in thefirst half of next year.     Copenhagen is hoping EC environment ministers will approvethe highly controversial carbon/energy tax proposal1 during itssix-month presidency, a goal many will find ambitious given thetechnical complexity of the tax and the political raw nerves ittouches in several countries.  Denmark is eager for the Communityto bring in the tax to help meet its CO2 stabilization goal,without waiting for the US, Japan, and other Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) members to takesimilar measures, as the European Commission has proposed.     Conspicuously absent from the environment ministry's list ofeight priorities is the long-awaited directive on packaging2proposed by the Commission in July.  Denmark is among the memberstates that have criticized the draft proposal, which in itscurrent form would force Copenhagen to scrap its long-standing banon the sale of beverages in cans.     Denmark is, however, hoping the Council will reach agreementon introducing a voluntary eco-auditing scheme for industry3 (seeNews Briefs, page 16) and to approve tighter regulations on tradein endangered species.4     The other issues Denmark plans to work on are:     * A yet to be published proposal establishing a common regimefor integrated pollution prevention and control (see "BATDefinition Changes As EC Permitting Draft Nears Completion" onpage 7);     * A directive seeking to reduce volatile organic compound(VOC) emissions from fuel storage and distribution by 90% over 10years5;     * A directive toughening up emissions standards forincineration of hazardous waste6;     * The European Commission's fifth EC environmental actionprogram,7 and the possible development of further initiatives tocarry out the program; and     * The discussion and possible establishment of procedures tointegrate the concept of sustainable development into all sectorsof policy.     The ministry stresses that the list is tentative and may bechanged, possibly in order to accommodate any issues leftunresolved by Great Britain, the Council president until the endof this year.  However, the ministry considers eight issues themaximum number it can properly deal with over six months.NOTES     1 COM(92) 226.     2 COM(92) 278.     3 COM(91) 459.     4 COM(91) 448.     5 COM(92) 277.     6 COM(92) 9.     7 COM(92) 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Europarliament Committee Wants Pollution Phase-Out Calendar     An influential committee of EC parliamentarians is callingfor the bloc to draw up a timetable for completely phasing outemissions of pesticides, phosphates, nitrates, and otherpollutants.  The demand forms part of a resolution the EuropeanParliament's environment committee has drafted in response to thefifth EC environmental action program proposed by the EuropeanCommission, the Community's executive.  The program, the mainvehicle through which the EC intends to translate the Rio EarthSummit agreements into practice, will run from next year until2000, and seeks to make a start on shifting the Community economytoward environmental sustainability.     The full 518-member Euroassembly is expected to vote nextmonth on the resolution, which the Commission is not obliged toheed.  Spanish Socialist member Carmen Diez de Rivera, who draftedthe resolution, told EWWE the zero emissions calendar was one ofmany long-standing demands of the parliament that had so far beenignored.  Other suggestions in the paper include an EC-widereferendum on nuclear power, creation of a Community inspectorateto make sure environment rules are heeded, a standard tourist taxto fund environmental maintenance of resorts, and payment of partof the revenues from the proposed EC carbon/energy tax into a fundto help developing countries and East European states reduce theircarbon dioxide emissions.     The Community's Council of environment ministers is waitingfor the parliament to approve the resolution before finalizing itsown reaction to the program in December, the last proceduralhurdle to cross before the Commission can start implementing theplan.  The program forms a comprehensive strategy of measures toachieve defined environmental quality targets through cooperationamong all levels of society.     For more information, contact: Carmen Diez de Rivera,European Parliament, 97/113 rue Belliard, 1040 Brussels, Belgium.Tel: +32 2 284 5895.NOTES     1 COM(92) 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992British Look at the Big Environmental Picture     The British government has for the first time published acomprehensive collection of environmental statistics.  UKEnvironment covers a broad range of topics including climate, airquality, waste, soil and land use, water quality, the marineenvironment, coastal erosion, wildlife habitats, and populations.     Not much of the information in the compendium is new, butmuch of it has not been compiled into one reference source before.The publication of the report also fulfills a promise made in theBritish government's 1990 "white paper" on the environment, ThisCommon Inheritance, to make information about the environmentavailable to everyone.  Consequently, much of the information ispresented in the form of charts and maps for the layperson ratherthan detailed tables for the expert.     The report confirms that some environmental standards havedeteriorated.  Since 1980, sulphur dioxide concentrations havedeclined, but carbon monoxide emissions have risen by 30% over thesame period due to an increase in road transport.  For the samereason, nitrogen dioxide emissions have increased by 35% since1986.  CO2 emissions have remained reasonably static over the past10 years, but the relative importance of road transport has alsorisen substantially for this pollutant.     According to the report, accurate figures for the amountspent on protecting the environment do not exist in Great Britain.Nevertheless, the compendium estimates that some 14 billion pounds(US $22.4 billion), or about 2.5% of gross domestic product, wasinvested in environmental protection during 1991.  [Note: As usedin EWWE, the word billion equals thousand million or1,000,000,000.]     According to government estimates, the largest share of this,6.7 billion pounds (US $10.7 billion), went toward waterpurification and river pollution cleanup.  British water suppliersare currently implementing a program of changes required by ECdirectives governing water quality (see "In Britain, Better Payfor Better Water" on page 13).     Three billion British pounds (US $4.8 billion) was spent toreduce pollution arising from all types of waste material.Industry spent a further 2.4 billion pounds (US $3.8 billion) toreduce air emissions, and just under 2 billion pounds (US $3.2billion) went toward land cleanup and noise reduction.     Overall, around 60% of identifiable expenditure, or 8.8billion pounds (US $14 billion), was related to pollutionabatement.  Natural resource management took 24% and amenityimprovement 8%.  Less than 10% in total was spent on conservation,research, development, education, and training.     Copies of UK Environment, published by the British Departmentof the Environment, can be obtained from the British governmentpublisher, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.  Tel: +44 71 622 3316.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Environment Budget Up in Spain, Down in Italy     The Spanish Ministry for Public Works and Transport (which isalso in charge of environmental affairs) projects a 30% increase(over 1992) in Spain's environment budget for next year.  For1993, Vicente Albero, general secretary for water and theenvironment, will have a total amount of 160 billion pesetas (US$1.5 billion) to spend.  Water plays a major role in theallocation of those funds; substantial amounts will go towardcoastal improvements, the improvement of wastewater systems, and anew water management and protection plan.     If approved, this plan would create protected areas for allrivers, and would also set water prices to reflect the cost oftreating wastewater.  According to a recently released governmentreport, more than 100 Spanish rivers are -- at least in part --extremely polluted, groundwater is overexploited, and 40% of allSpanish reservoirs are entropied.  Under the proposed water pricepolicy, however, consumers in the driest and least-developedregions of Spain (which use the largest amounts of water) wouldhave to pay the most, a fact that has already provoked negativeresponses from consumers as well as some parliamentarians.     At the same time, the Department of Nature Conservation(Instituto Conservacion de la Naturaleza) within the Ministry ofAgriculture plans to invest more than 5 billion pesetas (US $48million) in the maintenance of Spain's nine national parks.  TheMinistry of Industry and Tourism, for its part, expects to investa total of 48 billion pesetas (US $457 million) in a program thatprovides, among other things, for grants to local administrationsand tourist industry companies that want to improve theirenvironmental performance.  Tourism is a key industry in Spain,and surveys have shown that environmental quality is important tovisitors from abroad.     In Italy, meanwhile, the environment budget seems set to godown by as much as three quarters, as the country is experiencingmajor economic and institutional problems.  This, at least, is thecabinet proposal that the Italian Parliament is currentlydiscussing.  If the budget is approved in its present form, fundsfor energy efficiency and renewable energy programs underEnvironment Laws 9 and 10 will be trimmed substantially; fundsearmarked for a CFC phaseout and the stabilization of greenhousegases would also suffer.  In the area of public transportation,the development of high-speed trains, which connect major cities,would continue to be funded, while funds for local publictransportation are expected to go down.  At the same time, no cutshave been proposed in the area of road building and roadtransport.     Substantial budget cuts will not help Italy's new environmentminister, Carlo Ripa di Meana, who has to accomplish three majortasks: reorganize the Ministry of the Environment, badlyunderstaffed given its tasks and compared with other ministries;improve Italy's system of enforcement of environmentalregulations;  and fight for funds.  In the latter area, at least,there may be two partial solutions.  For one thing, Ripa di Meanahas managed to retrieve funds that his predecessor, GiorgioRuffolo, did not spend; normally, such funds would go back to theTreasury.  The 30% left over from last year's budget will now beavailable in addition to this year's budget.  Ripa di Meana isalso considering the introduction of "green" taxes and charges(for example on land use), and the setting of fees for water useand waste management to reflect their actual cost.  Revenue fromthese sources may also help offset budget losses.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992Norway Proposes Green Troops for Environmental Cleanup     The Norwegian government has announced a preliminary plan toestablish an elite force of "green troops" to fight national andinternational environmental disasters.  The troops would be drawnfrom the regular Norwegian army and would be trained to deal withoil spills, natural disasters, and nuclear disasters, and to leadpost-war cleanup efforts.     Gabriel Lund, secretary of the joint defense-environmentministerial working group that proposed the new program, toldEWWE's sister publication, the Global Environmental Change Report(GECR), that the government will hold a hearing to discuss theplan on 16 November 1992 and will publish its decision inDecember.  The plan must then be approved by Parliament.     Lund told GECR that troops would be deployed in two majorunits: an emergency unit of 500 to 600 soldiers, prepared torespond to any disaster within 48 hours, and a follow-up force of1,100 that would be involved in longer-term cleanup efforts.  Lundsaid that international requests for green troop assistance wouldbe handled through diplomatic channels and cleared with the UN.     For more information, contact the Norwegian Defense MinistryInformation Office.  Tel: +47 2 402 300 or +47 2 402 310.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992NEWS BRIEFS:     Former EC Commissioner for the Environment Carlo Ripa diMeana is threatening to set up a European environment agency withnon-EC countries unless the bloc's leaders agree at their Decembersummit in Edinburgh on where to site the currently homeless ECEnvironment Agency.  The colorful Ripa, who now heads Italy'senvironment ministry, exploded when his French and Spanishcounterparts blocked attempts to get agreement on a location forthe agency at the EC environment ministers' recent meeting inLuxembourg.  He also indicated that Italy and France would sooncome forward with new initiatives for reducing carbon dioxideemissions...  Officials say prospects have improved that ECenvironment ministers will agree in December to create a voluntaryscheme to encourage eco-auditing by industry after Germany did notrenew threats to block the initiative...  Belgium'sFrench-speaking Green party has put forward detailed proposals foreco-taxes on packaging, throw-away razors, pesticides, andnon-recycled paper, but an agreement in principle, reached on theissue by the country's major parties this summer, now seems indoubt...Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WATCH: WESTERN EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 23, 1992HOTLINE:     Contact the EWWE Hotline for more information on any newsitem covered in this issue.  Tel: +1 617 641 5128 (Boston); +32 2230 8978 (Brussels).  Fax: +1 617 648 8707 (Boston); +32 2 2308558 (Brussels).Back to Headline List WT02-B37-4IA086-000616-B016-189http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002536 text/html 58613HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:23:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:11 GMTContent-length: 58426Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev25.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNet February 8, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GREENHOUSE DISPUTE CLOSES THE CURTAIN ON BUSH'S ENVIRONMENTAL HONEYMOON (NEWS ANALYSIS) (842 words) NEW EPA RULE THREATENS VIRGINIA COAL PROJECTS (500 words) SRP: AN ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PARK? (358 words) DOE LOOKS TO VITRIFY ITS WASTE PROBLEMS AT THE SAVANNAH RIVER FACILITY (864 words) NSWMA APPEALS ALABAMA HAZARDOUS WASTE COURT CASE (375 words) SENATE ENERGY HEARS KEY DOE NOMINEES (161 words) CRAY WINS $66 MILLION SUPERCOMPUTER CONTRACT (62 words) STATE RECYCLING FUNDING TO CLIMB IN 1990 (54 words) USDA EARMARKS WATER QUALITY R&D FUNDS (73 words) NATURE CONSERVANCY BUYS GRAY RANCH (109 words) QUOTABLE (75 words) LUKEN ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT, DECISION LIKELY TO INFLUENCE RCRA DEBATE (96 words) HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TIGHTER STANDARDS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION (78 words) JONTZ LAUDS BUSH FORESTRY PROPOSAL (208 words) DELAWARE'S ROTH PUSHES `CLUNKER' INCENTIVE FOR EPA (422 words) LOCAL ANGLE TOPS ENVIRONMENT AGENDA (623 words) EPA TARGETS PESTICIDE CONTAINERS: Farmer cooperation tops 90 percent (466 words) COALITION URGES $1 BILLION LAND PURCHASE PROGRAM (358 words) MARCH CALENDAR OF ENVIRONMENT EVENTS (789 words) ********BEYOND THE BELTWAY: NEWS FROM THE STATES******** ARIZONA (97 words) NEW JERSEY (81 words) PENNSYLVANIA (64 words) MARYLAND (54 words) CONNECTICUT (142 words) NEBRASKA (106 words) PENNSYLVANIA (101 words) ILLINOIS (61 words) TECHNOLOGY POLICY IN THE 1990s: THE SHIFT FROM MILITARY TO CIVILIAN TECHNOLOGIES, A CONFERENCE (308 words) WARNING (72 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990GREENHOUSE DISPUTE CLOSES THE CURTAIN ON BUSH'S ENVIRONMENTALHONEYMOON (NEWS ANALYSIS)by Dennis WamstedThe tenuous year-old truce between President Bush and theenvironmental community was breached, perhaps irreparably, thisweek as long-simmering differences between the two sides onglobal warming, the pending reauthorization of the Clean Air Actand Bush's no-net-loss policy on wetlands all surfaced in heatedpublic disagreements. The spark for the public split was thepresident's speech before the meeting of the IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change (IPCC) here in Washington.In his speech, Bush stressed the U.S.' commitment to the IPCCprocess and "aggressive and thoughtful action on environmentalissues." As part of this commitment, Bush announced his intentionto host a White House conference on science and economic researchon the environment. In addition, the president reminded thedelegates of the U.S.' budgetary commitment to environmentalprotection. The new budget includes more than $2 billion in newspending for environmental protection, he said, with $1 billionearmarked specifically for the U.S. Global Change ResearchProgram."That commitment, by far the largest ever made by any nation,reflects our determination to improve our understanding of thescience of global change," Bush said. "We are working with ourneighbors around the world to enhance global monitoring and datamanagement, improve analysis, reduce the uncertainty ofpredictive models and conduct regular reassessments of the stateof science."Beyond this global climate change R&D initiative, theadministration has "already taken many steps...that bring botheconomic and environmental research. Steps that make sense ontheir own merits in terms of responsibility and efficiency, whichhelp reduce emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and carbon dioxideand other pollutants now entering the atmosphere."Still, the president refused to endorse immediate action tofreeze or reduce carbon dioxide emissions, the principalgreenhouse gas, in an effort to slow the projected rise in globaltemperatures in the next 50 years or so. "You're called upon todeliver recommendations which strike a difficult yet criticalinternational bargain: a convergence between global environmentalpolicy and global economic policy," Bush told the IPCC delegates."Human activities are changing the atmosphere in unexpected andin unprecedented ways," Bush continued, but many questions remainunanswered. "Together, we have a responsibility to ourselves andthe generations to come to fulfill our stewardship obligations.But that responsibility demands that we do it right."Some may be tempted to exploit legitimate concerns for politicalpositioning," Bush added, concluding: "Our responsibility is tomaintain the quality of our approach, our commitment to soundscience and an open mind to policy options."Bush's refusal to call for immediate action was assailed by theenvironmental representatives at the IPCC meeting. Thepresident's speech "was just a lot of hot air," said Dan Becker,the director of the Sierra Club's Global Warming & EnergyProgram. Bush's promise to plant a billion trees a year in theU.S. is akin to throwing sponges into Prince William Sound toclean up the oil spilled by the Exxon Valdez tanker. "Sununuwon," Becker added, referring to the intra-administration debateregarding global warming in which Sununu has taken the go-slowapproach.The speech had "no new direction, no substantive steps" to attackthe global warming problem, added Brooks Yeager, vice presidentof government relations for the National Audubon Society, whosaid that the environmental community had hoped Bush wouldendorse a CO2 reduction policy. Instead, the administrationcontinues to oppose even the automotive CO2 emissions standardincluded in the Senate's version of the pending Clean Air Actreauthorization. A national policy on CO2 reductions must be thefirst order of business, continued Rafe Pomerance, who isaffiliated with the World Resources Institute.These concerns were echoed by a number of the environmentalcommunity's strongest supporters in Congress. The president'sspeech was disappointing, Sen. Tim Wirth (D-Colo.) said. "Weought to be doing a lot more right now," he said after Bush'spresentation, citing in particular the need for additionalemphasis on energy efficiency measures, alternative fuels andpopulation control. I am concerned that the administrationappears "unable to move forward."Later, in a speech on the Senate floor, Wirth urged hiscolleagues to act--even if the administration refuses tocooperate. "It bewilders me why we do not take a leadership role.It bewilders me why the steps that are so obvious to be taken arenot begin taken."Wirth's comments were seconded by Sen. Joe Lieberman (D-Conn.),who blasted Bush for his inaction. "Having shed his alleged wimpimage in the conduct of foreign affairs, the business ofresurrecting that wimp image in the conduct of our environmentalpolicy."Similar concerns were broached this week regarding theadministration's commitment to clean air. "[Bush] has abandonedhis commitment to clean air for all Americans and even threatenedto veto the bipartisan compromise...now pending in the Senate,"Richard Ayres, the chairman of the National Clean Air Coalitionsaid in a statement. "The administration is attempting to force aback-room negotiation aimed at eliminating every singleimprovement the Environment Committee made in the administrationbill."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEW EPA RULE THREATENS VIRGINIA COAL PROJECTSby Kennedy MaizeA unilateral decision by EPA Region III regarding PSD orprevention of significant deterioration requirements for newcoal-fired generating facilities, "unless quickly corrected, willdelay and may prevent the development of generating capacityneeded for continued reliable electric service in Virginia,"Daniel Bird, Virginia's Coal and Energy Commission chairman,warned in a letter to Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) late last month.In addition, Bird wrote, the region, which covers Virginia, isbeing tougher on pollution control technologies than Region IV,which covers North Carolina. As a result, "investment ingenerating projects and the resulting employment and economicbenefits may shift from Virginia to North Carolina."According to Bird, prior EPA policy based air modeling for thePSD program, which governs the construction of new pollutionsources in clean air areas, on the assumption that sources wouldemit at their historic rates. But EPA unilaterally decided thatmodeling should instead be based on the maximum allowable rate."This policy change was made without notice to the public and didnot become apparent until project developers began filing airpermit applications during 1989," wrote Bird. "In March of 1989,EPA advised the states that modeling on the basis of allowableemissions would be required by October 1989."Bird noted that many cases in Virginia show that "a wide gulfexists between actual and maximum allowable emissions. Therefore,EPA's shift in policy represented a drastic change that wouldbecome effective while a number of projects that had been plannedand sited under the previous policy were in the process ofdevelopment."Bird said he understands the reason for the EPA shift: The agencyhas no assurance that emitters will not increase emissions. ButBird wants EPA to come up with a transitional approach that doesnot harm projects started under the old rules. "I would emphasizethat the commission does not quarrel with EPA's apparentobjective," Bird continued. "However, this rule's unnecessarilylarge impacts and the lack of adequate notice...requires a promptadjustment in this policy."Bird also said EPA Region III is "unduly aggressive" inimplementing "Best Available Control Technology" (BACT)requirements. The EPA region, Bird wrote, "appears to be seekingtechnologies providing 95 to 99 percent SO2 removal that have notbeen adequately demonstrated to be effective and economic for thesame type of generating unit." But Region IV next door is notrequiring such stringent removal levels, Bird added.Region III's ardor, said Bird, is also out of step with the BushAdministration's proposals to cap sulfur dioxide emissions andrequire offsets for new units. "Assuming that a cap is retained,"Bird wrote, "total SO2 emissions will be controlled regardless ofhow BACT requirements are applied." With caps, Bird argued, "nopurpose is served by forcing developers to a higher level ofcontrol on new units than they consider economic. On thecontrary, a key principle underlying the president's proposals isthat the control be achieved at the lowest cost."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990SRP: AN ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH PARK?by Danialle WeaverAIKEN, South Carolina--The Department of Energy's Savannah Riverfacility, located on 192,000 acres of reforested farmland inwestern South Carolina, is a study in contrasts.The site boasts state-of-the-art waste processing technology inthe Defense Waste Processing Facility (see story on page two), anearly complete facility that will render millions of gallons ofdeadly defense wastes into a harmless glass matrix. At the sametime, the site serves as home to a weapons production technologylittle changed in nearly four decades.Like many of DOE's other weapons facilities, the site has beendesignated a National Environmental Research Park that serves asa refuge for five endangered species, including four birdspecies--bald eagles, wood storks, red cockaded woodpeckers andperegrine falcons--and one fish species, the short-nosedsturgeon.The Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, operated on the site bythe University of Georgia, has a large environmental monitoringeffort to study the long-term health of the site's wildlife. Infact, because the site's 320 square miles represent a virtualoasis of greenery compared to the surrounding cropland, the DOEfacility is an excellent place to study the effects of geneticisolation and natural selection in closed populations.At the same time, the site also contains damnable examples ofenvironmental practices that have long since been disavowed,notably seepage basins used for the land disposal of liquid low-level wastes and low-level solid waste buried directly into theground.One of the site's Carolina Bays--formed when the glaciers of theice age receded--was formerly home for several typical SouthCarolina species of flora and fauna, including Venus flytraps andalligators. But heavy metals and volatile organics, such astrichloroethylene, from the nearby seepage basins seriouslycontaminated the bay, which is now nicknamed "Lost Lake" byworkers at Savannah River.Environmental restoration activities, including removing severalfeet of lake mud and draining some of the lake water, havehelped, and life is slowly returning to Lost Lake. Seepage basinsand low level waste burial grounds are being cleaned up, cappedwith a clay cap impermeable to rainwater and covered with newvegetation.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990DOE LOOKS TO VITRIFY ITS WASTE PROBLEMS AT THE SAVANNAH RIVERFACILITYby Danialle WeaverAIKEN, South Carolina--In 1992, workers at the Department ofEnergy's Savannah River site hope to write a new and hopefulchapter in the long history of the U.S. struggle to find ways tosafely store the nation's most deadly radioactive waste for thethousands of years it remains hazardous to human life and theenvironment.The solution, says Lucien Papouchado, manager of waste managementprograms at Savannah River for Westinghouse Savannah RiverCompany, lies in vitrifying or glassifying the waste. Similartechnology has already been successfully adopted in France andBelgium.Although several waste vitrification facilities are slated tobegin operations in the U.S. in the 1990s and beyond, SavannahRiver's $1.2 billion Defense Waste Processing Facility isscheduled to come on-line first. The wastes generated by nearly40 years of plutonium and tritium production at the site accountfor 56 percent of the radioactivity in DOE's inventory of high-level defense waste, according to recent estimates by the GeneralAccounting Office.It took "15 years of R&D" to come up with the processes that willbe used at the DWPF, said Richard Begley, director of theSavannah River Laboratory and a vice president for WestinghouseSavannah River Company, the facility's operating contractor.Bechtel served as architect-engineer for the facility andMorrison-Knudsen served as the primary construction contractor.Groundbreaking was held in late 1983.Westinghouse and DOE plan to begin a series of "cold" processingruns with simulated radioactive waste in September. Once thefacility begins operating, it will take approximately 15 years tovitrify the 34 million gallons of liquid high-level waste alreadystored at Savannah River.The majority of DOE's liquid high-level defense waste isgenerated in the process of recovering the uranium and plutoniumfrom the reactors' spent fuel rods. Before they ever reach thevitrification facility, spent fuel rods are soaked in nitric acidto dissolve the cladding. Then, the fuel itself is dissolved inan aqueous solution of nitric acid, and an organic solvent isused to separate the nitrates of uranium and plutonium from thefission products.Before the waste is placed in storage tanks, the acid isneutralized with sodium hydroxide, and the radioactive elementssettle in a thick sludge on the bottom of the tanks. The liquidon top, called supernate, makes up about 90 percent of the wasteand consists of sodium nitrate and sodium nitrite.The supernate, or salt solution, will then be evaporated at theSavannah River saltstone facility, which is expected to start upthis year. The remaining "saltcake" will be treated to removecesium-137 and strontium, which will then be sent to the DWPF.The saltcake will be mixed with cement, fly ash and furnace slagand then pumped into a concrete storage vault, where it will cureinto a stable concrete. After the vault is filled, it will becapped with clean concrete and backfilled with earth to isolateit from rain and weathering.At the vitrification facility, the waste will first be treatedwith chemicals to remove the mercury introduced duringreprocessing. Then, the waste will be mixed with groundborosilicate glass, fed into a melter and heated to 2,100 degreesFahrenheit. The melter is designed to turn a gallon of the wasteslurry into about four pounds of glassified waste at a rate of228 pounds per hour. It will take about 16 hours to fill onecanister 85 percent full, according to Steve Sheetz, a seniorWestinghouse engineer.Particles will be scrubbed from the waste gases generated by themelter by water that is shot out of scrubber nozzles at very highspeed, trapping radioactive particles and separating them fromthe gases. Any remaining particles will be caught by highefficiency filters and a bed of sand.From the melter, the waste will flow into stainless steelcanisters that are 10 feet high, 2 feet in diameter, and 3/8-inchthick. The canisters, which weigh about 1,100 pounds empty, willweigh approximately 4,800 pounds when filled, according toSheetz. The canisters hold about 3,700 lb. of glass. A temporaryplug will then be inserted, and the canisters decontaminated toDepartment of Transportation standards using a slurry of groundglass, Sheetz continued. Once they are decontaminated, thecanisters will be permanently sealed with a steel plug forced inplace by 70,000 pounds of hydraulic pressure. A 23,000 ampcurrent will then be applied to the plug for about two seconds,resulting in a weld "far superior" than those from conventionalwelding techniques, Sheetz said.The canisters will then be transferred to a temporary glass wastestorage building, which Sheetz manages, where they will be storedin below-ground concrete vaults until they can be shipped to afederal repository.All major operations at the facility will be performed by remotecontrol. Before equipment was installed in the facility,engineers created full-scale mock-ups of the equipment to ensurethat it could be maintained and repaired via remote control.Equipment can be removed and replaced using an overhead crane orrepaired in place using mechanical arms placed at strategiclocations along the walls of the facility.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NSWMA APPEALS ALABAMA HAZARDOUS WASTE COURT CASEThe National Solid Wastes Management Association has appealed afederal District Court ruling that upheld Alabama's controversialhazardous waste disposal legislation, the association announcedlate last month. The court, in a January 12 ruling, upheld a lawthat enables the state to ban shipments of hazardous waste fromstates that do not have waste disposal facilities of their own.NSWMA General Counsel Bruce Parker challenged the logic used bythe court in its ruling. "The issue of whether or not states havecomplied with federal law to deal with their own hazardous wastescannot be used as independent grounds for allowing a state likeAlabama to violate the Constitution," Parker said, adding: "It isour belief that the January 12 opinion did not address all of thelegal points we challenged in our suit and it improperly appliedsome basic tenants of constitutional law."The association is also concerned about the decision's impact onthe much-delayed Superfund clean-up program, Parker continued."We are sympathetic with Alabama's concerns that other states maynot have completed the required hazardous waste capacityassurance process, but we can not allow Alabama to violate theConstitution in an attempt to force other states to develop theirown hazardous waste management plans."The association and Chemical Waste Management Inc., the owner ofthe Emelle disposal facility affected by the decision and a jointparty to the lawsuit, filed their appeal with the Eleventh U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta, along with a request for anexpedited briefing and hearing schedule.The court's decision could have a negative impact on ChemicalWaste Management's stock, Debra Coy, an analyst with WashingtonAnalyst Corporation, warned in a recent issue of `CapitalComments.' To date, the decision has not hurt the company's stockprice, Coy wrote. "However, we believe there's a good chance thedecision could be upheld, setting a precedent for other statesthat want to restrict imports of waste, both solid and hazardous.We also believe there could be an impact on landfill earnings ifsome of the waste banned from the site is diverted tocompetitors' landfills. We believe the recent courtdecision...may be more worrisome to Chemical Waste Managementthan most industry analysts have anticipated."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990SENATE ENERGY HEARS KEY DOE NOMINEESTwo Department of Energy nominees received a friendly receptionfrom members of the Senate Energy & Natural Resources Committeeduring a joint confirmation hearing on Monday.Highlighting his technical training, managerial capability andpublic service experience, John Bartlett, nominated as directorof DOE's Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, pledged"open, frequent and effective interactions with Congress" andsaid he "hopes to achieve respect for DOE's management" of thewaste program during his tenure. Before becoming a DOE consultantin November 1989, Bartlett directed energy and environment workfor The Analytic Sciences Corporation of Reading, Massachusetts.Robert Gentile, nominated to become DOE's assistant secretary forFossil Energy, told the committee: "We're entering a new era inwhich environmental rhetoric is being replaced by environmentalaction yet we must at the same time be assured of an adequatesupply of energy at reasonable costs." Gentile was previously thedirector of the Department of the Interior's Office of SurfaceMining.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990CRAY WINS $66 MILLION SUPERCOMPUTER CONTRACTCray Research has won a contract from the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration to supply the agency with twosupercomputers in a deal valued at $66.1 million over five years.Cray will be paid $10.7 million this year for the supercomputersystems. The two machines will be used to improve computercapability at the agency's National Meterological Center nearWashington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990STATE RECYCLING FUNDING TO CLIMB IN 1990Twenty states have budgeted more than $900 million to fundrecycling programs over the next two years, according to a surveycompiled by Recycling Times, which is published by the NationalSolid Wastes Management Association. The funding includes nearly$600 million earmarked by the state of California to boost itsin-state recycling efforts.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990USDA EARMARKS WATER QUALITY R&D FUNDSThe U.S. Department of Agriculture has earmarked more than $17million for programs aimed at improving water quality inagricultural watershed areas in 37 states, Agriculture SecretaryClayton Yeutter announced last month. "This is a part of USDA'saccelerated water quality effort for the 1990s and active supportof the president's 1990 Water Quality Initiative," Yeutter said."We're scheduling 37 hydrologic units areas this year andanticipate another 37 areas in 1991."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NATURE CONSERVANCY BUYS GRAY RANCHThe Nature Conservancy has purchased the 321,703-acre Gray Ranchin southwestern New Mexico, the Arlington, Virginia-basedorganization announced last week. The purchase, for anundisclosed amount, of the 502.6-square-mile parcel is believedto be the largest private land acquisition in conservationhistory. "The purchase of Gray Ranch is a milestone inconservation history," said John Sawhill, the incoming presidentof the Conservancy. "Few intact natural systems of this caliberexist in the world today. The Gray Ranch also represents thefuture trend for The Nature Conservancy and its partners. Totruly insure our natural world for future generations, we aredeveloping creative ways to safeguard much larger landscapes."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990QUOTABLE"If we put a roadblock in front of exporting to countries likeCanada, it's going to have to come to places like Alabama. Wehave enough waste in Alabama. We don't want anymore. We want itto go somewhere else."--Rep. Sonny Callahan (R-Ala.) speaking at the first hearing thisyear before the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee ontransportation and hazardous materials regarding reauthorizationof the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990LUKEN ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT, DECISION LIKELY TO INFLUENCE RCRADEBATERep. Thomas Luken (D-Ohio), the chairman of the House Energy andCommerce transportation and hazardous materials subcommittee,announced late last month that he would not seek reelection thisfall. The announcement, which was something of a surprise, couldhave a significant impact on reauthorization of the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act, which is now pending beforeLuken's subcommittee.The 64-year-old's decision to retire will open a coveted seat onthe Energy and Commerce Committee when the 102nd Congressconvenes next year. Chairmanship of Luken's subcommittee willlikely be assumed by Rep. Al Swift (D-Wash.).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TIGHTER STANDARDS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALSTRANSPORTATIONThe House Energy and Commerce transportation and hazardousmaterials subcommittee last week unanimously approved legislation(H.R. 3520) that would tighten existing regulations on thetransportation of hazardous wastes. The bill would authorize thehiring of 200 additional federal inspectors to enforce the newregulations, which would require the Department of Transportationto register companies that ship hazardous waste and requirecompanies that haul extremely hazardous material, such asradioactive wastes and poisons, to obtain federal safetypermits.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990JONTZ LAUDS BUSH FORESTRY PROPOSALThe Bush Administration's plan to plant one billion trees at acost of $175 million should be linked with a reduction in thenumber of trees cut on public lands in the Pacific Northwest,Rep. Jim Jontz (D-Ind.) said last week. "With the president'sproposal, trees are finally receiving the attention they deserveas the most cost-effective means of addressing the global warmingproblem," Jontz said. "But to be responsible stewards of ournation's environment, we must also take steps to stop thedestruction of our remaining old growth ancient forests. It isironic that at the same time the president proposes to do abetter job replanting trees where they were once cut, we areliquidating our most magnificent forests faster than everbefore."Jontz, a member of the House Agriculture forests, family farmsand energy subcommittee, is the sponsor of legislation (H.R.2144) that would significantly boost federal support for urbanforestry initiatives. The bill, which passed the House inNovember and is now pending before the Senate AgricultureCommittee, would establish a matching fund plan for urban areasinterested in setting up forestry programs. The fund would giveinterested urban areas a dollar in federal money for every dollarraised from local sources.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990DELAWARE'S ROTH PUSHES `CLUNKER' INCENTIVE FOR EPASen. William Roth (R-Del.) introduced legislation (S. 2049) lastweek that would authorize the Environmental Protection Agency toprovide incentives to remove pre-1980 model year automobiles fromthe country's highways. There are roughly 22 million cars stillon the road dating from before 1980, Roth said, and these autosare "some of the biggest polluters on our nation's highways."Overall, there are roughly nine million cars dating from before1975 and another 13 million from the 1976-1979 model years.Together, these two groups emit 1.1 million tons of hydrocarbonsa year--or somewhere between 15 percent and 30 percent of thetotal annual automobile-generated hydrocarbon emissions."In fact," Roth continued, "I have heard estimates run as highas 40 percent when one considers evaporative losses and otherlosses, and it has been stated that about 60 percent of thetransportation-sector hydrocarbon emissions in southernCalifornia come from clunkers."The clean air legislation pending in the Senate ignores thiscrucial source of pollution, Roth said, adding that his billwould amend this shortcoming. The incentives in the DelawareRepublican's bill would focus principally on the existingCorporate Average Fuel Economy or CAFE system. Specifically, thelegislation would give the manufacturers of newer automobilescredits under the CAFE program whenever a post-1980 model wassold to an individual trading in a pre-1980 automobile. Toqualify for this credit, which would be based on the differencein gas mileage between the two automobiles, the manufacturerwould have to prove that the engine block and body of the oldercar have been permanently removed from the road. Fines forcompanies that do not comply would total $2,000 per car.The legislation would be beneficial to all parties, Roth said."I can foresee a scenario where the owners of these clunkersbecome valuable customers when they drive onto the new car lotlooking for a new fuel efficient, low-polluting car." Forexample, a manufacturer could receive a CAFE credit of some 30miles per gallon (mpg) if a customer trades in an older vehiclegetting just 10 mpg for a newer one at 40 mpg. Further, dependingon the size of the CAFE credit, part of the bonus could beearmarked for the buyer to reduce the cost of the newautomobile."Consequently, the bill is good for everyone--for themanufacturer, the retailer, the owner, but most importantly, forthe environment. We need to encourage more fuel efficient, saferenvironmentally sound methods of transportation. This would be avery good beginning," Roth concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990LOCAL ANGLE TOPS ENVIRONMENT AGENDAby John EganHOUSTON--When it comes to the environment, many Americans seem tohave adopted an "out of sight, out of mind" attitude, accordingto a nationwide survey commissioned by Cambridge Energy ResearchAssociates. A majority of those polled said they would help fundlocal environmental issues, but far fewer people would be readyto fund more geographically diffuse and intangible issues likeacid rain and global warming, adds the report, released here onMonday in conjunction with CERA's annual executive meeting.The study, `Energy and the Environment: The New Landscape ofPolitical Opinion,' was conducted by Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Opinion Dynamics Corp. for CERA.Mandatory recycling was favored by 88 percent of the 1,250 peoplequestioned in the survey. About 81 percent supported a ban onnon-biodegradable products, while 58 percent wanted to encouragemass transit use by strictly limiting the amount of automotiveparking in cities.Six out of ten of the respondents would "definitely" pay a one-time $50 fee to help protect the nation's wildlife and wildernesslands, according to the study. About 54 percent would also paythe same-size tariff to clean up polluted water, while 50 percentsaid they would dig into their pockets to help dispose ofhazardous chemicals and toxic wastes."The environmental consensus will be a major factor in the futureAmerican political and business landscape," Daniel Yergin, CERA'spresident, told a press conference where he unveiled the study."The popular-based support for environmental improvement cutsacross traditional demographic, partisan and ideologicaldivisions of American society, and could translate into far-reaching political and economic consequences."But while the public thinks the environment is important, otherissues are more pressing: Approximately 53 percent of thosesurveyed said the U.S. government should spend more to battledrug abuse. Uncle Sam should also spend more on public education,according to 42 percent of those polled. By contrast, 40 percentsupported spending more to safely dispose of dangerous chemicalsand wastes, while only 28 supported spending more to clean thenation's air.As the issues covered by the survey became more global and lesstangible, fewer people said they would be willing to dig intotheir pockets to support remediation efforts. Specifically, onlyone-third of those surveyed would "definitely" give the U.S.government $50 to counter either the greenhouse effect or acidrain, according to the study. About 35 percent of thosequestioned would give $50 to help solve municipal solid wastedisposal problems, while 37 percent were willing to fund programsto counter ozone depletion. Slightly under half those surveyedwould spend $50 to help solve the nuclear waste disposal problem.Nearly 20 percent of the respondents said they would refuse topay extra for efforts to curb diffuse problems like acid rain andthe greenhouse effect. By contrast, only about 10 percent ofthose surveyed categorically refused to spend more of their moneyon visible issues like protecting wildlife or cleaning up waterpollution.Respondents differentiated between open-ended and one-timetariffs. By a two-to-one margin they opposed cutting pollutionthrough a 50 cent per gallon gasoline tax. A majority alsorejected a 25 cent per gallon gasoline tax. "Open-ended taxeswith no dollar limits to be used for purposes only broadly andvaguely defined do not win support from most Americans as anacceptable price tag on environmental improvement," the reportwarned.Sixty-two percent of those surveyed believe that economic growthand environmental clean-up can go hand-in-hand. If the economyand the environment were locked in a zero-sum struggle, 74percent would choose to have slower growth and a cleanerenvironment. Only 16 percent of those queried would chooseeconomic growth over a cleaner environment.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990EPA TARGETS PESTICIDE CONTAINERS: Farmer cooperation tops 90percentby Paul KemezisA successful pilot program to clean up and recycle pesticidecontainers in Washington County, Mississippi could lead tosimilar programs in several states, according to EnvironmentalProtection Agency officials familiar with the program.Small, state-sponsored container collection efforts already existin Oregon and Maine, but a large-scale recycling program hadnever been tried before in a densely farmed region. In addition,the Mississippi pilot program was the first time that pressurizedspray cleaners were used and the empty high-density polyethylenecontainers were sold for recycling, according to Robert Denny,EPA's pesticide program manager.Iowa is currently considering a statewide program and otherstates, including North Dakota and Minnesota, have also expressedinterest in the pilot program's results. EPA, which provided$80,000 for the Mississippi program, may allocate additionalfunds from its special projects budget for similar programs,Denny told Environment Week.Washington County, which is located in a major cotton growingregion bordering the Mississippi River, launched the project inthe summer of 1989 to prevent used containers with pesticideresidues from being discarded in landfills, burned or simplythrown in ditches. Farmers were given high pressure cleaningequipment donated by ICI Americas Inc., and urged to flush thecontainers and retain the pesticide residue to spray on fields.After they were cleaned, the metal and plastic containers were tobe deposited at eight collection centers.Mississippi Agriculture Dept. officials who ran the program saythe results were surprisingly good. All told, the departmentcollected 52,000 plastic containers and 48,000 pounds of metalcans. Using a heavy publicity campaign including video tapes,slide shows and local television ads, they estimate that theyachieved a 90 percent recovery rate. The program was totallyvoluntary.EPA's Denny says a principal goal of the program was to test theresults of the pressure rinsing, which has been shown to be 600times more effective in removing residues than traditional triplerinsing. The rinsing is particularly important because itprovides a cleaner product to sell to recyclers. Nevertheless,use of the recycled plastic is still somewhat restricted becauseof its previous pesticide contact.Robert McCarty, deputy director of plant industry with thestate's Agriculture Dept., says the Washington County programwill continue next year using remaining EPA funds. The departmentwill also ask the legislature to fund a statewide program. Whilethe program generates some revenue from the sale of recycledmaterials, it is not planned as a profit-making venture.Notwithstanding the success of the pilot program, Denny says itwill be up to individual states to initiate and fund large-scaleprograms. EPA plans to help by developing rules regardingcontainer shapes in order to make cleaning easier and also onwhat can be used to construct the containers.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990COALITION URGES $1 BILLION LAND PURCHASE PROGRAMCongress should make better use of the billions of dollarsauthorized for the Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF) toacquire environmentally sensitive land and to create new publicrecreation areas, a coalition of 20 national conservation groupsrecommended in a report released last week. During the 1980s, thecoalition said, the unappropriated balance in the conservationfund climbed from zero to more than $7 billion as the ReaganAdministration consistently failed to appropriate the fundsavailable. "During the 25th anniversary year of the Land andWater Conservation Fund, we believe it is time to renew ourcommitment to present and future generations through theappropriation of $999 million in fiscal year 1991," the heads ofthe 20 groups wrote in a cover letter accompanying the report.Specifically, the coalition proposed spending: *  $253.05 million for land acquisition activities by the U.S.    Fish and Wildlife Service; *  $249.18 million for the National Park Service; *  $242.98 million for the U.S. Forest Service; *  $200 million for state grants; and *  $54.15 million for the Bureau for Land Management;The LWCF, which was signed into law by former president Johnson,is composed primarily of revenues raised from leasing activity onthe Outer Continental Shelf and royalties associated with OCS oiland gas production.The coalition's report identifies lands in 46 states, theDistrict of Columbia and four U.S. territories that should bepurchased during the coming fiscal year. In crafting itssuggestions for land purchases, the coalition focused particularattention on areas where there is a serious threat to land, wateror wildlife; willing sellers; existing acquisition efforts; andexisting or expected court orders that will require the federalgovernment to compensate landowners."During the fund's silver anniversary, we should be bold enoughto invest the $1 billion proposed in 1987 by President Reagan'sCommission of Americans Outdoors," urged Wilderness Societypresident George Frampton in releasing the report. "Every daythere is less open space left in America, and unless we actquickly, many of the natural treasures that our report recommendsfor purchase will be gobbled up by subdivisions and otherspeculators."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990MARCH CALENDAR OF ENVIRONMENT EVENTS1-2, Environmental Training: Requirements, Strategies & Resourcesfor Environmental Managers and Trainers Course, Washington, DC,Contact: Grace Lee, Government Institutes, 966 Hungerford Drive,Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.5-6, Government Environmental Contracting, Washington, DC,Contact: Miss J.K. Van Wycks, Federal Publications, 1120 20thSt., NW, Washington, DC 20036, (202) 337-7000.5-7, Risk Assessment in the Process Industries, Chester, England,Contact: Sara Mountford or Louise Marriott, IBC TechnicalServices Ltd., Bath House (3rd Floor), 56 Holborn Viaduct, LondonEC1A 2EX England, (01-236-4080).6-7, Federal Environmental Markets Conference, Arlington,Virginia, Contact: Government Institutes, 966 Hungerford Drive,Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.6-7, Environment 1990, Seminar and Exhibition, Milwaukee,Wisconsin, Sponsor: Federation of Environmental Technologies,Contact: FET, PO Box 185, Milwaukee, WI 53201, (414) 251-8163.6-9, GEN-UPGRADE '90, International Symposium on PerformanceImprovement, Retrofitting and Repowering of Fossil Fuel PowerPlants, Washington, DC, Sponsors: U.S. Department of Energy, theInternational Energy Agency and the Electric Power ResearchInstitute, Contact: Gary Poe, EPRI, (415) 855-8969.8-9, Handling Land Use and Environmental Problems of Real Estate,San Francisco, California, Sponsors: Practicing Law Institute andthe California Continuing Education of the Bar, Contact: AnnTracy, PLI, 810 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10019,(212) 765-5700.8-11, 1990 Sulfur Dioxide Control Symposium, New Orleans,Louisiana, Sponsors: EPA and the Electric Power ResearchInstitute, Contact: Sharon Luonogo, EPRI, 3412 Hillview Ave.,Palo Alto, CA 94303, (415) 855-2010.10-13, Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries 1990 Conventionand Exhibition, New Orleans, Louisiana, Sponsor: ISRI,(202) 466-4050.11-15, Third Annual Symposium on the Application of Geophysics toEngineering and Environmental Problems, Golden, Colorado,Sponsors: The Society of Engineering and Mineral ExplorationGeophysicists, Contact: (303) 980-1648.12-13, Modeling the Physics, Biology and Chemistry of the UpperOcean and its Interaction with the Atmosphere, London, England,Contact: Mike Fasham, Institute of Oceanographic Science, BrookRoad, Wormley, Godalming, Surrey, GU8 5UB, England.12-16, Third Annual Hazardous Waste Conference, Albuquerque, NewMexico, Sponsors: New Mexico Hazardous Waste Management Society,City of Albuquerque, the New Mexico Environmental ImprovementDivision and EPA, Contact: Phyllis Pei, (505) 846-2654.15-16, Environmental Reporting & Recordkeeping RequirementsCourse, Washington, DC, Contact: Grace Lee, GovernmentInstitutes, 966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850,(301) 251-9250.18-22, American Institute of Chemical Engineers Spring NationalMeeting, Orlando, Florida, Contact: Steve Smith, AIChE, (212)705-7845.19-21, New Jersey Energy and Facilities Management Exposition,Secaucus, New Jersey, Contact: Sally Gambrill, Energy Expo Inc.,PO Box 222, Maplewood, NJ 07040, (201) 763-5739.19-21, Great Lakes International Solid Waste Management Forum,Lansing, Michigan, Sponsors: Engineering Society of Detroit,Society for Environmental Science and Michigan Waste Industries,Contact: ESD, 24 Frank Lloyd Wright Drive, Suite C500, Ann Arbor,MI 48105, (313) 995-4440.19-22, Soltech '90, Power We Can Live With, and Solar '90,Today's Uses, Tomorrow's Opportunities, Austin, Texas, Sponsors:U.S. Department of Energy, Solar Energy Industries Association,American Solar Energy Society and the Lower Colorado RiverAuthority, Contact: American Solar Energy Society, 2400 CentralAvenue, Suite B-1, Boulder, CO 80301, (303) 443-3130.19-23, GLOBE '90, North America's 1st International EnvironmentalIndustry Trade Fair and Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia,Sponsor: International Environment Industry, Contact: DavidMarshall, 250-1130 West Pender St., Vancouver V6E 4A4, Canada,(604) 681-6126.19-23, Chapman Conference on Biomass Burning--Atmospheric,Climatic and Biospheric Implications, Williamsburg, Virginia,Sponsors: American Geophysical Union and the National Air andSpace Administration, Contact: AGU, (202) 462-6000.20-22, Tropospheric Ozone and the Environment, Los Angeles,California, Sponsor: Air & Water Management Association, Contact:AWMA, (412) 232-3444.20-23, EPRI-EPA Symposium: Transfer and Utilization ofParticulate Control Technology, San Diego, California, Contact:Ramsay Chang, EPRI, (415) 855-2535.22-23, First Annual Recycling Conference, Liverpool, New York,Sponsor: New York Department of Environmental Conservation,Contact: DEC, 50 Wolf Road, Albany, NY 12233, (518) 457-6603.22-23, New Jersey Environmental Laws and Regulations Course, EastBrunswick, New Jersey, Contact: Lori Cannon, GovernmentInstitutes, 966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850,(301) 251-9250.26-27, New York Environmental Laws and Regulations Course,Albany, New York, Contact: Lori Cannon, Government Institutes,966 Hungerford Drive, Suite 24, Rockville, MD 20850, (301) 251-9250.26-28, Energy and the Environment in the 21st Century, Cambridge,Massachusetts, Sponsor: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Contact: MIT Conference Services Office, Room 7-111, Cambridge,MA 02139, (617) 253-1703.27-28, 1990 Update on RCRA Regulations, Washington, DC, Contact:Government Institutes, (301) 251-9250.27-29, International Landfill Gas Symposium, Chicago, Illinois,Sponsor: Governmental Refuse Collection and Disposal Association,Contact: GRCDA, PO Box 7219, Silver Spring, MD 20910, (301) 585-2898.27-29, National Conference on Octane and Reformulated Gasoline,San Antonio, Texas, Sponsor: Octane Week, Contact: Greg Haigwood:1-800-872-3835.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990ARIZONAPhoenix, Arizona's voluntary recycling pilot program has been sosuccessful in the past year that it will be expanded city-wide,the city announced recently. The newly expanded program willinclude 300,000 homes, compared to the 4,000 homes in the pilotprogram. "This expansion will occur pending evaluation ofeconomics and end market agreements," said Jack Friedline, deputypublic works director for the city. "Full evaluation of the pilotprogram will be made in the second quarter this year. If economicanalysis shows a benefit, we will recommend a multi-yearimplementation program probably from 1991 to 1995."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEW JERSEYWheelabrator Technologies has begun start-up operations at itsGloucester County, New Jersey, trash-to-energy facility, thecompany announced recently. The project is the first in thecountry to be regulated as a public garbage utility, and willoperate under a tariff rate and franchise system regulated by thestate's Board of Public Utilities. Located on the Delaware River,the facility will be capable of processing up to 575 tons ofmunicipal solid waste a day and producing 14 megawatts ofelectricity.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIAThe Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources hasrevoked the waste processing permit of Philadelphia-based ACNInc. for violations of the state's environmental regulations andstandards. Improper storage of waste at the site and poorlymaintained leachate collection tanks have been of particularconcern to the state agency, which initially ordered the companyto cease all operations last May pending resolution of theseproblems.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990MARYLANDMaryland Secretary of the Environment Martin Walsh recentlyannounced the approval of $360,000 in state grants to assistlocal jurisdictions implement air pollution control programs. The11 grants will be funded with money from the Maryland Clean AirFund, which receives revenues from permit fees and civilpenalties collected by the state agency.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990CONNECTICUTConnecticut's Department of Environmental Protection has awarded$60,000 in grant funds to municipalities in the state's CentralNaugatuck Valley to boost regional recycling efforts. The fundswill be used by the Valley's council of governments to institutea comprehensive regional recycling program for the area's roughly370,000 residents. "This is one more important step forward forConnecticut's recycling movement," DEP Commissioner LeslieCarothers said in announcing the grant award. "This grant willhelp add more than 10 percent of the state's population in theCentral Naugatuck Valley join the large numbers of citizensalready involved in regional recycling around Connecticut." Thegrant will help the Valley's municipalities comply with a statelaw mandating recycling for nine items by January 1, 1991,including: glass and metal food containers, newspaper, corrugatedand white office paper, scrap metal, automotive batteries, usedoil and leaves.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990NEBRASKAThe Nebraska Department of Environmental Control and the AttorneyGeneral's Office have filed suit in Hitchcock County againstTexaco Producing, Inc. for allegedly contaminating surface andgroundwater during the company's operations in the area. Thedepartment is seeking to have the contamination cleaned up, andto collect civil penalties and the cost of the investigation fromthe company. "We have asked the court to make Texaco assess thecontamination and clean it up," said Steve Moeller, the state'sassistant attorney general. "We're also asking for civilpenalties of up to $5,000 per day, and the payment of $20,000 tocover the cost of our investigation."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIAEnvironmental protection efforts have been a cornerstone ofPennsylvania Governor Robert Casey's administration, and 1990will be no exception if the Republican governor has his way. Inhis State of the State address late last month, Casey announcedthe signing of an executive order requiring all new passengercars sold in the state to comply by 1994 with the tight emissionsstandards now in effect in California. "To set the example,"Casey continued, "I've ordered that all new state vehicles meetthese standards, effective immediately. In addition, we're goingto toughen up inspection standards so they cover emission controldevices."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990ILLINOISOfficials of Philadelphia-based Reading Energy Company and theVillage of Robbins announced late last month that they wouldbegin construction on a $200 million resource recovery facilitysouth of Chicago, Illinois by mid-1990. The facility will becapable of processing 1,600 tons of municipal refuse a day andwill generate enough electricity to supply the daily needs of50,000 homes.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990TECHNOLOGY POLICY IN THE 1990s: THE SHIFT FROM MILITARY TOCIVILIAN TECHNOLOGIES, A CONFERENCEMay 1 & 2, 1990, Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.Hear the experts from the administration, congress, industry,academia, labor and finance address these critical technologyquestions:--How will government, industry and academia adjust to the newworld order and the de-emphasis on military technolgy development?--Will new resources be freed up for civilian technology programsas a result of cuts in defense spending? Where will the growth bein the 1990s?--Will those working on basic research get squeezed out in favor ofthose working on applied technologies?--What will it take to move technology to the top of the nationalpolicy agenda?--Is there a role for government in stemming the sale of U.S.technology companies to overseas competitors?--Will government military R&D programs be restructured toencourage the development of civilian industries?--What is the role of the National Laboratories, the nation'slargest employers of scientists and engineers?--How should companies reorient themselves vis-a-vis the federalgovernment to prosper in the 1990s?Among the Speakers:EDWARD BLACK, General Counsel & Vice President, Computer &Communications Industry AssociationRICHARD DeLAUER, Chairman, Fairchild Space & Defense Corp.JOHN DEUTCH, Provost, Massachusetts Insitute of TechnologyLYLE GRAMLEY, Vice President and Chief Economist, MortgageBankers Association, former governor of the Federal ReserveBoardGEORGE KOURPIAS, President, International Association ofMachinists and Aerospace WorkersREP. DAVE McCURDY, Member, House Armed Services Committee andHouse Science, Space and Technology CommitteePAUL NESBIT, Senior Aerospace Analyst, Prudential-Bache ResearchEDWARD TELLER, Director Emeritis, Lawrence Livermore Laboratoryand Senior Research Fellow, Hoover InstitutionDAVID FISHLOCK, Science Editor, Financial Times of London(Moderator)Registration Fees: (through 4/2/90) - $595.00                   (after   4/2/90) - $645.00For further details, contact Lissa Dyer, 202/662-9728 phone, or202/662-9744 fax.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENT WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 8, 1990WARNINGFederal law prohibits reproduction of this newsletter for anypurpose without the publisher's permission. This means you CANNOTPHOTOCOPY, distribute by FAX, TRANSMIT ELECTRONICALLY, DOWNLOADto a DATABASE or MAKE COPIES of this NEWSLETTER BY ANY OTHERMEANS whether for INTERNAL or EXTERNAL DISTRIBUTION, NEWSSUMMARIES, ROUTING or any OTHER PURPOSE. Under Federalcopyright law (17 United States Code 10 et seq.) violators can befined up to $50,000 for each infringement.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-5IA086-000616-B016-223http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002600 text/html 63471HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:23:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:06 GMTContent-length: 63284Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev58.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNet January 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * AIR * ARB MODIFIES ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATE (473 words) STUDY RELEASED ON DIOXIN EMISSIONS FROM WASTE COMBUSTION (162 words) MARGETT INTRODUCES LEGISLATION TO OVERRIDE CFC BAN IN CALIFORNIA (187 words) * ENFORCEMENT * 51-MONTH JAIL TERM FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE VIOLATIONS (340 words) * ENVIRONMENT * JUDGE REVERSES RULING ON FISH AND GAME CEQA FEES (280 words) * ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY * LAWRENCE LIVERMORE LAB TO ASSIST CAL/EPA WITH TECHNOLOGY EVALUATIONS (168 words) * INITIATIVES * TWO ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES ENTER CIRCULATION (303 words) * PESTICIDES * GOVERNOR CALLS SPECIAL SESSION FOR CONTINUATION OF METHYL BROMIDE REGISTRATION (444 words) WORKER PROTECTION STANDARD IMPLEMENTATION HEARINGS SCHEDULED (317 words) ADDITIONAL COMMENT PERIOD FOR EXTENDED PESTICIDE USE (231 words) CROSS CONTAMINATION OF PESTICIDE PRODUCTS POLICY RELEASED (308 words) TWO PESTICIDES BANNED TO REDUCE POLLUTION IN BAY AND ESTUARIES (158 words) * UNDERGROUND TANKS * UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK LEAKAGE MAY BE LESS OF A THREAT (280 words) * NEWS DIGEST * AIR (235 words) ELECTRIC VEHICLES (116 words) TANKS (141 words) U.S. EPA (117 words) * ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION * CALIF. ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION REPORT (88 words) * GOVERNOR'S APPOINTMENTS * GOVERNOR WILSON MAKES ENVIRONMENTAL APPOINTMENT (453 words) * CALIFORNIA REGULATION REPORT * NEW REGULATIONS (519 words) PROPOSED REGULATIONS (610 words) * CALIFORNIA BILL REPORT * 1/12/96 REPORT NOTES (1558 words) * CONGRESSIONAL BILL REPORT * 1/5/96 REPORT NOTES (396 words) * FEDERAL REGISTER REVIEW * EDITOR'S NOTE (30 words) * CALENDAR * REGULATORY CALENDAR (355 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ARB MODIFIES ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE MANDATESACRAMENTO -- The Calif. Air Resources Board (ARB) staff hasproposed changes to the current Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) rule,scheduled for introduction in 1998.  The ZEV modification, endorsedby Governor Wilson, would retain the requirement for fullimplementation by 2003.BackgroundIn 1994, Governor Wilson submitted California's StateImplementation Plan (SIP), under the 1990 Clean Air Act.  The planset forth the state's strategies to achieve clean air byimplementing cost-effective regulations which encourage the advanceof technology through market forces.  One of the most controversialelements of the SIP is the ZEV mandate.Under the terms of the ZEV regulation, adopted in 1990, majorautomakers are required to offer vehicles with no tailpipeemissions in 2 percent of their fleets by 1998.  The numberincreases to 5 percent in 2001 and ultimately to 10 percent in2010.An alternative to the present rule was requested by the ARB afterauto makers' projections indicated the sales demand for lead/acidbatteries with limited mileage ranges would not appeal to enoughbuyers to meet the rules.In response to concerns such as cost/marketability, technology, theuse of hybrids and the development of infrastructure needs, the ARBsubmitted to the Governor, a proposal to modify the ZEV rule, whilemaintaining the ultimate long-term goal.ARB ProposalARB Staff's preliminary proposal is to drop the 2 percentrequirement in the early years of the program and build up to 10percent ZEVs by 2003, when all car companies that sell more than3000 vehicles per year statewide must comply with the regulation.In addition, manufacturers will receive extra ZEV credit through2003 for ZEVs sold before 1998 and those equipped with advancebattery types that have the range and lifespan that many expertsbelieve is needed to make them competitive with gasoline poweredmodels.  Those battery types, including lithium and nickel-baseddesigns, are expected to be commercially available by 2001.The staff proposal would suspend the current ZEV requirements until2003, and propose that auto manufacturers participate in apartnership program to promote and evaluate the development ofadvanced ZEVs.  All of the exhaust, evaporative and refuelingemission reductions associated with the existing ZEV requirements,plus a premium, would be made up by the manufacturers through theproduction of cleaner cars.ARB staff has been directed to fully develop the plan and presentit for consideration at a public hearing no later than March 1996.In his endorsement of the ZEV modification proposal, GovernorWilson said, "This proposal...would retain the requirement for fullimplementation of the ZEV mandate by 2003.  But it will also permitmodifications that both allow enforceable emission benefits thatexceed existing requirements and at the same time encourage earlydevelopment of battery technology that will produce ZEVs the marketwill accept."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996STUDY RELEASED ON DIOXIN EMISSIONS FROM WASTE COMBUSTIONNEW YORK -- The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) hasreleased a study that concludes there is no correlation between theamount and type of chlorine in the waste constituents of combustionfacilities and dioxin concentrations measured at the stack.The study, "The Relationship Between Chlorine in Waste Streams andDioxin Emissions from Waste Combustor Stacks," analyzed more than1,900 test results, and concludes that limiting the chlorinecontent of combustor feedstocks has no, or little, effect on thecomposition or quantity of dioxin emitted.According to ASME, the finding refutes claims by public interestgroups that there is a direct relationship between chlorine anddioxin, or PCDD/F, emissions.  ASME says these groups have beenseeking regulations limiting the amount and type of chlorinatedwaste that can be combusted in waste-to-energy plants, hazardouswaste incinerators, cement kilns, and other types of combustionsystems.Copy AvailabilityA copy of the study is available from ASME, (800) 843-2763.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996MARGETT INTRODUCES LEGISLATION TO OVERRIDE CFC BAN IN CALIFORNIASACRAMENTO -- Assemblyman Bob Margett (R-Arcadia) has introducedlegislation that would repeal the federal ban onchlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which became effective on Jan. 1, 1996.AB 1996 would allow the use, possession, and production of CFCs inCalifornia, despite the Federal ban.  The bill, known as theCalifornia Air Conditioner Protection Act of 1996, would delay theprohibition of freon until the year 2000.According to Margett, "What we have, is a classic example ofstate's rights.  The Tenth Amendment of the Untied StatesConstitution gives states powers not delegated to the Federalgovernment by the Constitution.  Last time I checked, theConstitution was silent on the issue of freon and CFCs.""I wanted to take a reasonable approach to the freon issue.  Ingiving industry a much needed extension to thoroughly study theeffects of freon on the environment while still protectingCalifornia's consumers," Margett said.More InformationMargett and principle co-author Senator Richard Mountjoy, aretrying to build a state wide coalition of consumers and businessesin support of AB 1996.  For information contact Margett's office at(916) 445-7234.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 199651-MONTH JAIL TERM FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE VIOLATIONSWASHINGTON -- U.S. EPA has announced a 51-month incarcerationsentence for Reginald B. Gist, former operator of High Tech PlatingSystem, in Balch Springs, Texas.  Gist was sentenced for allegedlyimproperly disposing and transporting of hazardous wastes generatedby his electroplating businesses.In addition to the jail sentence, Gist is required to payrestitution in excess of $75,000 and may not operate anotherplating business.Gist was one of the owners of the High Tech Plating from 1988 -1990.  Following repeated notices to him by Dallas County wastewater control authorities that his business had been illegallydumping electroplating waste into the sewer system, the sewerconnection was disconnected.  Gist admitted that he abandoned thefacility, leaving plating vats and 55-gallon drums containing morethan 70,000 gallons of hazardous wastes, including acids, cyanidesand heavy metals.  EPA cleaned up the site at a cost in excess of$300,000.According to court records, Gist opened a new company, MetalPlating Systems in Forney, Texas, where liquid plating wastes weredumped into the septic system and onto the surrounding ground.  Healso hauled liquid and solid plating wastes to property he owned atLake Fork, Texas.  When the Texas Natural Resources ConservationCommission discovered the contamination at the Forney facility,Gist was ordered to remove the contaminated soil and dispose of itproperly.As part of the pleas agreement, Gist admitted that rather thandispose of the contaminated soil properly, he transported it to theLake Fork property where it was either buried or dumped on theground.  Gist left the Forney location in 1992 and moved MetalPlating Systems to Terrell, Texas.On Sept. 22, Gist pled guilty to one count of unlawful disposal ofhazardous waste at Balch Springs and one count of unlawfultransportation of hazardous waste from the Forney and Terrelllocations to Lake Fork, in violation of the Resource Conservationand Recovery Act (RCRA).  EPA estimates that the Agency spent inexcess of $450,000 to cleanup the Terrell Facility, alone.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996JUDGE REVERSES RULING ON FISH AND GAME CEQA FEESSACRAMENTO -- Sacramento Superior Court Judge Jeffery Gunther hasreversed his previous ruling and ordered the Dept. of Fish and Gameto collect fees charged for the implementation of the CaliforniaEnvironmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the review of environmentalimpact documents of major developments in accordance with Fish andGame Code Section 711.4.The ruling was the result of an action taken by the CaliforniaAssociation of Professional Scientists (CAPS).  CAPS sued Fish andGame to set aside a settlement agreement with private land ownersthat required the department to cease and desist the collection ofapproximately $3 million in annual fees.  Judge Gunther hadpreviously approved the settlement agreement.CAPS argued that Judge Gunther's approval of the settlement wasunconstitutional.  Section 3.5 of the State Constitution prohibitsan administrative agency from refusing to obey a state law in theabsence of a ruling from an appellate court that the law isunconstitutional.According to CAPS, the settlement that was overturned had beenentered into after Judge Gunther ruled the fees statute wasunconstitutional.In reversing his approval of the settlement, Judge Gunther stronglyexpressed his unhappiness with the constitutional provisionprohibiting agencies from refusing to enforce statute law on thebasis of a Superior Court decision, but ultimately acknowledgedthat the Constitution controls.CAPS says an appeal of the court's decision in likely.CAPS represents approximately 2,400 state employed scientists,including several hundred biologists and related resourceprofessionals working for the Dept. of Fish and Game.The fees generated by the Environmental Review Procedure, for whichthe fees are collected, result in a significant portion of thedepartment's annual budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996LAWRENCE LIVERMORE LAB TO ASSIST CAL/EPA WITH TECHNOLOGYEVALUATIONSSACRAMENTO/LIVERMORE -- Under a Memorandum of Agreement singed lastmonth between Cal/EPA's Dept. of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC)and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, scientists andengineers from the Lab will help develop and commercialize newenvironmental technologies.  The lab will provide personnel and Labfacilities to evaluate new environmental technologies seekingcertification under the Environmental Technology Certificationprogram.According to DTSC, the agreement:*Creates a wider, more diverse pool of available scientific andengineering expertise available for the testing of technologies.*Makes available additional scientific, testing and laboratoryfacilities to evaluate environmental technologies, and*Enhances the credibility of the certification through thesynergism of California's reputation for environmental standardsand Lawrence Livermore's reputation for technology development."Our partnership brings together the field and regulatoryexperience of Cal/EPA with the research and development experienceof the Lab," said Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock.  "Thiscombination will provide a tremendous resource to the environmentaltechnology industry and allow for greater capability to certifymore technologies."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TWO ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES ENTER CIRCULATIONSACRAMENTO -- Secretary of State Bill Jones has announced that twonew environmental initiative measures have entered circulation forpetition signatures.Beverage Container Recycling Program.  Wine and Liquor Containers.This initiative proposes to amend the existing recycling law to addwine and liquor containers to beverage containers on whichdistributors are assessed a charge.  If adopted, the measure wouldincrease funding for recycling and anti-litter programs fromprogram-generated revenues.  In addition, it would providefinancial incentive for sterilization and refilling of recycledcontainers.The estimated annual cost of the state recycling program wouldincrease by approximately $2 million.  Additional recycling programrevenue increases are estimated at $20 to 25 million annually.More InformationThe proponent of this initiative is Mark Murray of CaliforniansAgainst Waste, (916) 443-5422.  He must submit 433,269 signaturesof registered voters to county officials by May 30, 1996.Radioactive Waste Disposal. Initiative Statute.This initiative would prohibit the disposal of low-levelradioactive waste in the state by means of burial.  It wouldrequire low-level radioactive wastes generated by medical,biomedical or biotechnical industries to be managed usingretrievable and monitored facilities.The proposal would also establish a third party liability fund forinjury to persons or property from waste disposal, paid for throughsurcharge on waste generators.  It also exempts the state fromcosts or liability for waste storage or disposal, except for wastesgenerated by state and local agencies.It is estimated that the measure would result in one-time state andcounty costs ranging from $8 million to $13.5 million, and ongoingannual costs of approximately $1 million to $2 million.More InformationThe proponent of this initiative is Ernest Goitstein, (415) 369-6690.  He must collect 433.269 signatures of registered voters byJune 3, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996GOVERNOR CALLS SPECIAL SESSION FOR CONTINUATION OF METHYL BROMIDEREGISTRATIONSACRAMENTO -- At the end of December, Governor Pete Wilson calleda special session of the California Legislature to considerlegislation that would allow the continued registration of methylbromide and pentachlorophenol.Methyl bromide is a widely used pesticide to control insects,mites, rodents, plant diseases, nematodes, termites, and forpretreating soil prior to planting a number of agricultural corps.Pentachlorophenol is a wood preservative used by all major utilitycompanies in California to protect power and telephone poles fromdestruction by wood-eating pests.Currently, some of California's major trading partners includingJapan, Korea and Mexico require methyl bromide treatment onagricultural products prior to shipping.  New Zealand and Australiarequire all shipments of products in wooden crates or pallets to betreated with it to prevent pests from entering their countries.Existing law requires manufacturers of pesticides to conduct healtheffect studies and submit them to the state for evaluation.Current law requires that the registration of methyl bromide besuspended after March 30, 1996, if the necessary studies are notsubmitted by then.According to a recent study released by the Calif. Dept. of Foodand Agriculture (CDFA) the state could loose up to $346 million inrevenues and 9,894 full-time jobs annually, from the suspension ofmethyl bromide registration.Ongoing scientific debate between Cal/EPA and U.S. EPA regardinghow these studies should be conducted, delayed the initiation ofthe studies.  Consequently, the last toxilogical study for methylbromide will not be completed until December 1997.At the end of the last legislative session, SB 808 by Senator DickMonteith (R-Modesto) and Assemblyman Peter Frusetta (R-San Benito)that would have resolved this problem, failed passage.  A specialsession provides a practical way to extend the statutory deadlinefor the submittal of the last methyl bromide study.  The specialsession will run concurrently with the regular Legislative session.At this time, in the Third Special Session, SB 1 (Henry Mellow, D-Monterey),  SB 2 (Monteith) and AB 1 (Frusetta) have beenintroduced.  Each bill would extend the methyl bromide studydeadline to December 1997.  Last week AB 1 passed the AssemblyAppropriation Committee (11-4).  It is currently scheduled forhearing on the Assembly Floor.  SB 1 and SB 2 are scheduled forhearing in the Senate Health and Human Services Committee on Jan.24.  (For more information on these bills, see the California BillReport.)Legislation passed during a special session go into effect on the91st day after adjournment of the special session, while thosepassed during a regular session of the Legislature go into effecton January 1 of the following year.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996WORKER PROTECTION STANDARD IMPLEMENTATION HEARINGS SCHEDULEDSACRAMENTO -- The Dept. of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) has scheduledsix workshop/hearings throughout the state on the implementation ofthe federal Worker Protection Standard (WPS) in California.Current California regulations place requirements on employers ofpesticide handlers and fieldworkers.  Currently the handler portionof the regulations is applicable to all pesticide use situations:the fieldworker portion is applicable to employees working intreated agricultural fields; handler regulations cover protectionof study participants, hazard communication, emergency medicalcare, training, personal protective equipment, decontaminationfacilities, medical supervision, change areas, light, and closedhandling systems.  Fieldworker regulations encompass posting, andreentry into, treated fields, training, emergency medical care,decontamination facilities, and hazard communication.By implementing the WPS in California, the coverage of both thehandler and fieldworkers of the WPS are limited to the commercialor research production of agricultural plant commodities on farms,forests, greenhouses, and nurseries.  Although the WPS addressesmost, but not all, of the same areas covered by current Californiarequirements.The following hearings have been scheduled on Worker ProtectionStandards:Salinas - February 21Salinas Community Center (Santa Lucia Room), 940 North Main St.,Salinas, 93901.Sacramento - February 26Secretary of State Auditorium, 1500 - 11th St., Sacramento, 95814.Visalia Area - February 28UC Kearney Agriculture Center, 9240 South Riverbend Ave., Parlier,93648.San Diego Area - March 6San Diego County Farm Bureau, 1670 East Valley Parkway, Escondido,92027.El Centro -March 7Imperial Irrigation District Auditorium, 1285 Broadway, El Centro,92243.Redding Area - March 12Shasta District Fairgrounds, 1890 Briggs St., Anderson 96007.Comments/More InformationComments must be received no later than March 15.  Comments and/orquestions should be directed to Roy Rutz, Worker Health and SafetyBranch, Dept. of Pesticide Regulation, 1020 N St., Room 200,Sacramento, CA 95814-5629, (919) 445-4279.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ADDITIONAL COMMENT PERIOD FOR EXTENDED PESTICIDE USEWASHINGTON -- Under the terms of a recent settlement agreement,U.S. EPA will provide additional opportunity for public commentbefore the Agency extends the time period during which "existingstocks" of certain canceled pesticides can be used.The settlement resolves a lawsuit brought by the United FarmWorkers of America (UFW) against EPA.  UFW sued the Government onbehalf of migrant workers who were exposed to the pesticide,mevinphos, which was later canceled.  The workers learned that EPAextended the period during which the manufacturer could continue tosell "existing stocks" of the canceled pesticide.Under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act(FIFRA), a manufacturer's registration of a pesticide can becanceled if the pesticide poses an unreasonable health orenvironmental threat.  In some cases, upon the request of amanufacturer, EPA can permit the sale and use of existing stocks ofthe canceled pesticides.Through the settlement, EPA has agreed to go beyond the existingterms of FIFRA, and provide public notice and an opportunity tocomment before it modifies the time period during which existingstocks of certain canceled pesticides can be used."[This] settlement is part of EPA's ongoing efforts to increasepublic involvement in the pesticide regulatory process," said LynnGoldman, EPA's Assistant Administrator for Prevention, Pesticides,and Toxic Substances.EPA is expected to publish its policy early this spring.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996CROSS CONTAMINATION OF PESTICIDE PRODUCTS POLICY RELEASEDWASHINGTON -- Last month, a new policy that sets numerical limitsof contamination for all categories of pesticides, above which U.S.EPA would consider the contaminant to toxicologically significant,was released by the Agency.In a notice issued to pesticide registrants (PR Notice 95-X), EPAexplained the Agency's new interpretation of what "toxicologicallysignificant" means in terms of contamination of pesticide activeingredients, particularly as it pertains to the contamination ofone pesticide by another.  The new policy will allow EPA to focusits attention on the contamination issues that pose a risk forhealth and the environment.According to the objectives in the PR notice, the new policyshould:* set a clear standard that can be readily applied by the regulatedindustry, as well as EPA;* maintain accountability of the product form the producer to enduser;* minimize the possibility that cross contamination will pose asignificant problem; and* not preclude marketplace or private solutions to correct problemsthat do arise.Under the new policy, which goes into effect after a 60-day commentperiod, EPA will move from a "zero-based" to a "risk based"approach in considering the "toxicological significance" ofcontamination of one pesticide by another.  Risk considerationsinclude potential human health effects from both dietary and non-dietary exposure, ecological effects, potential groundwatercontamination and the potential for leaving unwanted residues onfood.EPA has concluded that potential toxicity to plants by thecontaminant poses the greatest potential for harm, given the lowconcentration of contamination being considered.A contaminant that is toxicologically significant must be reportedto EPA for a determination of its potential effects and possiblecorrective or regulatory action.More InformationCopies of the new policy are available form EPA's Office ofPesticide Communications, (703) 305-5017.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TWO PESTICIDES BANNED TO REDUCE POLLUTION IN BAY AND ESTUARIESSACRAMENTO -- Emergency regulations to prohibit the sale and use ofpesticide products containing copper sulfate or tributyltin (TBT)in nine Bay Area counties, have been announced by Cal/EPA.  Bothpesticides have been proven harmful to San Francisco Bay and itsestuaries.The ban affects copper sulfate-containing pesticide products thatare poured into sewers and drains to kill plant and tree roots.The affected TBT products are used in cooling towers in larger airconditioning systems to control microorganisms that can causefouling.  The pesticides are prohibited for use in Alameda, ContraCosts, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano,and Sonoma counties.Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock said, "Because we know that theseproducts have important uses, our scientists developed informationon alternative methods for controlling root intrusion in sewerlines and microorganisms in many air conditioning systems.  This isan excellent example of how environmental and economic progress canbe successfully combined."Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK LEAKAGE MAY BE LESS OF A THREATSACRAMENTO -- According to a recent study by Lawrence LivermoreNational Laboratory (LLNL), the impact of some leaking undergroundstorage tanks on the environment maybe less than previouslythought.The independent study supports increasing evidence that many siteswithin California present a low risk to the environment once thetanks have been removed, and may require only monitoring to ensurethat the contaminated plume is stable and not contaminating otherareas.In response to the study, recent state and public concern regardingexpensive regulatory oversight in the cleanup of leakingunderground fuel storage tanks, the State Water Resources ControlBoard (SWRCB) has advised the state Regional Water Quality ControlBoard and local oversight Programs to halt active remediation andbegin monitoring programs in cases containing low risk groundwaterexposure.  According to Cal/EPA, this will assure that Stateattention is focused on better remediation of high risk sties andsituations.Cal/EPA Secretary James Strock said, "This initial act by the WaterBoard is among the first regulatory reforms resulting from GovernorWilson's recent executive Order W-127-95.  We heard about theurgency of this issue in our public forums in November, and now weare taking action."The report, "Recommendations to Improve the Cleanup Process forCalifornia's Leaking Underground Fuel Tanks," was presented to theSWRCB in October.  The report also recommends that passivebioremediation be considered the primary remediation tool in mostcases, once the fuel leak source has been removed.Typically, low risk cases involve shallow groundwater with amaximum depth to water less than 50 feed and without drinking waterwells screened in the shallow groundwater zone with 250 feet of theleak.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996AIRCPUC SETS UTILITY FUNDING LIMITS FOR LOW EMISSION VEHICLES -- TheCalif. Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) has set the dollar amountutilities can recover in rates to fund low emission vehicle (LEV)programs for the next six years.  The combined utility LEV programfunding request totaled $426,652,000.  The CPUC approved$171,421,000 (40 percent) of this amount.  Ratepayers will fund$132,408,000.  Shareholders will fund the remainder.  The LEVprograms are intended to comply with Legislative mandate tofacilitate purchase and use of electric and natural gas vehicles inCalifornia.STUDY CONFIRMS HEALTH BENEFITS OF ACID RAIN REDUCTION -- A recentstudy released by U.S. EPA estimates the value of health benefitsfrom the reduction of sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions fromutilities, under the acid rain provisions of the Clean Air ActAmendments, at between $3 billion and $11 billion for 1997.  Thereport focused on 31 eastern states where sulfates are asubstantial problem.   It is estimated that by 2010, when the acid rain reductionprogram will be fully implemented, the annual U.S. health benefitswill range between $12 billion and $40 billion.  According to thereport, reductions in premature deaths account for approximately 88percent of the total health benefits; reductions in the number ofnew cases of chronic bronchitis account for another nine percent ofthe total.  More Information:  Copies of the study are availablefrom the Acid Rain Hotline, (202) 233-9620.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996ELECTRIC VEHICLESGOVERNOR COMMENDS GENERAL MOTORS ON VEHICLE DEBUT -- Governor PeteWilson has congratulated John Smith, Jr., chairman of the GeneralMotors (GM) Corporation, on the debut of the EV1, the firstpurpose-built electric vehicle to be available to the public inSouthern California later this year.  "Making this revolutionaryvehicle available to the public will inevitably accelerate thecompetition to produce zero emission vehicles, and will help usreach California's mandate of having 10% of the automobiles forsale be ZEVs [Zero Emission Vehicles] by 2003," the Governor said.   GM introduced the EV1 on January 4.  The two-seat vehicle willbe marketed this fall.  The company has spent approximately $350million on electric car development.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996TANKSFINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR UST OWNERS AND OPERATORS -- The StateWater Resources Control Board has announced the availability of anadditional U.S. EPA-prepared publications describing federal andstate funding programs designed to help owners and operators onunderground storage tanks (USTs) upgrade their facilities to meetthe Dec. 22, 1998 upgrade deadline.  "Financing Underground StorageTank Work, Federal and State Assistance Programs," is designed tohelp all UST owners and operators -- especially those with tanks ontribal lands -- obtain loans or grants for financing correctiveaction and upgrading UST systems.  It describes federal loan andgrant programs and provides a listing of states that offer USTfinancial assistance programs.  The booklet is based on the"Federal and State Financial Assistance Report," introduced lastSeptember.  More Information: For copies of these documents,contact U.S. EPA's RCRA/Superfund Hotline, (800) 424-9346.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996U.S. EPAFIRST ANNUAL CUSTOMER SERVICE REPORT PUBLISHED BY U.S. EPA -- Thefirst annual customer service report, "Putting Customers First:EPA's Customer Service Plan," has been released by U.S. EPA.  Thereport describes EPA's mission and commitment to customer service.It also provides customer service standards and plans for thisyear's efforts to improve customer service for each of the Agency'smajor business processes: permitting; pesticide registration;research and demonstration grants; rulemaking; public access;state, tribal, and local program grants; enforcement inspectionsand compliance assistance; and voluntary programs.  A final sectionreports performance information received in 1995 from surveyscompleted by several core processes.  More Information: Copies maybe obtained from EPA's Public Information Center, (202) 260-7551.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996CALIF. ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OPINION REPORTCalifornia Attorney General Dan Lungren has issued the followingopinion regarding surface mining:95-502 -- The removal of soil, rocks, and debris from flood controlchannels and debris basins by a flood control district in order tomaintain original construction contours is not a "surface miningoperation" requiring a permit and the preparation of a reclamationplan.Copy AvailabilityTo obtain a copy of an opinion contact the Calif. AttorneyGeneral's Office, Opinion Unit, P.O. Box 944255, Sacramento, CA94244-2550.  Or, call (916) 324-5172.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996GOVERNOR WILSON MAKES ENVIRONMENTAL APPOINTMENTGovernor Pete Wilson has announced the following appointments.Deputy Secretary for Technology at Cal/EPAAnn C. Heywood, of Danville, as deputy secretary for technology atCal/EPA.  Heywood, 50, has been vice president of corporatedevelopment at Thematrix, Inc., since 1994.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Air Resources Board StaffRick Tomilinson, 29, of Salinas, as chief of the Office ofEnvironmental Technology Certification.  Tomlinson has served asspecial assistant tot he secretary of Cal/EPA since 1993.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Members to the Governor's Council on BiotechnologyErnest Mario, Ph. D., 57, of Palo Alto, has been the co-chairmanand chief executive officer of ALZA Corporation, a Silicon Valleydeveloper of therapeutic delivery systems, since 1993.William W. Otterson, 65, of La Jolla, is the co-founder anddirector of the Univ. of California, San Diego Connect Program inTechnology and Entrepreneurship, a position he has held since 1986.These appointments do not require Senate confirmation.Director of Cal/EPA's Orange County Permit Assistance CenterDanian M. Hopp, 34 of Mission Viejo, has served as assistant to thecity manager for the City of Mission Viejo since 1988.This appointment does not require Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, SantaAna RegionEvelyn R. Hart, 64, of Newport Beach, currently serves on the stateBoard of Behavioral Science Examiners.  She is a former citycouncilwoman and mayor of Newport Beach, having served on thecouncil from 1978 to 1994.This appointment requires Senate Confirmation.Members to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, SanFrancisco Bay RegionRichard J. Balocco, 46, of San Ramon, is vice president ofcorporate communications for the San Jose Water Company, a positionhe has held since 1982.John H. Muller, 49, of Half Moon Bay, is the owner and operator ofDaylight Nursery, a position he has held since 1991.These appointments are subject to Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, CentralValley RegionKathleen "Molly" Wilson, 70, of Redding, has been a member of theShasta County Board of Supervisors since 1989 and currently servesas the vice chair of the Board.  Since 1964, Wilson has been co-owner of Page Equipment Sales, Inc., a logging trailermanufacturing business in Anderson.This appointment requires Senate confirmation.Member to the Calif. Regional Water Quality Control Board, NorthCoastal RegionWilliam "Bill" Hoy, 51, of Weed, is a Siskiyou County Supervisorand is the co-owner and operator of Hoy Hereford Ranch.This appointment is subject to Senate confirmation.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996NEW REGULATIONSThe following regulations have been filed with the Secretary ofState.  For more information contact the filing agency.  Copies ofthe regulations may be obtained by contacting the filing agency, orthe Secretary of State at (916) 773-3000.TITLES 3 & 26: PESTICIDESSUBJECT: Copper and Tributyltin Containing PesticidesAGENCY: Dept. of Pesticide RegulationDATE FILED: 12/11/95 (Emergency)EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/11/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Adopt 6910 and 6920INFORMATION/COPIES: Bill Fabre, (916) 324-4191SUMMARY: This action is the resubmission of two emergencyregulations which will ban the safe use of tributyltin and coppersulfate for specified purposes in nine counties in order to preventthe pollution of San Francisco Bay which results from the use ofthese compounds.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: Implementation Delay of PSI ProgramAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardDATE FILED: 11/30/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/30/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 2190, 2193INFORMATION/COPIES: James Ryden, (916) 322-2884SUMMARY: This action delays implementation of the periodic smokeself-inspection program for heavy-duty diesel fleets from 1/1/95 to1/1/96.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: California HDV Exhaust Emission StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardDATE FILED: 12/14/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 1/3/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 1956.8, 1965, 2112INFORMATION/COPIES: Moritz Glazer, (916) 322-2884SUMMARY: This action deals with California exhaust emissionsstandards for heavy duty vehicles.TITLE 16: AUTOMOTIVE REPAIRSUBJECT: Automotive Repairs Dealers and Official Stations andAdjustersAGENCY: Dept. of Automotive RepairDATE FILED: 12/5/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/5/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Adopt 3340.28, 3340.29, 3340.30; Amend 3303.2,3340.1, 3340.15, 3340.22.1, 3340.24, 3340.31, 3340.31, 3340.32.1,3340.33, 3340.33.1, 3340.35, 3340.36, 3340.37, 3340.50, 3340.50.3,3340.50.5; Repeal 3340.25, 3340.30, 3340.34, 3340.37, 3340.50,3340.50.3, 3340.50.5; Repeal 3340.25, 3340.30, 3340.34INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-3163SUMMARY: This Certificate of Compliance amends requirements forlicensure as a smog technician.TITLE 14: ENDANGERED SPECIESSUBJECT: Coho SalmonAGENCY: Fish and Game CommissionDATE FILED: 12/1/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/31/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 670.5INFORMATION/COPIES: Ronald Pelzman, (916) 653-4899SUMMARY: This action adds coho salmon south of San Francisco Bay tothe endangered species list.TITLE 16: AUTOMOTIVE REPAIRSUBJECT: Emergency Regulations - Emissions StandardsAGENCY: Dept. of Automotive RepairDATE FILED: 12/1/95EFFECTIVE DATE: 1/2/96SECTIONS AFFECTED: Amend 3340.42, 3340.42.1INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 322-3553SUMMARY: This action establishes the definition of a grosspollution vehicle, new inspection procedures for dynamometer-basedemissions testing, and new maximum emission standards in tableform.TITLE 22: WATERSUBJECT: Lead and Copper Drinking WaterAGENCY: Dept. of Health ServicesDATE FILED: 12/11/95 (Emergency)EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/11/95SECTIONS AFFECTED: 64670, 64671.05, 64671.10, 64671.15, 64671.20,64671.25, 64671.35, 64671.40, 64671.50, 64671.60, 64671.65,64671.70, 64672, 64672.6, 64673, 64674, 64675, 64676, 64677, 64678,64679, 64680, 64681, 64682, 64683, 64684, 64685, 64686, 64687,64688, 64689, 64690, 64691, 64692; Amend 64252, 64254, 64256,64257, 64258, 64415, 64468.1INFORMATION/COPIES: Charles Smith, (916) 657-0730SUMMARY: This emergency action adopts the U.S. EPA's NationalPrimary Drinking Water Regulations for lead and copper, for allsuppliers of domestic water to the public, pursuant to both thefederal and state Safe Drinking Water Acts.  This includesrequirements for treatment and monitoring, replacement of leadservice line, public education, reporting and recordkeeping.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996PROPOSED REGULATIONSThe following regulations have been proposed and/or scheduled forhearing.  ** = New entries since the last issue.TITLE 3: PESTICIDESSUBJECT: Conflict of InterestAGENCY: Dept. of Pesticide RegulationACTION: Proposal to amend 87306HEARING: No hearing has been scheduled at this time.  Comments aredue by February 8, 1996.INFORMATION/COPIES: Susan Jimenez, (916) 445-1691SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend an existing Conflict ofInterest Code which designates employees who must disclose certaininvestments, income, interests in real property, businesspositions, and employees who must disqualify themselves from makingor participating in the making of governmental decisions affectingthose interests.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: CaFRG StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardACTION: Proposal to amend 2271HEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Board Hearing Room), Sacramento,9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION/COPIES: John Courtis, (916) 322-6019SUMMARY: This proposed action is intended to implement theprovisions of SB 709, and to provide other clarifications to theCalifornia Reformulated Gasoline (CaFRG) variance procedures.TITLE 13: AIRSUBJECT: CO Relaxation Standard for Utility EnginesAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardACTION: Proposal to amend 2403HEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room),Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered untilJanuary 26.INFORMATION/COPIES:  Michael O'Connor, (818) 575-6635SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend regulations and testprocedures related to the control of emissions from utility andlawn and garden equipment engines.**TITLE 14: SAN FRANCISCO BAYSUBJECT: PermitsAGENCY: San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development CommissionACTION: Proposal to amend 10300 (and other items)HEARING: February 15, 101 Eighth St., (Metro Center Auditorium),Oakland.INFORMATION/COPIES: Ellen Sampson, (415) 557-8784SUMMARY: This proposed action would amend the definition of "majorpermits" (and other items).**TITLE 14: SOLID WASTESUBJECT: Emergency Waiver of StandardsAGENCY: Calif. Integrated Waste Management BoardACTION: Proposal to amend sections 17210 through 17210.9HEARING: February 6, 8800 Cal Center Dr., (Board Room), Sacramento,10:00 a.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Chris Deidrick, (916) 255-2309SUMMARY: This proposed action would provide clarification andguidance to each operator who hold a solid waste facilities permitin applying for an emergency waiver of standards in the event of astate emergency or local emergency.TITLE 16: AIRSUBJECT: NOx StickersAGENCY: Bureau of Automotive RepairACTION: Proposal to amend 3340.37HEARING: January 25, 400 R St., Suite 1030, Sacramento, 3:00 p.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-4484SUMMARY: This proposed action would delete the requirements for theissuance of NOx window stickers designating whether a retrofit NOxcontrol device has been properly installed or the vehicle is exemptfrom the requirements for a retrofit NOx control device.TITLES 17 & 26: AIRSUBJECT: Toxics Hot Spots FeeAGENCY: Calif. Air Resources BoardHEARING: January 25, 2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room),Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may not be considered untilJanuary 26.INFORMATION/COPIES: Genevieve Shiroma, (916) 322-7072SUMMARY: The Board is proposing several major amendments to the FeeRegulation for 1995-96.TITLES 22 & 26: HAZARDOUS WASTESUBJECT: Hazardous Waste Management: Delay of ClosureAGENCY: Dept. of Toxic Substances ControlACTION: Proposal to amend 66264.13, 66264.112, 66264.113,662640142, 66268.13, 66265.113 and 66265.142HEARING: January 18, 1996, 744 P St., (Auditorium), Sacramento,10:00 a.m.INFORMATION/COPIES: Lorna Kirby, (916) 342-2431SUMMARY: The proposed Delay of Closure regulations would allow,under limited and stringent circumstances, a landfill, surfaceimpoundment or land treatment unit to delay closure of the unit andremain open after the formal receipt of hazardous wastes in orderto continue receiving non-hazardous wastes in that solid orhazardous waste management unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 19961/12/96 REPORT NOTESThis report covers significant actions through 1/12/96.  Copies ofbills may be ordered from the Legislative Bill Room, call (916)445-2323.EDITOR'S NOTE:  If you are following California environmentallegislation not being covered in EIR, please bring the bill numbersto our attention.  Call us at (916) 920-9094, or FAX a list to usat (916) 920-9096, and we will add them to our tracking list.PRINGLE ELECTED SPEAKERAssemblyman Republican Leader Curt Pringle (R-Garden Grove) waselected Speaker of the Assembly on January 4.  He succeedsAssemblyman Brian Sentencich (R-Fresno)."This is the completion of one process and the beginning ofanother," Speaker Pringle said.   "Let 1996 mark the year in whichour legislative agenda is fulfilled -- an agenda of hope forCalifornia's businesses and families."Pringle is a businessman by background.  A twenty-seven yearresident of Garden Grove, Pringle was born in Iowa.  In 1968 hisfamily moved to California and soon thereafter established PringleDraperies, a wholesale/retail window covering firm.IMPORTANT DATESJanuary 19 -- Last day for policy committees to hear and reportfiscal bills introduced in their house in 1995.January 26 -- Last day for any committee to hear and report billsintroduced in their house in 1995.January 31 -- Last day for each house to pass bills introduced intheir house in 1995.February 23 -- Last day for bills to be introduced.BILL INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced since the last report.Assembly BillsAB 1983 (MILLER) CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS   Existing law prohibits the prescribed manufacture or sale ofspecified chlorofluorocarbons or aerosol propellants containinga chlorofluorocarbon.  Existing law limits, as specified, thesale of motor vehicles equipped with CFC-based products, andrequires motor vehicle manufacturers to submit specifiedinformation in that regard to the State Air Resources Board.   This bill would repeal those provisions.  The bill wouldprovide that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, aperson may possess, use, manufacture, purchase, install,transport, or sell chlorofluorocarbons, and the possession, use,manufacture, purchase, installation, transportation, or sale ofchlorofluorocarbons does not subject any person, this state, orany political subdivision of this state to any penalty, fine,retaliatory action, or other punitive measure.1/3/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESK-----------------------------------------------------------------AB 1996 (MARGETT) FREON: AIR-CONDITIONING   Existing law prohibits the prescribed manufacture or sale ofspecified chlorofluorocarbons or aerosol propellants containinga chlorofluorocarbon.  Existing law limits, as specified, thesale of motor vehicles equipped with CFC-based products, andrequires motor vehicle manufacturers to submit specifiedinformation in that regard to the State Air Resources Board.Existing federal law prohibits the production or use of certainchlorofluorocarbons.   This bill would provide that, notwithstanding any suchprovision of law, until January 1, 2000, the production,manufacture, use, and sale of freon for express use inautomotive and home air-conditioning units and home appliancesdoes not subject any person, this state, or any politicalsubdivision of this state to any penalty, fine, other punitivemeasure, or enforcement action.1/4/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESK-----------------------------------------------------------------AB 2009 (CORTESE) WASTE: SOLID WASTE FACILITIES: PERMITS   Existing law, the California Integrated Waste Management Actof 1989, regulates the management of solid waste.  The actrequires the California Integrated Waste Management Board andcertified local enforcement agencies to perform specifiedfunctions with regard to the regulation of solid wastemanagement, including the issuance and enforcement of solidwaste facilities permits.  The board is required to concur orobject to the issuance, modification, or revision of any solidwaste facilities permit within 60 days of the board's receipt ofany proposed solid waste facilities permit. However, the boardis required to object to the permit and to submit itsdetermination and specific objections to the local enforcementagency, the applicant, and the city or county within which thefacility is located, until a countywide integrated wastemanagement plan has been approved by the board, if the boardmakes a determination concerning specified diversionrequirements.   This bill would delete that requirement that the board objectto the permit until the countywide integrated waste managementplan is approved.   The bill would declare that it is to take effect immediatelyas an urgency statute.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: ASSEMBLY DESKSenate BillsSB 1371 (MELLO) ECONOMIC POISONS   Under the Birth Defect Prevention Act of 1984, the Departmentof Food and Agriculture was required by December 31, 1985, toidentify pesticide active ingredients that the departmentdetermined had the most significant data gaps and widespread useand that were suspected to be hazardous to people.   Under the act, the Director of Pesticide Regulation also wasrequired on January 15, 1992, to issue a notice of the impendingsuspension of the registration of those pesticide productscontaining an active ingredient with a significant data gap forwhich the registrant had not submitted required data by December31, 1991.   However, existing law provides that notwithstanding theseprovisions, if the director finds that delays in submitting themandatory health effects studies were primarily caused byactions of the Department of Pesticide Regulation, the director,with the concurrence of the Secretary for EnvironmentalProtection, may extend the deadlines for submitting themandatory health effects studies for certain ingredients,including, among others, pentachlorophenol and methyl bromide.   In addition, under the act, no pesticide product containingspecified active ingredients for which the required studies havenot been submitted by March 30, 1996, shall remain registeredin this state after that date.   This bill would revise these latter provisions to specify, inaddition, that no pesticide product containing methyl bromideor pentachlorophenol for which the required studies have notbeen submitted by December 31, 1997, shall remain registeredafter those respective dates.   This bill would declare that it is to take effect immediatelyas an urgency statute.1/3/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES-----------------------------------------------------------------SB 1385 (ROSENTHAL) PUBLIC CONTRACTS: STATE PURCHASING: RECYCLEDPRODUCTS   Existing law requires all state agencies to purchasererefined automotive lubricants, recycled antifreeze, recycledsolvents, and recycled paints, as defined.  Existing lawrequires the purchase of the listed materials only when they areavailable, of a fitness and quality equal to their nonrecycledproduct and are not more costly than 5% of the lowest pricequoted by suppliers.  Existing law would repeal on January 1,1997.   This bill would delete the repeal date of January 1, 1997,thereby continuing the requirement that all state agenciespurchase the listed materials indefinitely.1/4/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONTHIRD EXTRAORDINARY SESSIONGovernor Wilson has called an Extraordinary Session of theLegislature to deal with the Methyl Bromide issue.  This is theThird Extraordinary Session the Governor has called during the1995-96 Regular Session of the Legislature.INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced in the Third ExtraordinarySession.Assembly BillsAB 1 (FRUSETTA) ECONOMIC POISONS   Existing law prohibits a pesticide product containing certainspecified active ingredients for which the required studieshave not been submitted by March 30, 1996, from remainingregistered in this state after that date.   This bill would permit a pesticide product containing methylbromide or pentachlorophenol to remain registered in this stateif the required studies for those active ingredients aresubmitted  by  on or before  December 31, 1997.1/11/96 PASSED ASSEMBLY APPROPRIATIONS (11-4)AMENDED: 1/10/96STATUS: ASSEMBLY FLOORSenate BillsSB 1 (MELLO) ECONOMIC POISONS: METHYL BROMIDE AND PENTACHLOROPHENOL   Under the Birth Defect Prevention Act of 1984, the Departmentof Food and Agriculture was required by December 31, 1985, toidentify pesticide active ingredients that the departmentdetermined had the most significant data gaps and widespread useand that were suspected to be hazardous to people.  Under theact, the Director of Pesticide Regulation also was required onJanuary 15, 1992, to issue a notice of the impending suspensionof the registration of those pesticide products containing anactive ingredient with a significant data gap for which theregistrant had not submitted required data by December 31, 1991.  Existing law permits the director, with the concurrence of theSecretary for Environmental Protection, to extend the deadlinesfor submitting the mandatory health effects studies for certainingredients, including methyl bromide and pentachlorophenol, ifthe director finds that delays in submitting the mandatoryhealth effects studies were primarily caused by actions of theDepartment of Pesticide Regulation.  Existing law also prohibitsa pesticide product containing certain specified activeingredients for which the required studies have not beensubmitted by March 30, 1996, from remaining registered in thisstate after that date.   This bill would prohibit a pesticide product containingpentachlorophenol or methyl bromide from remaining registered inthis state after December 31, 1997, if the required studies forthat active ingredient have not been submitted by that date.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES-----------------------------------------------------------------SB 2 (MONTEITH) ECONOMIC POISONS: METHYL BROMIDE ANDPENTACHLOROPHENOL   Existing law prohibits a pesticide product containing certainspecified active ingredients for which the required studieshave not been submitted by March 30, 1996, from remainingregistered in this state after that date.   This bill would permit a pesticide product containing methylbromide or pentachlorophenol to remain registered in this stateif the required studies for those active ingredients aresubmitted by December 31, 1997.1/8/96 INTRODUCEDSTATUS: SENATE HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICESBack to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 19961/5/96 REPORT NOTESThis report covers significant actions through 1/5/96.  Copies ofbills may be ordered by contacting your U.S. Representative or U.S.Senators.CONGRESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTSClean Air ActH.R. 325 (Manzullo) became law on December 23, 1995.  The billamends the Clean Air Act to provide for an optional provision forthe reduction of work-related vehicle trips and miles traveled inozone nonattainment areas designated as severe.BILL INTRODUCTIONSThe following bills have been introduced in the 104th Congress.U.S. Senate BillsS. 1491 (GRAMS) PESTICIDES (12/20/95):  A bill to reformantimicrobial pesticide registration, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.S. 1497 (NICKLES) SOLID WASTE (12/21/95): A bill to amend the SolidWaste Disposal Act to make certain adjustments in the land disposalprogram to provide needed flexibility, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Environment and Public Works.S. 1505 (LOTT) PIPELINE SAFETY (12/22/95):  A bill to reduce riskto public safety and the environment associated with pipelinetransportation of natural gas and hazardous liquids, and for otherpurposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, andTransportation.U.S. House of RepresentativesH.R. 2827 (MORELLA) ENVIRONMENT (12/21/95): A bill to consolidateand improve governmental environmental research by organizing aNational Institute for the Environment, and for other purposes; tothe Committee on Science.H.R. 2835 (PALLONE) MERCURY POLLUTION (12/22/95): A bill to reducethe risk of mercury pollution through use reduction, increasedrecycling, and reduction of emissions into the environment, and forother purposes; to the Committee on Commerce.H.R. 2838 (SMITH of N.J.) SOLID WASTE (12/22/95): A bill to amendthe Solid Waste Disposal Act to provide congressional authorizationfor State and local flow control authority over solid waste, andfor other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce.H.R. 2845 (COLLINS) SOLID WASTE (1/4/96):  A bill to amend theSolid Waste Disposal Act to allow petitions to be submitted toprevent certain waste facilities from being constructed inenvironmentally disadvantaged communities; to the Committee onCommerce.H.R. 2846 (COYE) CONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL SITES (1/4/96):  A bill toamend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow a credit for thecleanup of certain contaminated industrial sites and to allow theuse of tax-exempt redevelopment bonds for such cleanup; to theCommittee on Ways and Means.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996EDITOR'S NOTEDue to the partial shut down of the federal government the FederalRegister Review is not contained in this issue.  It will continuein the next issue of EIR.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996REGULATORY CALENDARJanuary 18Dept. of Toxic Substances Control hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal toamend Hazardous Waste Management Delay of Closure regulations.  744P St., (Auditorium), Sacramento, 10:00 a.m.  INFORMATION: LornaKirby, (916) 342-2431.January 24 - 25Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA) hearing.SUBJECT: Recommendations regarding issues that affect multiplecomponents of Cal/EPA's risk assessment practices.  400 P St.,(Room 1160), Sacramento, 8:30 a.m. each day.  INFORMATION: JoyceSmylie, (510) 540-1011.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to implementthe provisions of SB 709, and to provide other clarifications tothe California Reformulated Gasoline (CaFRG) variance procedures.2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.NOTE: This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION: John Courtis, (916) 322-6019.January 25Bureau of Automotive Repair hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to deleteNOx window stickers requirements.  400 R St., Suite 1030,Sacramento, 3:00 p.m.  INFORMATION: Donald Minnich, (916) 255-4484.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal to amendregulations and test procedures related to the control of emissionsfrom utility and lawn and garden equipment.  2020 L St., (LowerLevel Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.  NOTE: This item may notbe considered until January 26.  INFORMATION: Michael O'Connor,(818) 575-6635.January 25Calif. Air Resources Board hearing.  SUBJECT: Proposal tosignificantly amend the Toxics Hot Spots Fee Regulation for 1995-96.  2020 L St., (Lower Level Hearing Room), Sacramento, 9:30 a.m.NOTE:  This item may not be considered until January 26.INFORMATION: Genevieve Shiroma, (916) 322-7072.February 6Calif. Integrated Waste Management Board hearing.  SUBJECT:Clarification and guidance to each operator who hold a solid wastefacilities permit in applying for an emergency waiver of standardsin the event of a state emergency or local emergency.  8800 CalCenter Dr., (Board Room), Sacramento, 10:00 a.m.  INFORMATION:Chris Deidrick, (916) 255-2309.February 15San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission hearing.SUBJECT: Proposal to amend the definition of "major permits," andother items.  101 Eighth St., (Metro Center Auditorium), Oakland.INFORMATION: Ellen Sampson, (415) 557-8784.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-6IA086-000616-B016-268http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev61.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002635 text/html 87979HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:24:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:04 GMTContent-length: 87792Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev61.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONVERGENCE (1262 words) GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRING (352 words) CONFERENCE REPORT VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISK (769 words) NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDS (2044 words) LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSION (1033 words) EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULE (460 words) WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAW (252 words) PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASEL (114 words) BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFT (413 words) REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAM (456 words) PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVE (391 words) 4TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCE (414 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATER (409 words) EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHED (111 words) REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000 (281 words) NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICY (1018 words) ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTING (796 words) GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONED (592 words) ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORT (472 words) SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLS (1070 words) WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTE (155 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONVERGENCEA senior official of the Austrian Environment Ministry raised anintriguing question at the end of last year (this issue p5): will thepresence of the three new member states of the European Union, Austria,Finland and Sweden, lead to future ecological criteria comparable tothe convergence criteria set as pre-conditions for economic andmonetary union (EMU)?  From one point of view, the notion of anenvironmental equivalent to the EMU convergence criteria would be seenby some Euro-sceptics as just another potty idea from Europhiles whohave lost contact with reality.  After all, the member states arehaving enough difficulty getting their economies into line for EMU atthe moment, to the point where even Germany seems to be waivering onthe timetable.On the other hand, the mere stating of such a thought tells ussomething about the changing balance of power within the EU onenvironmental policy.  The three new states which joined in 1995 haveadded an important new block of votes within EU Council meetings on theside of environmental rigour.  Their decisions to join the Union werehard fought internally and were predicated upon a determination toretain their own higher-than-EU environmental standards and anunderstanding that other like-minded member states would help them toraise the whole EU regulatory framework into line.  Each had toovercome considerable doubts about the commitment of the EU toenvironmental protection before they could persuade their populationsto support accession.For a variety of reasons, including high disposable income, exposure toimported pollution by air or water, vulnerable and highly prizednatural assets, and cultures insured in a certain brand of civicresponsibility, these countries had already gone beyond the existing EUstandards in a number of environmental fields.  There were others wherethey had done less, but those received rather less publicity and, inany case, the public in these countries does appear overall to be morewilling than their colleagues in some other EU states to support publicspending on environmental objectives.In the course of the negotiations about their joining the EU, the threenew members secured a deal which allowed them to keep environmentalstandards which exceeded EU requirements for up to four years while theEuropean Commission attempted to persuade the rest of the Union torevise the common rules upwards.  The EU gave no binding commitment tosuch upward revisions at the end of the four-year transition period;what it agreed to was to try to achieve that and to convene a fullreview of the standards at issue at the end of the period, giving thenew members a chance to participate in the review on an equal footingwith those which had arrived before but also obliging them to come intoline with whatever emerges.  The open-ended nature of this agreementseems to have been somewhat glossed over within the three countries,where the public has been assured that there is absolutely no way theEU is going to force them to back down on their tight standards.The governments involved, which had stuck their necks out politicallyto support EU entry, have limited room for manoeuvre on this, becausethe anti-EU campaigns made great play of the argument that their proudnational environmental standards would be undermined by EU membership.Having now gone in, it is therefore imperative to prove them wrong byshowing that there has been no back-tracking and that, on the contrary,the new members have helped to raise the level of protection throughoutthe Union.Because there is still some way to go before the transition periodexpires, differing perceptions about what has been agreed can be safelyleft alone for the time being, in the knowledge that, on some of thecritical issues, the previous member states had already accepted thatexisting regulations were out of date.  Nevertheless, as the Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) to decide the next steps towardsintegration of the EU approaches, environmental policy seems set toplay a greater part in the proceedings than ever before.  Someobservers even think that it could become a serious obstacle to furtherprogress, both among the existing fifteen members and in relation toaccepting new countries from central and east Europe (CEE).Both the new entrants and several longer-standing members have anagenda for the IGC meetings in Turin which amounts to a clear steppingup of environmental regulation, including greater use of qualifiedmajority voting within Environment Council meetings and less recourseto the principle of subsidiarity.  That principle, the same Austrianofficial said, " should be interpreted restrictively and not in thesense of impeding environmental policies at Community level .... In anycase," she went on "we should avoid a narrow-minded interpretation ofthis important principle."Although some items on these countries' agenda will be agreed allround, other objectives on their lists will set them directly at oddswith less enthusiastic member states which either think that regulationhas gone far enough in a certain field or believe that it should beleft to national governments.  Perhaps more importantly, since the EUis well accustomed to such internal struggles, the new strengthening ofthe environmental harmonisation voice also risks worsening a potentialcollision between existing EU members and the countries which hope tobe the next in line.  In particular, the countries of central and eastEurope (CEE) have high expectations of early EU accession and suchhopes are only increased by signs of political instability in Russia.And yet, the task of approximating their environmental laws andstandards in a wide range of fields to those of the EU remains adaunting one (this issue p7).Estimates of the cost of this approximation process vary widely, withfigures like ECU100bn (US$78.6bn) or even ECU300bn quoted for theregion as a whole.  At the same time, the enormous environmentalproblems faced by these countries remain somewhat side-lined by urgenteconomic objectives, presenting the governments concerned with endlessreasons for postponing painful and expensive environmental reforms andfor restraining environmental enforcement.  Real progress isundoubtedly being made and there is no shortage of people at all levelswho are determined to push through such reforms.  The problem is thatthis is very difficult and there is no shortage of momentum for plentyof other crying needs as well.Amid this potentially awkward conflict between member states insistingon an upward revision of EU standards and politically sensitiveaspiring members who have a huge task ahead just to get close to thepre-conditions for entry, EU policy-makers are working hard to injectmore realism into the debate.  In doing so, they have to take on boardon both the ecological imperatives of countries like Austria, Sweden,Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands, and the need for practical waysforward in the CEE countries.One fear is that this could all lead inexorably towards a split or evena series of splits into two- or three-speed Europes, the implicationsof which are distinctly uncomfortable for many people.  The danger isthat failure to reconcile these ill-matched goals could bring progresstowards CEE accessions to a halt and that such a setback wouldundermine hard-won understandings among existing EU members.  In someways, it is hard to believe that environmental issues could play acritical part in such weighty historical developments and, indeed, whenthe crunch comes, they may be swept aside.  For the moment, however,they seem likely to command a lot of attention.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUIDANCE LIKELY IN THE SPRINGThe guidance document due to elaborate on key contaminated land andliability provisions in the Environment Act 1995 now seems likely toemerge in draft for public comment around April (ELR028/3, 026/5, 025/3et al).  No formal announcement has been made, but ELR understands thata pre-publication draft is due to be circulated to selected experts andinterested groups in mid-February.  A meeting with a core group ofpeople has been arranged by the Department of the Environment (DoE) for22 February, apparently to garner initial responses to that draft.  Asimilar meeting was held in April 1995 at an earlier stage in thepolicy debate to give the same people early warning of the Government'sthen plans for guidance and amendments as the Environment Bill wasentering the House of Commons (ELR020/6).Until recently, the main target date for the DoE has been to get thepackage of guidance and regulations ready for submission to Parliamentbefore its summer recess.  Although ELR can only speculate at thisstage, it looks now as though that date could be hard to meet.  If apublic draft is put out for comment in April, there could be aconsultation period of about six to eight weeks, after which thesubmissions will have to be digested and revisions made whereappropriate.  The DoE apparently kept open the option of seekingfurther advice once the public responses were received from thecontractors it used at the end of last year (ELR026/5), although it maynot exercise that option.  The most likely date for a revised draft nowseems to be late-summer, early-autumn, perhaps October.  Hopefully,that will go straight to Parliament for approval in a procedure thatcan not take less than three weeks.  Some observers have suggested thatthere might be a need for a further brief period for comment beforefinal submission to Parliament if substantial changes have been made inthe light of the responses in the spring.  The DoE will be hoping toavoid that and, provided it does, the whole regime could come intoforce around the beginning of 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VENDORS & WASTE PRODUCERS AT RISKThe possible implications of the UK Government's new contaminated landregime continue to be pored over in advance of the guidance documentsand regulations due out soon in draft to clarify important points inPart II of the Environment Act 1995 (this issue above).  At a seminarin London in January, convened by the Contaminated Land Working Partyof the UK Environmental Law Association, Richard Burnett-Hall, ofBristows Cooke & Carpmael, London, warned that people sellingcontaminated sites could be at risk of liability later on if thepurchaser or subsequent owners decided to change the site's use.  Healso argued that, although the UK Act does not name waste producers orgenerators as primary responsible parties in the way that the USSuperfund law does, waste producers could nevertheless find themselvesdrawn into the liability net as polluters.Mr Burnett-Hall observed that a vendor who had warranted that a sitewas clean for the purposes of a planned future use such as a car parkand had agreed a sale price with a purchaser under those conditionsmight find that a subsequent change of use at the site re-opened thequestion of responsibility for the remaining contaminants.  Under thenew regime, a site could be approved as satisfactory by the authoritiesfor the purposes of a specific intended use while a considerable amountof residual contamination remained underground, contained againstfurther dispersion but neither removed nor eliminated.  That is thecore of the Government's "suitable for use" clean-up strategy, intendedto encourage the return to productive use of old industrial sites byavoiding the excessive costs which would be incurred if all sites hadto be returned to a pristine condition.Such partially cleaned sites would, however, be granted approval onlyfor restricted uses.  A plan to change their use to, say, a residentialdevelopment might cause them to be re-classified as contaminated andtrigger a whole new round of official remediation procedures.  At thatpoint, Mr Burnett-Hall told ELR, the regulator might deem the originalvendor an "appropriate person" for a remediation order or cost recoveryaction on the grounds that he or she "caused" the offending substancesto be "in, on or under" the relevant land.  Unless the forthcomingofficial guidance were specifically designed to avoid vendors being putback on the hook once they had done what was required for theoriginally intended use, he said, vendors would be well advised to seekan indemnity from the purchaser covering all the contaminationremaining at the site.  Otherwise, the vendor's liability exposurecould remain open long after the site had passed out of his or hercontrol.In relation to waste producers, Mr Burnett-Hall said that much woulddepend on the meaning of "cause".  At present, there must be someconcern, he suggested, that a waste producer operating under the dutyof care imposed by the Environmental Protection Act 1990 might followhis wastes all the way to a disposal site and even require that they bedeposited at a certain location within the site, remaining to checkthat this was carried out, and then find later that the regulatordeemed such control to amount to causing contaminating substances to bepresent in, on or under the land.  Again, Mr Burnett-Hall said that hewould like to see the guidance address this directly, specifying thatwaste producers in such circumstances were not "appropriate persons".Among other things, Mr Burnett-Hall also predicted that the forthcomingguidance under the Act would be "seriously useful" compared with whathad existed hitherto and that the new land regime would be far moreeffective in making things actually happen.  He said that it remainedopen to question, however, how far local authorities would be competentand willing to carry out the provisions, especially in relation peopleoperating in their areas.  He expected voluntary clean ups, whereoperators chose to agree a plan with the regulators, often to go beyondstatutory requirements and not stop at just enough remedial action forthe next site use.  He also expressed concern about  the procedure forapportioning liability, arguing that it would be difficult to define aclear hierarchy of "appropriate persons" even in the guidance and thatone option would be to give local authorities discretion over whom toname.  If that were adopted, he said, either there would be room forappeal on the grounds that someone else should have been named asresponsible, in which case there was a risk of Superfund-stylelitigation, or appeals would not be allowed and the process would beseen as very unfair.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW MEMBERS WANT TOUGHER STANDARDSWith the approach of the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) todecide the next steps towards integration of the European Union, no oneshould be in any doubt that the arrival as EU members of Austria,Finland and Sweden in 1995 has increased the pressure for tightenvironmental regulation. Speakers from all three countries at aconference in Vienna in November* emphasised the importance placed onthis by a broad cross-section of opinion in each and the overall effectof this on the European Commission was confirmed by representatives ofthe Commission's environment directorate general (DGXI).  To someextent, this process has passed unnoticed in the rest of the EU up tonow, perhaps because of the low key role so far played by the newmembers.The IGC process may turn out to be the first widely visible platformfor this new pro-environment block, which is likely to support moves,already backed by some existing member states, for more stringentstandards and greater use of qualified majority voting, rather thanunanimity, within the Council of Ministers on environmental matters.Another opportunity will arise when an initial four-year transitionperiod for the new member states comes to an end.  During that period,the accession treaty allows the new states to maintain standards whichare stricter than those within the rest of the EU and commits theEuropean Commission to conducting a review of EU standards in the hopeof raising them to the levels prevailing in the new states.  At the endof the period, the intention is to have settled common standards acrossall 15 member states, with the aim of setting them at the highestpossible level.The new states clearly expect that to accommodate their own or higherstandards and are stating that, if such agreement has not been reachedby then, they will be very reluctant to reduce their standards intoline with those of less strict members.  The Commission, on the otherhand, is insisting that the accession treaty and the joint declarationswhich went with it commit the EU only to a process of revision and notto any definite result.  The new states will therefore have the chanceto press their case as full participants in an EU-wide discussion, butthe outcome can not be guaranteed.Jose MartAEnez Aragon, of DGXI, told the conference nevertheless thatthe arrival of the new member states had given new impetus to the EU'senvironmental policy.  Among other things, it had allowed the EU totake a more assertive position in international negotiations, such asthe Berlin climate change conference and the third meeting of the BaselConvention (ELR025/8).  In an accompanying paper, Margaret Brusasco-MacKenzie, the head of DGXI's international affairs unit, said that itwas already clear from the new states' role in recent environmentcouncil meetings that their arrival, with a background of highstandards and high public awareness of environmental issues, would"produce a Union with a far more ambitious approach".  When it comes tothe review under the transition arrangements, she said, "the question isnot whether the Union of fifteen can go hand-by- hand towards higherstandards, but rather the speed at which this is to be done."AustriaSpeakers at the conference* from Austria all stressed thatenvironmental concerns had figured high on the list of prioritiesduring the debate about joining the EU, with a majority of Austriansconcerned about any possible dilution of the country's stringentregulations.  The agreement, known as the "horizontal solution", in theaccession treaty allowing Austria to maintain its own environmentalstandards even where those exceed the EU equivalents, throughout thefour-year transition period, was seen as a key result of thenegotiations leading up to accession.  It is clear that the AustrianGovernment, recently re-elected with a similar political complexion,will fight hard at the end of that period to prevent any loosening ofstandards and will lobby strongly for support in other member states .Ingrid Thomasitz, of the Federal Environment Ministry, said that, inthe current review of the EU's Fifth Environmental Action Programme(this issue p12), the Austrian Government would support a more robustapplication of sustainability as a real test of policies in fields suchas transport, energy, agriculture and tourism, a restrictiveinterpretation of subsidiarity so that it does not impede environmentalpolicies at EU level, and a further strengthening of the precautionaryand polluter pays principles, together with the integration ofenvironmental costs into the prices of goods and services.At the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC), she said that Austriawould advocate: an obligation on the Commission to consider theenvironmental effects or "ecological consequences", as well as thebudgetary ones, of every legislative proposal; simplification andrevision of the safeguard clause in Article 100(a)(4) of the Treaty tomake it a real "environmental guarantee", allowing member states "tointroduce stricter national standards as well as apply the existingones"; wider support for qualified majority voting and the jointdecision-making procedure under Art 189(b) of the Treaty, to enablemeasures such as energy taxes to be imposed, although with limits inrelation to certain policy fields; other reforms to strengthen the roleof the European Parliament in EU decision-making; and greatertransparency in decision-making to aid public involvement.Overall, Ms Thomasitz speculated that the presence of the three newmember states might at some stage lead to ecological criteriacomparable to the convergence criteria for economic and monetary union. Klemens Fischer, of Austria's Permanent Representation to the EU inBrussels, told the conference that the acknowledgment given in JointDeclarations 6 and 7 of Act of Accession to the new member states'attachment to their existing environmental standards had been veryimportant to the voting within Austria on joining the EU.  He warnedthat, if the Union had not reached common standards equivalent to thoseprevailing in Austria by the end of the four-year transition period,Austria would see no alternative to exercising its right to imposenational standards under Art 100(a)(4)  and, he said, the politicalstakes would be too high for the European Commission to prevent that.Frank Ceska, General Secretary of the Federation of AustrianIndustrialists, observed that an important part of the case presentedby opponents of joining the EU had been that it would deprive Austriaof its ability to pursue an independent, and stricter, environmentalregime.  He made clear that Austrian industry had rejected that viewand was gratified that the critics had been proved wrong, since none ofthe country's stricter regulations had been changed since EU entry.  Healso drew attention to a pledge given by EU Environment CommissionerRitt Bjerregaard at a Council meeting in March 1995, that she did notintend that any of the new member countries should be forced to changetheir standards after the end of the transition period.Given Austria's commitment to tight environmental rules, Mr Ceskareported that industry favoured accelerated harmonisation of stricterrules throughout the EU, rather than development of new rules inAustria alone. In particular, he called for postponement of currentJustice Ministry proposals for a new environmental liability act inAustria, based on the Council of Europe convention on civil liabilityfor damage resulting from activities that are dangerous to theenvironment (the "Lugano" Convention).  This, he argued, would cause"an enormous burden for industry and an unbearable distortion ofcompetition".  It would be much better, he said, to await forthcomingEuropean Commission proposals for an EU directive in this field.Paul Luiki, of Heller, Lober, Bahn & Partners, Vienna, explained thatAustria had good reasons for sensitivity to environmental damage: it isa small, land-locked country bordering on eight other countries, whichimports over 90% of its air pollution and a good deal of waterpollution through rivers such as the Danube, depends on groundwater for99% of its drinking water, has an important tourist industry whichrequires a clean environment and also poses risks to it, and has aparticular problem with ground-level ozone, with substantially higherconcentrations than elsewhere in Europe.  As a result, he said,according to a 1991 OECD study Austria devoted a higher percentage ofits GDP to environmental protection, at 1.94%, than most otherindustrialised countries, including Germany (1.74%), the Netherlands(1.46%) and the US (1.36%).Mr Luiki cautioned that comparisons of Austrian and EU environmentalstandards could be over-simplified, since in some cases these were notdefined in comparable ways, and like Mr Ceska, he pointed to some areaswhere EU membership had led Austria to introduce new rules, such asenvironmental impact assessment and access to environmentalinformation.  He also noted that, in some fields such as wastewaterdischarges, implementation of stricter Austrian standards left room forimprovement.  On the other hand, he said that Austria had given greaterpriority than the EU to groundwater quality within its drinking waterpolicy.  A regulation under the country's Water Act, he told theconference, required provincial governors to declare a groundwateraction area and to implement clean-up action where quality criteriawere exceeded.  He reported that the first such action was stillawaited, but he did not think it would be long before one occurred.  Healso pointed to associated regulations on storage of hazardousmaterials, including one covering chlorinated solvents which involvedstringent emission and monitoring standards and for which there was asyet no EU equivalent.Ernst Brandl, of Schonherr Barfuss Torggler & Partner, Vienna,highlighted the heavy reliance under Austrian law on "command andcontrol" mechanisms, at both federal and provincial levels.  Lengthypermitting procedures, he said, usually allow everyone who might beaffected by a proposed development to participate and to appeal, withthe result that, for example, 12,000 people were involved in thecertification process of a garbage incineration plant in Vienna.  Mostprovinces also have an "attorney for the environment" who has standingin all provincial proceedings concerning activities which might have animpact on the environment.Finland/SwedenSatu Nurmi, of the Finnish Permanent Representation to the EU, told theconference* that Finland's geography presented special environmentalrisks, with one-third of its territory above the Arctic Circle, a harshnorthern climate and natural resources which were vulnerable tochemical precipitation.  "Even a small input of a hazardous substance,"he said, "may cause impacts that are difficult if not impossible toremedy simply because the natural renovation capacity of ecosystems isvery slow in northern latitudes."  He then listed a series of subjectson which Finland had obtained special declarations and transitionalarrangements during the EU accession process, where it consideredpresent EU regulations insufficiently strict.  These includedtransitional measures covering: pentachlorophenols (PCPs), fertilisers,pesticides, sulphur content of liquid fuels and plant protectionproducts.Like the Austrian speakers (this issue above), Mr Nurmi emphasised thatsuch environmental issues were given a high priority by the Finnishpublic.  That was also echoed by Prof Hans Stenberg, of AdvokatfirmanLindahl, Stockholm, who said that this was one area in which theSwedish Government could find common ground with a large part of theSwedish population, the political parties and non-governmentalorganisations (NGOs).  He reported that the Government had specified aspriorities in its approach to the EU's environmental agenda: measuresto combat acidification and climate change, resource management andproduct recycling, conservation of biological diversity, more stringentchemical control, international co-operation and more specific measuresincluding: environmental impact assessments, cleaner industrialprocesses, waste disposal, environmental management and audits, trade,energy-related taxes and land and water resource management.More generally, Prof Stenberg said that the Swedish Government attachedmuch importance to implementation of rules once they were agreed.  Thatwent further than the basic question of correct implementation ofdirectives under member state law, he said; it also included allocationof enough economic resources to the responsible bodies to ensure thatthe rules are effectively observed.* "European Environmental Harmonisation, Liability and Enforcement: TheImpact of Accession of New EU Member States", 5th Annual Seminar of theEuropean Environmental Law Subcommittee (F1) of the International BarAssociation's Section on Business Law, 271 Regent Street, London W1R7PA. Tel: +44 (0)171-629 1206; Fax: +44 (0)171-409 0456.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LONG WAY TO GO BEFORE ACCESSIONEnvironmental issues could become a major obstacle to accession to theEuropean Union for the first time as the countries of central and eastEurope (CEE) prepare for this step following agreement on a broad pre-accession strategy at the Essen European Council in December 1994.Despite much rhetoric and optimism up to now, they still have a verylong way to go before they fulfil the environmental policy conditionsrequired for entry, according to a representative of the EuropeanCommission.  Speaking at a conference in Vienna in November(this issueabove), Julian Wilson, of the PHARE Programme staff in DGIA, said thatwhile the Commission was working hard to support the countries' effortstowards accession, there were some unrealistic expectations within theCEE region, particularly in relation to the environmental conditions.Among the problems experienced so far, he reported, were that thedialogue with the EU on the issues involved was relatively superficial,basic information and statistics were lacking, as were comprehensivecountry strategies, financing plans and schedules did not exist,legislation was being passed but not monitored or enforced, and theenvironment was generally of secondary importance compared witheconomic growth.He warned that existing member states would not allow new entrantsunless the statutory targets on matters such as emissions were met andthe CEE region was mostly still a long way off that.  The EuropeanCommission's environmental policy representatives were often seen as anirritating obstacle by CEE government ministries, such as finance andindustry, he said, some of whom had to be convinced that environmentalrequirements were unavoidable.  Mr Wilson described the progress whichhad been made since the publication last summer of a White Paper onpreparation for integration into the internal market (COM(95) 163final), on matters such as harmonisation of regulations, monitoring andenforcement, municipalities, and past environmental damage and thegreening of industry.  He emphasised that the funds available throughthe PHARE Programme and other international financial institutionswould amount to only a small proportion of the money required by theCEE countries for approximation to EU environmental standards.Mr Wilson made a number of forecasts on how things would develop in thenext few years, including that: CEE industry would remain uncontrolledand very "ungreen" during the accession period; municipalities wouldmeet environmental conditions faster; the environment overall wouldbecome a block to creation of a free market and to eventual accession;the central part of the region had a head start, although the Balticstates were catching up fast; the countries which costed theenvironment fully, enforced more strongly and asked for acceptabledispensations would accede first; and the present timeframes werecompletely crazy.  The idea being promoted by some that the countrieswould meet the objectives within five years was nonsense, he said;progress could be made, however, if governments were prepared todiscuss specific derogations and enforcement matters.  The whole debatein the environmental field, he argued, needed to be much morestructured, operational and realistic.  He also warned that thisprocess presented real dangers if it was not taken sufficientlyseriously, because a failure to achieve the EU's objectives in relationto CEE countries could rebound on what had been achieved within theexisting EU membership.Tim Murphy, head of the environmental appraisal unit at the EuropeanBank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), London, also urgedsober assessment of the amounts of money needed to achieveharmonisation with EU standards, pointing out that one estimate for allsix accession countries and three Baltic states was ECU100bn, or 3.6%of gross domestic product (GDP) a year.  Another estimate given earlierat the conference, of ECU300bn, would represent some 11% of GDP onenvironmental affairs, he pointed out, which was clearly unrealistic.He stressed that most of the finance for achieving environmentallysustainable development would have to come from the countriesthemselves and much of it from the private or municipal sectors.Among the challenges facing the CEE countries, Mr Murphy said, were aneed to realise that they had to internalise environmental costs, aneed to embrace principles such as cleaner production and wasteminimisation, and the importance of environmental product standards.He argued that it was particularly important to the EBRD that thecountries did not divide into two, with an advanced minority havingprospects of early accession and a less advanced majority fallingbehind.  He also said that the investment cycle currently offered awindow of opportunity which had to be seized by the countriesthemselves.Gyula Bandi, of University Eotvos Lorand, Budapest, said that theenvironment was still not a high priority issue for the HungarianGovernment, although he hoped that the introduction of Hungary's newEnvironmental Protection Act (in force from December 1995) (ELR023/5,020/7) might push it up the priority list.  Even the Act, he argued,tended to allow economic considerations to override environmentalrequirements, with concepts such as "if the present economic situationallows" and a general lack of acceptance that there would be costs toindustry.  A key problem, he said, was there was still no coreprogramme or strategy, within which to order priorities and, inaddition, a recent resolution to restructure governmentresponsibilities had created uncertainty about who the competentauthorities for various environmental matters would be.Stanislaw Wajda, an adviser to the Polish Environment Minister,reported that the Polish Government was working on a framework lawwhich was launched in June last year, was due to be completed by June1996 and should be sent to the country's Parliament by the end of 1997. He said that Poland faced problems such as a lack of legal expertiseand of analytical materials on EU laws, and was missing workingrelations with EU experts and direct insight into the legislativeprocess within the EU.  He felt that observer status would be helpfuland he drew attention to a refusal of such status which had occurred in1994 when Poland approached the EU's network of enforcement officials,known as the Chester or IMPEL Network (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9). Atthe time, the response had been that the request was premature, but heargued that that ought to be re-considered.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EMERGING FROM SOVIET RULEAn important feature of the development of environmental law in theBaltic states is that, unlike the countries of central Europe, they areemerging from 50 years within the Soviet Union.  They have thereforehad to develop a whole framework of national law, as well as rules fora market economy, since they obtained independence in 1991.  Theyreached approximation agreements with the EU in 1995, so are very muchat the beginning of the process of adjusting their environmental lawsand regulations, the conference (this issue p7) was told by GrettaGoldenman, of Oppenheimer Wolff & Donnelly, Brussels.In Lithuania, she reported, a unit has been set up within the Ministryof Environmental Protection to deal with the approximation process, butthe Ministry has access to very little expertise in environmental lawand would benefit greatly from closer contact with experts in moreadvanced countries.  For that reason, she said, the LithuanianGovernment has recently been exploring close working ties with one ormore EU member states, to learn from their experience.  In themeantime, a substantial amount of legislation is in draft, coveringsubjects like environmental impact assessment and waste management, anda framework law on environmental protection was passed in 1992.  Anenvironmental strategy was also recently prepared for submission to theSofia Environment for Europe conference last October (ELR025/6).Legislators were having to struggle in this field, Ms Goldenman said,with a background of Soviet regulations on subjects like ambient airand water quality, which were so strict that they were virtuallyunachievable.  The result in the past, she said, was that statutory"maximum allowable pollution values" were routinely supplemented by"temporary allowable pollution limits" issued by the authorities toreflect what was actually being released by a plant.  Charges andpenalties for pollution were consequently very low, leaving almost noincentive at all for enterprises to invest in pollution reduction.One of the anomalies in Lithuania, and also in Latvia and Estonia, hasbeen that the privatisation process has up to now involved sellingenterprises separately from the land on which they stand, Ms Goldenmantold ELR.  This is because the country's Constitution limits ownershipof land to citizens of Lithuania and foreign embassies.  In order tobecome members of the EU this has to be changed, she said, and aConstitutional amendment partially removing that obstacle was beingdebated in the Lithuanian Parliament in December.  An inter-ministerialworking group set up in April 1995, with some outside representationfrom the business community, she reported, also producedrecommendations in September concerning liability issues in theprivatisation process, focussing particularly on damage which occurredprior to privatisation, when the assets were under state ownership.The Environmental Protection Ministry is currently considering thoserecommendations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WASTE OFFENCES BRING NEW LAWA series of breaches of waste management authorisations recentlyuncovered by environmental inspectors have persuaded the SlovakEnvironment Ministry (MZPSR) to introduce new measures to tighten upregulation in this field. The Ministry is currently preparing a new Lawon Wastes, part of which will include provisions to make it much moredifficult to "skirt round" the laws and regulations, according to astatement from Environment Minister Josef Zlocha in January.  Therewill also be encouragement for waste incineration as preferable to someother forms of waste disposal.  Mr Zlocha emphasised that the dangerfrom wastes should not be under-estimated, because in the future theycould become an "ecological time bomb".Two cases were cited by the Slovak News Agency in January.  The firstconcerned a company called EHS, part of Slovnaft as, which had assumedresponsibility for handling certain hazardous wastes.  Instead ofdisposing of them in the approved manner, the Ministry discovered17,000 tonnes (t) of the waste in a brickworks yard in Lucenec, nearthe Hungarian border, and 7,000t at a municipal waste site in Trencin,north east of Bratislava. The second case involved Tellus Tellumo, inBratislava, which is alleged to have discharged used mineral oilwithout due regard to its effects on groundwater and to have beenstoring used batteries on site, with possible sulphuric acid leaks.The company had a licence only to transport, rather than store, suchmaterials.  Local and national inspection officials were reported tohave exercised the appropriate sanctions in both cases.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PARLIAMENT RATIFIES BASELBulgaria was added to the list of countries which have ratified theBasel Convention on trans-boundary movements of hazardous wastes andtheir disposal, following a vote in its Parliament on 18 January.  Insupporting the vote, the Government observed that Bulgarian law inrecent years had been brought into line with the provisions of theConvention.  The Environmental Protection Act passed in 1991 andamended in 1992 regulates import and trans-shipment of waste, and isbacked up by foreign trade rules and agreements with the EuropeanUnion.  Bulgaria has also instituted an internal system for licensinghazardous waste disposal.  The Environment Ministry reported thatBulgarian industry generated 14,300 tonnes of hazardous waste in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BC PUBLISHES THIRD SITE DRAFTDraft no 3 of the Contaminated Sites Regulation for the Canadianprovince of British Columbia (BC) was finally published on 4 December.This Regulation is required in order to implement a new contaminatedsite regime under the Waste Management Amendment Act, 1993 (also knownas Bill 26), which was passed in June 1993 (ELR001/6).  The regimeinvolves strict, joint and several, and retroactive liability,compulsory remediation orders, with exemptions for certain parties,limited liability provisions for minor contributors and thosevolunteering to conduct clean ups, allocation panels to assist inapportioning liability, a public registry of site information and siteprofile requirements at the time of specified transactions.  The systemhas been criticised by some business groups, but has also been subjectto prolonged consultation.  The BC Government's view is that the newprovisions clarify issues which were left unresolved under previouslegislation and in so doing provide more defences and exemptions forthe parties likely to be involved.Draft no 2 of the Regulation was circulated for comment in September1994, following a consultation exercise, originally with the intentionthat it should be the final draft prior to implementation and thereforesubject only to minor changes.  By October 1994, however, furtherconsultation had been extended indefinitely following pressure frommunicipal authorities and subsequently other groups concerning clean-upstandards, municipal liability and liability exposures for parties suchas lenders, trustees, developers and the mining industry (ELR014/6,012/4).  The third draft appeared to be imminent in July 1995(ELR024/5, 022/6), but has ultimately taken until December to come out. This time comments were requested within seven weeks (by 22 January)and the BC Government appeared to be resolved finally to push theRegulation through.  The target date for its coming into force wasgiven as spring 1996.The Regulation now contains some 17 Divisions (chapters) coveringsubjects such as site profiles, site registry, fees, contaminated sitedefinition and determination, remediation standards, liability,contaminated soil relocation, remediation plan approval and completion,and orphan sites.  Most of the changes reflect the concerns which wereexpressed about the second draft by various interested groups, so thatmunicipalities in particular get a series of clarifications orconcessions reducing their liability exposures, new exemptions areprovided for trustees, executors, administrators and other fiduciaries,a lower standard of care for receivers and a new system of soilstandard setting is introduced containing four different types ofstandards which are intended to allow more flexibility in theremediation process.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REPORT HOLDS OMAI LIABLE FOR DAMAn inquiry report produced by a commission of the Guyanese Governmenthas suggested that the mine operators, Omai Gold Mines Ltd, should beheld liable for the damage which resulted from the failure of atailings dam at Guyana's largest gold mine in August last year(ELR025/9, 024/19). The report concluded that the company had a legalobligation to ensure that the cyanide-contaminated water in thetailings pond did not escape and would be liable, irrespective of thequality of their work in securing it, if the contaminants were allowedto escape.  On the other hand, the report decided that thecontamination of the Omai and Essequibo rivers caused by the incidentdid not give rise to a serious threat to life and that the naturalbacteriological and biochemical systems in the water courses did notseem to have been severely affected.In the underlying event, some 3m cubic metres of cyanide-contaminatedwaste escaped from the tailings pond at Omai mine, first into the localOmai river, but thereafter into Guyana's largest river, the Essequibo.Initial concerns included possible threats to loggers, native Indians,fish and wildlife along the river, which is much used for drinkingwater and fishing.  Some neighbouring Caribbean countries at one stageimposed bans on Guyana's fish and shrimp catch.  By mid-September,however, the Guyanese Health Ministry had declared the Essequibo safe,following international inspections.  Local inhabitants, nevertheless,are reported to have complained of skin irritations and a coalitiongroup critical of the commission's report has been considering a classaction lawsuit, according to the Montreal Gazette.Omai Gold Mines Ltd is 65% owned by Cambior Inc, Montreal, 30% byGolden Star Resources Ltd, Edmonton (part of a Colorado-based US group)and 5% by the Guyanese Government.  The mine is reportedly the largestopen pit gold mine in South America.  At the beginning of January,Finance Minister Bharrat Jagdeo reported that the country's gold exportearnings were US$27m short of their $135m target in 1995 because of theOmai mine's closure following the spill.  A separate estimate putOmai's losses, in terms of expenses and lost revenue, at C$25m(US$18.2m).  Cambior's share price also fell substantially followingthe incident, with investors noting that the Omai mine had been due toaccount for a sizeable part of the company's gold production in 1995.The commission called for independent geo-technical scrutiny of a newimpoundment under construction at the mine, to confirm its structuralintegrity.  It suggested that the spill was caused by faultyconstruction of an embankment dam holding the liquid waste, resultingin progressive cavities or tunnels in the core of the embankment whichended in catastrophic failure.  Its report did not attempt to apportionblame for the faults.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PARLIAMENT PRESSES FOR LIABILITY DIRECTIVEJust when some observers thought that DGXI's efforts to get a draftdirective on environmental liability on to the books in 1996 wererunning into difficulty (ELR028/9), the European Parliament has steppedin to add a potentially important voice to the calls for such aproposal.  At its plenary meeting in December, the Parliament approveda resolution on the Commission's work programme for 1996 which includesa demand that "a proposal for a directive concerning rules on damage tothe environment" be added to the programme.  When the 1996 workprogramme was published in November, there was no mention of such aninitiative despite several indications during 1995 that DGXI hoped toachieve this, if possible, in the early months of this year.Efforts by DGXI to get approval for such a step from the College ofCommissioners, the forum which brings together all the EuropeanCommissioners, at one of their meetings in December, were abandoned bythe middle of that month, apparently because the EnvironmentCommissioner, Ritt Bjerregaard, felt that the prospects of winningagreement from her fellow Commissioners would be better after theresults were in from the two research projects into aspects ofenvironmental liability which are due for completion soon (ELR024/9,022/8 et al).What gives the Parliament's resolution some bite is that it drawsattention to its own previous resolution in April 1994 (ELR00/), whichcalled upon the Commission to bring forward proposals in this field,and to the fact that the earlier resolution was passed by theParliament under Article 138b of the Treaty, which gives the Parliamentthe power to initiate measures, rather than simply respond to theCouncil and the Commission.  A separate clause in the Decemberresolution stresses that "the legislative programme should includeEuropean Parliament initiatives adopted pursuant to Article 138b of theEC Treaty".  The issue of environmental liability, whatever itspolitical complications, has therefore become embroiled in theParliament's battle to implement the enhanced powers it obtained underthe Maastricht treaty.  Other environmental measures mentioned in theParliament's December resolution included a proposal for "a directiveon soil protection laying down strict provisions on protection againstpollution and sustainable management of the soil (land use, erosion,compaction)" and a "White Paper on the monitoring and application ofCommunity legislation on the environment, including the imposition ofpenalties".Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19964TH INTERNATIONAL ENFORCEMENT CONFERENCEThe fourth in an increasingly important series of internationalconferences on environmental compliance and enforcement will take placeon 22-26 April in Chiang Mai, Thailand.  Over 200 participants haveregistered for this event, representing some 80 countries andinternational organisations.  The previous conference was held inOaxaca, Mexico, in April 1994, attracting 175 people from 70 countries(ELR012/8-11, 011/14, 006/15), and before that the first two in theseries took place in Utrecht, in May 1990, and Budapest, in September1992 (ELR001/10).  Those two brought together representatives from 13and 40 countries, respectively.  The series has been supportedthroughout by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and theDutch Environment Ministry (VROM), together latterly with the UNEnvironment Programme (UNEP), local agencies in the countries visitedand other groups.  There has been a deliberate attempt to spread theactivity geographically by convening each conference in a new region toattract greater participation from that part of the world.What distinguishes these mega-events from some other conferences isthat participation is confined for the most part to active national andlocal officials with enforcement responsibilities, with a minority frominternational agencies and non-governmental organisations (NGOs).  Theflavour of the get-together is therefore very much about action andbuilding enforcement capabilities by sharing experience and extendingsupport across national boundaries.  In that sense, within Europe it isparallelled by the, also increasingly important, Chester or IMPELNetwork, which brings together enforcement officials throughout the EUon a regular basis (ELR006/15, 005/15, 001/9).The conference programme in Chiang Mai includes workshop sessions withsubjects which give an indication of some of the current priorities.They include, among others: establishing international co-operation andregional networks, automation and enforcement, strategic targeting,compliance monitoring, promoting voluntary compliance, measures ofsuccess, public role in enforcement, criminal enforcement (Interpoletc), economic instruments, take-back laws, transboundary illegalshipments of hazardous waste (tricks of the trade) and collaborativeinternational targeting. While much of the work will focus oninstitutional, technical and policy issues, it is worth noting thatinvolving the public in helping to enforce environmental regulationsremains very much on the agenda.  Workshop sessions on this public rolewill include issues such as the role of citizens in identifyingviolators, their role in pursuing enforcement actions or forcinggovernments to pursue violators and the need for public disclosure ofcompliance information.  Alongside this, considerable effort will beput into assisting countries with less advanced environmentalregulatory capacities to increase their effectiveness.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EEA HIGHLIGHTS SOIL & GROUNDWATERSoil and groundwater problems were among the topics highlighted by theEuropean Environment Agency (EEA) in a report published in November aspart of the European Commission's review of its Fifth EnvironmentalAction Programme.  The report was published just before the EEAcelebrated its second anniversary at its Copenhagen headquarters, anoccasion marked by a ceremony attended by 140 people, including theCommission President Jacques Santer, Environment Commissioner RittBjerregaard and senior representatives from all 15 EU member states.The EEA report concluded that EU environmental policy needed to be"accelerated" in order to meet its own environmental objectives.Although progress had been made in reducing some pressures on theenvironment, these were not enough, it said, to improve the generalquality of the environment, even less to achieve sustainability.Successes in recent years had been mainly in dealing with point (iestationary) sources of pollution, especially in the industrial sector.Policies aimed at diffuse sources, such as products, consumers andtransport, it argued, had been much less effective.The report recommended that further attention be given at Europeanlevel to climate change, acidification, urban air quality, waterabstraction and groundwater quality, habitat destruction andfragmentation, and waste management.  It also identified as otherissues which had not been comprehensively tackled at European level thedegradation of soil quality (described as an important naturalresource), coastal management and chemicals in the environment.  Withinthe 151-page report, the EEA suggested that more attention should begiven to the efficiency of environmental policies and called for aparticular focus on the transport sector, where it foresaw exceptionalpressures on the environment as a result of growth trends in freightand passenger road transport.Mr Santer told the Agency's anniversary gathering that he wanted theCommission to be "at the leading edge of environmental policies" andthat he saw the EEA's work in developing accurate data on environmentaltrends as part of a drive to change attitudes across Europe.  MsBjerregaard said that the issues identified in the EEA report would betaken up in the Commission's own proposals for advancing the 5th ActionProgramme.  She drew attention to the fact that moves towards greateruse of economic instruments in this field were being hampered by therequirement for unanimity at the Council of Ministers on policies withfiscal provisions and she observed that the unanimity requirement mightbe reconsidered during the 1996 Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC)(this issue p4).Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EEA INTERNET SITE LAUNCHEDA European Environment Agency (EEA) Internet site was launched byEuropean Commission President Jacques Santer at the Agency's secondanniversary celebrations on 13 November.  The World Wide Web site, athttp://www.eea.dk/, is intended to play a key role in making EEAinformation available to the general public.  The initial contents willbe relatively limited, but there are plans to add more publications andmany EEA databases, with the newest items advertised at the main homepage of the site.  Within the first month after its launch, the EEAreported that there had been 1,800 accesses to the home page and atotal of over 30,000 file retrievals from the whole site.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REFINERY FINED RECORD S$150,000A S$150,000 (US$105,783) fine imposed by the Port of SingaporeAuthority against the Singapore Refinery Co in connection with an oilspill at its Pulau Merlimau refinery last August is the highest so farimposed in Singapore for an oil spill.  The penalty was imposed underthe Prevention of Pollution at Sea Act, which provides for fines up toS$500,000 and prison terms of up to two years.  Previously, the highestfine for this kind of incident had been S$30,000.The August spill is reported to have resulted from a pipeline valvebeing accidentally left open following maintenance activities.  Some300 tonnes of oil subsequently leaked into the sea when pumpingrestarted.  The oil apparently leaked into an adjoining drain andthence into the storm water system and the sea.  It then spread over anarea of approximately 60 sq km and is said to have cost S$1.7m to cleanup.  A further S$6,000 in fines had previously been levied under theTrade Effluents Regulations.The company, a joint venture involving Caltex, BP and SingaporePetroleum Ltd, had sought a lesser penalty on the grounds that it hadco-operated fully once the leak was detected and had done its utmost toclean up the damage.  Since the incident, it told The Straits Times, ithad revised operating procedures, improved storm water inspectionbefore it enters the sea, installed guard basins and oil detectiondevices, provided additional training for staff, and reviewed emergencyresponse systems, organising an external audit to verify theimprovements.  A spokesman told the paper that the company was ISOcertified and had worked quickly to implement all the recommendationsof the inquiries conducted after the spill.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW EPA AUDITING/SELF-REPORTING POLICYThe US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued a new policyconcerning environmental auditing and reporting of statutoryviolations, which offers some incentives to companies to reportthemselves when they discover such infractions, but also leavesquestion marks about the advisability of doing so.  The policystatement, "Incentives for Self- Policing: Discovery, Disclosure,Correction and Prevention of Violations", was published in the FederalRegister on 22 December and came into effect on 22 January.  It is theculmination of a period of consultation about this subject which beganin the summer of 1994 (ELR020/11, 013/11).Hitherto, official guidance has been based on a series of policystatements issued by the EPA and the Department of Justice from 1986onwards, which stated that the regulators would not routinely seekcompanies' audit reports in the course of their enforcement work andthat activities such as self-auditing and voluntary disclosure would betaken into account in decisions about prosecutions and penalties.  Theunderlying policy, however, reserved for the authorities the discretionto demand such reports when they deemed it appropriate and was thesubject of much corporate concern because of the uncertainty which thiscaused.In recent years, business groups have been arguing in favour of a newform of legal privilege to protect such internal review documents,widely known as the "self-evaluative" privilege.  Several US stateshave introduced such a concept at state level and there is case lawsupporting it in private civil actions relating to fields such asmedical malpractice, but it is not recognised so far in the federal, ormany of the state, courts in the context of environmental actions.  TheEPA announced in March 1995 that it would not support a new statutoryaudit privilege in this field, for fear that that could "promotesecrecy, expand litigation and compromise enforcement actions".  Duringthe consultation process, environmental groups had lobbied the Agencyfor total transparency of the audit process, with public participationand disclosure throughout.  Companies, in contrast, tend to feel thatmore is achieved in terms of environmental protection if audit reportsremain internal.What the EPA decided to offer instead was a policy of reduced civilpenalties and waiving of criminal proceedings where organisationsdisclosed their own violations and promptly corrected them.  Thediscretion to ask for audit material would remain, but would only beexercised where there was independent evidence of a potentialviolation.  The incentive system now coming into effect specifiesconditions under which the "gravity-based" component of a civil penaltycan be reduced by either 100% or 75%.  Such civil penalties areassessed in two parts: first, in terms of the net economic benefitwhich the company concerned is deemed to have gained as a result ofviolating certain regulations and, second, a "gravity-based" elementintended to reflect the degree of seriousness involved.  The first willcontinue to be imposed in full under the new policy, but the second maybe reduced or eliminated where companies meet specified standards.A recent briefing put out by the Washington DC office of lawyersMorgan, Lewis & Bockius, gives a good summary of the new policy'sprovisions.  To secure a 100% reduction of the gravity-based penalty,nine conditions have to be met: the violation must be discoveredthrough an environmental audit or "due diligence" compliance programme;it must be identified voluntarily; it must be fully disclosed to theEPA within 10 days of discovery; it must be discovered and disclosedindependent of any government, third party or "whistleblower" action;it must be corrected within 60 days, or longer with EPA agreement, withcorrection certified to the EPA; the company must agree to take stepsto prevent a recurrence; the violation must not be a repeat of aprevious violation; it must not have caused "serious actual harm" norpresented "an imminent and substantial endangerment" nor violated theterms of a previous order or consent decree; and the company must co-operate with the EPA's investigation of the matter.  Morgan, Lewis &Bockius point out that this will allow companies to benefit from thepenalty reduction even where the violation is of a kind that is subjectto mandatory reporting.The policy then gives a detailed definition of environmental duediligence sufficient to achieve the reduction, based on the company'ssystematic efforts, appropriate to the size of the business, toprevent, detect and correct violations through all of a six-point listof measures.  It also offers more limited 75% reductions where thecompany does not have an audit or due diligence programme meeting theEPA criteria, but fulfils all the other conditions on the nine-pointlist.Alex Karlin, of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, told ELR that the EPA waseffectively offering companies a carrot to encourage voluntarydisclosure where no mandatory duty to disclose existed.  He cautioned,however, that companies would have to look carefully at each case anddecide whether it was better to come forward and accept a highprobability of a penalty, albeit reduced, or not to report in theknowledge that no one might ever find out or, if they did some years inthe future, the problem would already have been fixed.  Under thelatter circumstances, he said, the only thing missing would have been avoluntary report to the authorities, who might by that time take theview that it was not worth re-opening penalty proceedings.  Thedecision, he suggested, would be fact-specific, based on the nature ofthe violation and the likelihood of it coming out anyway.The most important pre-requisite, Mr Karlin emphasised, was to fix theproblem immediately or as soon as possible.  Having done that, heargued, the self-reporting question would become a smaller issue.  Henoted, nevertheless, that the "gravity-based" element in a penaltyassessed by the EPA could be as large as $1.4m or $2m, so thereductions on offer could not be dismissed.  He also said that existingcompany audit or compliance programmes ought now to be checked againstthe new EPA definitions to make sure that they would qualify forreductions under the scheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCOUNTING FORUM ADVISES ON REPORTINGPressure for fuller reporting of environmental factors by companiesreceived a further boost in December, when a potentially influentialadvisory document on the best ways to treat environmental expendituresand liabilities in company accounts and annual reports within theEuropean Union was produced by an expert body known as the AccountingAdvisory Forum.  The Forum comprises individual experts selected on apersonal basis to advise the European Commission on accountancymatters.  It is not a standard-setting body.  The document, entitled"Environmental Issues in Financial Reporting", is therefore intended tostimulate discussion on the issues among "standard-setters, preparers,users and auditors of accounts" in member states.The subject was raised in the Commission's Fifth Environmental ActionProgramme, "Towards Sustainability", published in 1992, and the Forumwas asked by the Commission to give an opinion on how to improvereporting in this field, "so that a better insight is provided into thecompany's attitude towards the environment and the impact ofenvironmental risks and liabilities on its financial position."  Thedocument is not concerned with separate environmental reports producedby companies, except insofar as it recommends that the existence ofthese should be referred to in accounts and annual reports as a sourceof further information.Using the framework of general provisions in the 4th and 7th CompanyLaw Directives on annual and consolidated accounts (78/660/EEC and83/349/EEC), the document acknowledges that environmental liabilitiesand risks entail special uncertainties relating to factors such aschanges in clean-up technologies, future legislation and the extent ornature of the clean up required.  Nevertheless, it argues that suchliabilities and risks qualify for recognition as a provision in thebalance sheet if the company has a legal or contractual obligation toprevent, reduce or repair environmental damage, or if its management iscommitted to such action through things like statements of policy orintention, industry practice or public expectations, or communicationof such a decision either internally or externally.The amount of a provision, it suggests, should be based on reasonableestimates of the loss, if necessary within a range, with a contingentliability note where it is possible that the loss will be greater thanexpected.  If no reasonable estimate can be made, which the documentdescribes as "rare circumstances", "the company should at leastdisclose the nature of the contingent liability as well as thecircumstances and risks involved in the notes to the accounts."  Theamount recorded as a company's expected future environmentalexpenditures should, the document says, be sufficient "to cover thefull costs of the damage to the environment for which the company isresponsible, irrespective of the date at which the activity is ceased."Except where long-term de-commissioning costs for such facilities asdrilling platforms or nuclear power stations can be clearlydistinguished from other liability provisions, the Forum interprets the4th Directive as requiring that the full charge should be included inthe profit and loss account as soon as it arises, and not spread overseveral years.  This is despite the fact that the Forum recognises thatnew legislation or discovery of unexpected liabilities may involveaccumulated expenditures which are so large that they distort thecompany's accounts in that year, making it difficult to interpret itsunderlying economic performance.The document defines criteria for capitalising environmentalexpenditures and it recommends more generally that gross liabilitiesand expected recoveries, through counter-claims, insurance cover orsimilar agreements, be shown separately in the balance sheet, ratherthan presenting liabilities in net form.  In terms of disclosure, thedocument says that environmental issues should only be disclosed inaccounts and annual reports "to the extent that they are material tothe financial performance or financial position of the undertaking",with exemptions where member states have introduced them for small andmedium-size companies.It suggests that the notes on the accounts should include the amountcapitalised and analysis of the amount charged to the profit and lossaccount "in a manner appropriate to the nature and size of businessand/or the types of environmental issues relevant to the enterprise",including factors as prevention, reduction and repair of environmentaldamage.  The notes should also, it states, cover costs incurred asfines or penalties for non-compliance and compensation to third partiesfor loss or injury (which the Forum excludes from its "narrow"definition of environmental expenditures).  In the annual report, theForum argues, information could include a description of the issueswhich are relevant to the financial position and the undertaking'sresponse to them, the enterprise's environmental policy, improvementsthat have been made in key areas, available government incentives, theextent of measures which are in the process of implementation and areference to any other information provided in a separate environmentalreport.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS POSTPONEDA Decree issued at the beginning of January has postponed the deadlinespreviously set for operators of certain high risk installations inFrance to obtain financial guarantees to cover factors such as accidentand pollution response measures, site restoration after closure andsite monitoring and security.  The deadline for such guarantees hadbeen 13 December 1995, but the French Environment Ministry announcedshortly before that that implementation would be delayed.  Under Decreeno 96-18 of 5 January 1996, the guarantee requirements are stillbrought into effect from 14 December 1995 for all new waste storagefacilities and mining operations (ie, those whose initial authorisationis after that date), but the deadline for such sites which were alreadyin operation is postponed until 14 June 1999.  New industrialfacilities will have until 14 December 1997 to obtain such guarantees,while it appears that no date has been set for existing industrialfacilities.These provisions come under Article 23 of the 1976 ClassifiedInstallations Law, as amended by Decree no 94-848 of 9 June 1994(ELR011/3).  The 1994 Decree specified elements of the differentcategories of installation which had to be covered, required allguarantees to be renewed at least three months before their expiry andtied them to particular operators, so that any change of ownership orcontrol would require a new guarantee.  Patrick Thieffry, of Thieffry &Associes, Paris, told a conference in Vienna in November (this issuep7) that the reason for delay was that qualifying financial securitieswere generally not available in France as yet from banks or insurersand no alternative fund had been established, as permitted under thelaw.  A few such guarantees had been issued, he said, but only on acase-by-case basis and at a local level.Mr Thieffry placed all this in the context of increasingly tightpolicing of the so-called classified installations, which include alarge number of relatively high risk plants in France.  He referred tocase law under the 1976 Law which showed that French courts will upholdorders against current operators requiring them to restore a site to"such a condition that it presents none of the hazards orinconveniences" which the law seeks to eliminate.  He observed thatthis responsibility was irrespective of whether the operator was incharge of the site at the time that the relevant pollution occurred andthat the requirement extended to events occurring before 1976, with theConseil d'Etat linking it to a prior 1917 Law on ClassifiedInstallations.Mr Thieffry cited as an example the case of a Marrion Merrel Dow sitein Yvelines, where the company was having to conduct a major clean-upoperation even though it only acquired the site in 1981 while the toxicchemicals involved had been dumped between 1965 and 1969.  In thatcase, over 80 tonnes of various toxic chemicals, 300 tonnes of aceticacid and 650 tonnes of alcohol had been deposited in a basin, fromwhich it had leaked into chalky soil and spread, with a vulnerablewater course nearby. ELR understands that the pollution only came tolight when Marrion Merrel Dow was in the process of selling the site toa new owner in 1992 and resulted in the contaminated part of the sitehaving to be withdrawn from the sale, pending satisfactory clean up.The operation is expected to last seven years and to include 15drilling operations to divert the flow of pollutants away from theperimeter and removal of some 2,500 tonnes of contaminated soil, MrThieffry said.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ISO PUBLISHES SUPERFUND REPORTThe US Insurance Services Office (ISO), New York, an industry bodyserving the property/casualty insurance industry, has published areport* on the Superfund hazardous substance clean-up law, which iscurrently subject to Congressional attempts at reform (ELR027/3, 026/1& 3, et al).  The report, entitled "Superfund and the Insurance IssuesSurrounding Abandoned Hazardous Waste Sites" was published on 29December.  It gives a range of estimates for the long-term costs toinsurers from such waste sites, based on previous studies, of between$25bn and $608bn, although it notes that most recent estimates are atthe low end of the range and that discounting for net present valuewould substantially reduce the numbers.  It places these figuresalongside the total US property/casualty insurance industry's statutorysurplus at the end of 1994 of $191bn, but it notes that a small numberof large writers of commercial liability insurance are likely to bearmost of the cost.  The combined surplus of the 35 most exposed to theselosses stood at $85bn.The report highlights as prime insurer concerns about Superfund:adverse court decisions which find unintended cover in old insurancepolicies, difficulty in establishing plausible estimates of liabilitiesand reserves due to conflicting court rulings and other factors, unfaircost allocation among potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and theirinsurers, and high litigation costs related to coverage disputes andpolicyholder defence.  It cites a number of studies into transactioncosts in the Superfund process, including legal costs, and highlights a1994 Government Accounting Office GAO survey which found that suchcosts represented approximately one-third of PRPs' costs and an A MBest study in the same year which estimated the insurance industry'slitigation cost share at 45%.The report reviews the range of reform options currently on thepolitical agenda, focussing particularly on elimination of retroactiveliability and joint and several liability, revision of clean-upstandards and remedy selection, and delegation of clean-up authority tothe states.  It concludes that many of the proposed reforms wouldreduce environmental liabilities for industry and for insurers, butmany could also increase expenses for the federal government.  In thatcontext, it notes that the potential payers of the taxes which thegovernment would be likely to raise to meet those costs, especially thepetroleum, chemical and insurance industries, disagree on the bestapproach.  Overall, the report suggests that Superfund and clean up ofhazardous waste will continue to be difficult issues for insurers,public policy-makers and society as a whole, and that the size of therequired clean up and the question of who should pay will remain thefocus of debate for many years to come.* "Superfund and the Insurance Issues Surrounding Abandoned HazardousWaste Sites", available from the Insurance Services Office Inc, 7 WorldTrade Center - 14th Floor, New York, NY 10048-1199.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SPATE OF OIL/CHEMICAL SPILLSAnyone taking a snapshot of recent events in Russia could be forgivenfor thinking that something close to an epidemic of oil spills andother leaks was taking place.  The incidents have been of varying sizesand the overall significance of them is hard to gauge.  Nevertheless,there seems little doubt that the general condition of the pipelinesystem falls well short of what would be required in most OECDcountries and reports from depots elsewhere in Russia and the formerSoviet bloc suggest a routine disregard in the past for basicenvironmental standards during operations such as oil delivery at railterminals and refineries.The most serious spill in recent weeks seems to have been one inDecember in the republic of Bashkortostan, at the southern end of theUrals, where a 700mm oil pipeline, more than 30 years old and runningalong the bottom of the river Belaya, was found to have burst on 26December near the capital city of Ufa, south-west of Sverdlovsk.Initial reports indicated that a 100 tonne (t) oil slick was presentingdifficulties because of severe weather conditions which were preventingthe use of specialised recovery equipment and even attempts to burn offthe oil.  According to news agency reports in early January, oil was bythen being removed by means of buckets through holes in the ice whichcovered the river.  Only some 15t had been recovered a week after theincident and there were fears that the oil might eventually reach theKama river and ultimately the Volga and the Caspian Sea.  Emergencyservices were reported to be building a protective shield nearBlagoveshchensk, 40km downstream from Ufa, to try to stop thathappening and both Bashkortostan and neighbouring Tatarstan had issuedpollution warnings.A few days later, however, the Bashkortostan Environment Minister,Rustem Khamitov, declared that the pipeline's owner had "seriouslyviolated the truth" in saying that 100t of oil had been lost; thereality was that a much larger quantity had escaped, he said, and thecrucial objective was to recover and neutralise as much as possiblebefore the spring thaw in 50-70 days time.  According to Reuters, thestate pipeline monopoly Transneft had declared two days after theincident that the leak had been dealt with, but Tass was now reportingthat 160 workers were still struggling to control the leak.  The pipehad apparently been shut off, booms put across the river and the oilset on fire to stop it spreading.  Some 664t of oil and water were saidto have been collected, of which up to 15% was oil.  At the same time,oil was reported to have reached Tatarstan, 160km from Ufa.By mid-January, weak ice on the river was forcing the authorities toresort to wider oil burning, leading Mr Khamitov to go on television toreassure people whose homes were being "covered with smoke" as the firespread over a large area.  The pipeline company was by then claimingthat 468t of oil had escaped, but other estimates put the figure at upto 2,400t.  On the other hand, according to Trud newspaper, pollutionreadings in the Belaya which showed concentrations of petroleumproducts five times maximum permissible levels had to be put in thecontext of routine chemical contamination of the river and commonbackground levels of petroleum products of 2-3 times the officiallimits in winter and up to 10 times in summer.  A Greenpeacerepresentative claimed that leaks from Russia's ageing pipeline networkwere so routine now that they resulted in the loss of between 2% and10% of the country's oil each year, representing total leaks of 20-50million tonnes (mt) a year.On 26 January, a Tatarstan environment official told a press conferencein Kazan that, extrapolating from the concentrations reaching the Tatartown of Aktanysh, it appeared that 12,000-13,000t of oil must haveleaked into the Belaya.  The Interfax news agency was quoted as sayingthat divers had still not located the precise point of the leak becauseof silting in the river and were therefore raising the pipe to thesurface for inspection.  Meanwhile, some 150km upstream of the Ufa oilspill, a serious leak of phenol occurred on 19 January at the Salavatoil refinery, involving the loss of around 2 cubic metres of this toxicsubstance.  The spill was initially turning into a snow-like solid inthe severe frost and efforts were being made to recover it in thatcondition before a thaw allowed it to dissipate into the Belaya.In the same month that all this was going on, a number of other seriousincidents were also reported.  On 24 December, some 400t of oil leakedfrom the Ukhta-Yaroslavl pipeline in the northern Komi republic,although the plume from this seemed to have been contained within anarea of around 5,000 square metres.  On 16 January, a second spill wasdiscovered in the same pipeline, this time near the town of Kotlas, inArchangel region. Some 70t of oil were reported to have escaped, but itappeared that none had reached the Severnaya Dvina river and work wasprogressing to collect and burn it off.  On 11 January, a bulldozerbreached part of Surgut-Polotsk pipeline in the Perm region,immediately north of Bashkortostan, releasing according to one estimate242t of oil.  On 16 January, it was reported that a slick extendingover 2.5km had been discovered on the Syzranka river in Samara region,west of Tatarstan.  This seemed to have leaked from an underwaterstretch of the Syzran-Zolnoye pipeline, possibly as a result ofcorrosion. The total quantity of oil leaked was not known, but againthe huge river Volga was threatened as the slick occurred only 8km fromthe meeting of the two rivers.The Baltic republic of Latvia has also been experiencing some similarproblems.  In November, 100t of diesel escaped from a pipeline linkingcentral Russia with the Latvian port of Ventspils, apparently theresult of a breach made by thieves some 12km east of Ventspils.  Asenior Latvian official called for a return to regular inspection ofhis country's pipelines, which he said had been left without anysupervision and had become an easy target for petroleum thieves whodamaged the pipelines.  On 16 January, a leak of petroleum productsfrom a wharf in Ventspils was reported to have reached the Baltic.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WASTE TREATMENT DISPUTEA plan by the Industrial Estate Authority of Thailand (IEAT) to providemobile waste treatment units at all the country's industrial estates isreported to have running into difficulty as a result of a previousgovernment contract with a Thai-US joint venture, Genco, to buildThailand's first modern hazardous waste facility in Rayong province.That contract gave Genco the sole right to operate hazardous wasteplants, according to FT Water Briefing.  Genco had planned to have itsplant up and running by early 1996, but had to stop work late last yearin the face of opposition from local residents who fear pollution tolocal streams.  A government-run treatment plant in Bankhunthien hasbeen working at only 10% of its 110,000 tonne capacity, apparentlybecause the majority of factories evade laws requiring treatment of alltoxic waste and pay for illegal dumping.  An estimated 1m tonnes oftoxic waste is produced each year in Thailand.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-7IA086-000616-B016-308http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002715 text/html 52922HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:24:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:13 GMTContent-length: 52735Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev12.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ** GENERAL INTEREST REPORTS ** ASSESSMENT OF THE LOSS AND DEGRADATION OF ECOSYSTEMS IN THE U.S. (110 words) REMOTE SENSING AS APPLIED TO POLLUTION MONITORING (129 words) ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION IN THE U.S. (307 words) PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY AND THE ENVIRONMENT (223 words) POLLUTION PREVENTION STRATEGY FOR INDUSTRY AND CONSUMERS (122 words) SITE REMEDIATION CASE STUDIES (98 words) ANALYSIS OF HAZARDS INVOLVING COMPRESSED GAS FUELING AT RETAIL SERVICE STATIONS (150 words) JUDGING THE HEALTH RISKS OF ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES (232 words) ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES USING LIDAR (294 words) ** AIR POLLUTION PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** CARBON MONOXIDE EXPOSURES INSIDE OF AUTOMOBILES (236 words) SURVEY OF WORKER HEALTH SYMPTOMS AND INDOOR AIR IN OFFICE BUILDINGS (150 words) USING GAS REBURNING TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE ATMOSPHERIC NOx EMISSIONS FROM FURNACES AND KILNS (148 words) GAS REBURN TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE NOx EMISSIONS IN TANGENTIALLY-FIRED BOILERS [951321] (121 words) ** FOOD & AGRICULTURE PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOODS: A DATABASE FOR COMPUTERS (224 words) ** WASTE SITES, DISPOSAL, PROBLEMS, AND REMEDIATION ** MANAGING BOTTOM-SEDIMENTS CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCES (80 words) REMOVING PCBs FROM CONTAMINATED SOIL USING THE CF SYSTEM(tm) SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESS (149 words) SOLVENT EXTRACTION FOR SEPARATING HAZARDOUS WASTE-SITE CONTAMINANTS (131 words) CONTAMINATED SOIL RESTORATION USING VAPOR EXTRACTION (162 words) VACUUM VAPOR EXTRACTION FOR INNOVATIVE SITE REMEDIATION (98 words) IN SITU RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) HEATING TO ENHANCE VAPOR EXTRACTION OF CONTAMINANTS FROM SOIL (150 words) ** MUNICIPAL WASTE PROBLEMS AND REMEDIATION ** OXYGEN-ENRICHED CO-INCINERATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) AND SEWAGE SLUDGE (265 words) ** BIOLOGICAL REMEDIATION OF WASTES ** BIO-OXIDATION TREATMENT OF PETROLEUM-CONTAMINATED SOIL (136 words) A VIDEO PRIMER ON BIOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIES (151 words) DECOMPOSITION OF TOXIC MATERIALS BY BIOREMEDIATION (139 words) ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS AND IMPACTS INVOLVING THE RELEASE OF NON-INDIGENOUS MICROORGANISMS (98 words) ** WATER TREATMENT, PROBLEMS, AND REMEDIATION ** PATENTS CONCERNING WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS FOR SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS (139 words) ADVISORY GROUPS IN WATER QUALITY PLANNING (74 words) NONPOINT WATER QUALITY POLLUTION FROM AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, AND MINING (74 words) ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT (64 words) ALTERNATIVE FINANCING FOR STATE WATER PROGRAMS (155 words) WATER POLLUTION EFFECTS OF METALS ON FRESH WATER FISH (129 words) ** RADIATION; RADIOACTIVE WASTES ** CANDIDATE PROCESSES FOR IN SITU TREATMENT OF MIXED VOC AND RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER (201 words) MODULAR RISK ANALYSIS FOR ASSESSING SITES CONTAINING MULTIPLE MIXED RADIOACTIVE WASTES (185 words) WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH 104,000,000 CUBIC FEET OF LOW LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE (211 words) FUTURE EPA REGULATORY ISSUES INVOLVING ENVIRONMENTAL RADIATION (104 words) THE POTENTIAL RISKS OF NUCLEAR SHIPS (161 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ASSESSMENT OF THE LOSS AND DEGRADATION OF ECOSYSTEMS INTHE U.S.This (National Biological Service) report: presentsestimates of declines of natural ecosystems in theU.S.; provides a rationale for ecosystem-levelconservation; discusses decline and threat as criteriafor conservation; and relates ecosystem losses toendangerment at species and population levels.  Itsuggests that integrated conservation plans bedeveloped for all ecosystems in each ecoregion of theU.S., starting with types and regions that sustainedthe greatest losses and are at greatest risk of furtherloss.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960101; Feb. 1995, 63 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996REMOTE SENSING AS APPLIED TO POLLUTION MONITORINGThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns the use of remote sensors to aid in themonitoring of air and water pollution.  It addressesthe use of lasers, optical radar systems, aerialphotography, and satellite observations.  The reportconsists of a collection of abstracts of availablereports, studies, papers, and other documentation, withreferences for their acquisition and extensive indexingto make it easy to find exactly what you want.  It willbe updated to include the latest information availableat the time you place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960102; latest 250 citations, updated to the date ofyour order.  Price: $319.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION IN THE U.S.At its core, environmental restoration -- defined asthe cleanup of contaminants from past activities --depends on a series of decisions about the nature andextent of contamination, the risk to human health andthe environment, and the potential effectiveness ofremediation techniques and technologies to reduce therisk to acceptable levels.  The effectiveness withwhich these decisions are made has significant impacton the cost and duration of the cleanup efforts.  Thedecisions must often be made on the basis of incompleteand uncertain data.  Emerging environmental informationand data acquisition technologies, together withappropriate strategies to support decision-making, arebeginning to change the way environmental restorationoccurs in the U.S.Past environmental restoration activities too oftenrelied on prescriptive data collection activities togenerate the information upon which decisions weremade.  Retrospective studies of such activities showthat often data were gathered for the purpose ofreducing the risk in decision-making, but little truereduction in risk was realized and large amounts ofresources were consumed.  Recent examination of thefailures in the U.S. to achieve many complete cleanups,despite the investment of large sums and time, pointsto the inability to have decisions made efficiently.The solution to the problem involves both regulatorychange to allow more flexibility in decision-making andthe introduction of technology to improvedecision-making.  This (Argonne National Laboratory)paper reviews recent assessments made of cleanupprocesses and the application of strategies andtechnologies to enhance decision-making for cleanup.It provides examples of the decision-making approachesand the technologies that have been employed to speedup characterization and to optimize the implementationof remediation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960103; 1995, 12 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY AND THE ENVIRONMENTFrom the ozone hole and the greenhouse effect, toplastics recycling and hazardous waste disposal,society faces a number of issues requiring anunprecedented understanding of the properties ofmolecules.  We are coming to realize that theenvironment is a coupled set of chemical systems.  Itsdynamics determine the welfare of the biosphere and ofhumans in particular.  These chemical systems aregoverned by fundamental molecular interactions, andthey present chemists with an unparalleled challenge.The application of current concepts of molecularbehavior and of up-to-date experimental andcomputational techniques can provide us withenvironmental insights needed to: mitigate past damage;anticipate the impact of current human activity; andavoid future insults to the environment.Environmental chemistry encompasses a number ofseparate, yet interlocking, areas of research.  In allof these areas, progress is limited by an inadequateunderstanding of the underlying chemical processesinvolved.  Participation of all chemical approaches(experimental, theoretical, and computational) and ofall disciplines of chemistry (organic, inorganic,physical, analytical, and biochemistry) will berequired to provide the necessary fundamentalunderstanding.  This (Battelle Pacific NorthwestLaboratories) paper discusses physical chemistry andthe environment.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960104; Aug. 1994, 13 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996POLLUTION PREVENTION STRATEGY FOR INDUSTRY ANDCONSUMERSThis (Van Nostrand Reinhold) publication deals withprosperity without pollution and pollution preventionstrategies for everyone.  Its contents are as follows:Pollution prevention pays for everyone; What pollutionprevention is - What waste recycling and otherstrategies are not; Achieving success by overcomingobstacles; Data tell the story - too much waste; Theozone groan - do we still have time; Harm to the farmand home from chemical pesticides; Changing consumption- reducing garbage; Household toxic products - thinkingmore and buying less; No time to waste.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960105; 1991, 400 pp.  Price: $429.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SITE REMEDIATION CASE STUDIESThis (Federal Remediation Technologies Roundtable)report is a collection of abstracts summarizing 37 casestudies of site remediation projects prepared byfederal agencies.  The case studies were undertaken todocument the results and lessons learned from earlytechnology applications.  They help to establishbenchmark data on cost and performance, which shouldlead to greater confidence in the selection and use ofcleanup technologies.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960106; Mar. 1995, 112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ANALYSIS OF HAZARDS INVOLVING COMPRESSED GAS FUELING ATRETAIL SERVICE STATIONSAn evaluation of the hazards associated with operationsof a typical compressed natural gas (CNG) fuelingstation is presented (by Total Petroleum Inc.).  Theevaluation includes: identification of a typical CNGfueling system; a comparison of the typical system withANSI/NFPA (American National StandardsInstitute/National Fire Protection Association)Standard 52 Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) Vehicular FuelSystem requirements; a review of CNG industry safetyexperience as identified in current literature; hazardidentification of potential internal and externalevents leading to potential accidents; and an analysisof potential accident scenarios as determined from thehazard evaluation.  The study considers CNG dispensingequipment and associated equipment, including thecompressor station, storage vessels, and fill pressure-sensing system.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960107; Apr. 1995, 156 pp.  Price: $179.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996JUDGING THE HEALTH RISKS OF ENERGY TECHNOLOGIESThis (Brookhaven National Laboratory) report providesperspective on the various risks to which man isroutinely exposed.  It serves as a basis forunderstanding the meaning of quantitative riskestimates and for comparing new or newly-discoveredrisks with other better-understood risks.  Specificemphasis is placed on the health risks of energytechnologies.  The report is not a risk assessment, nordoes it contain instructions on how to do a riskassessment; rather, it provides background informationon how most of us think about risks and why it isdifficult to do it rationally.  It provides aphilosophy and data to use to do a better job ofjudging risks more rationally.  It also provides anoverview of where the risks of energy technologies fitwithin the spectrum of all risks.  Much of thequantitative information provided is on the relativerisk of dying of various causes.  This is not becausethe risk of dying is seen as the most important kind ofrisk, but because the statistics on mortality rates bycause are the highest-quality data available on healthrisks in the general population.  (Although the reportis dated Sep. 1992, it was revised in May 1994.)(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950305; Sep. 1992, 107 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES USING LIDARThis translation of a Doctoral thesis from Sweden (LundUniversity) concerns the application of lidartechniques in environmental studies.  Lidarmeasurements are performed with a mobile lidar system,based on a Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser, to measure mercuryfluxes on emissions from chlor-alkali plants in Swedenand Italy.  An Italian cinnabar mining area (wheremining activities stopped in 1982) is mapped, and highfluxes of atomic mercury vapor are detected.Comparative measurements are also made using aconventional gold-amalgamation-point monitor.Plumes from geothermal plants in Italy are alsomonitored, and it is found that the amount of mercuryemitted is much higher than expected.  Lidarmeasurements are also performed on the gas plumesemerging from the Italian volcanoes Etna, Stromboli,and Vulcano, using a lidar system on a ship that madetraverses under the plumes.A vertically-sounding ozone lidar system fortropospheric measurements has also been constructed,based on a KrF excimer laser whose output isRaman-shifted in hydrogen to obtain wavelengths of  277and 313 nm.  Comparisons with two other ozonemonitoring systems -- a ND:YAG/dye laser based thelidar system, and a differential absorption opticalsystem (DOAS) -- are carried out.  The mobile lidarsystem is integrated with a spectrally-resolvingoptical multi-channel system and a multi-color imagingsystem, to remotely detect fluorescence from vegetationand water.  It is found that the fluorescence spectrafrom vegetation exposed to environmental stress aredifferent from the spectra detected from controlvegetation.  Fluorescence images are recorded fromdistances up to 100 m.  The thesis contains157 references and 15 figures.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND508TB; Apr. 1994, 90 pp.  Price: $149.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARBON MONOXIDE EXPOSURES INSIDE OF AUTOMOBILESThis (EPA) paper deals with carbon monoxide (CO)exposures measured inside a motor vehicle during88 standardized drives on a major urban arterialhighway (El Camino Real) having a traffic volume of30,500-45,000 vehicles per day, over a 13-1/2 monthperiod.  For the 88 trips, the mean CO concentrationwas 9.8 ppm, with a standard deviation of 5.8 ppm.  Afairly-strong seasonal trend exists for the co-variatesthat were examined: ambient CO at 2 fixed stations;atmospheric stability; seasonal trend function; time ofday; average surrounding vehicle count; trip duration;proportion of time stopped at lights; and instrumenttype.  A model consisting of only a single measure oftraffic volume and a seasonal trend component, hassubstantial predictive power; by contrast, the ambientCO levels, although partially correlated with averageexposures, contributed comparatively little predictivepower to the model.  The study shows that: (1) the massbalance equation can relate exterior CO concentrationsas a function of time, to interior CO concentrations;(2) CO exposures on urban arterial highways vary withseason; (3) momentary CO experienced behind red lightsvary with the intersection; and (4) an averaging-timemodel can simulate exposures during short trips(20 minutes or less) on urban arterial highways.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND511H; 1994, 11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SURVEY OF WORKER HEALTH SYMPTOMS AND INDOOR AIR INOFFICE BUILDINGSThis (EPA) paper reports the results of a questionnaireon health symptoms, workplace conditions, and perceivedindoor air quality that was administered to a total of3948 employees of the EPA working in 3 office buildingsin Washington, DC, to determine the personal orworkplace characteristics associated with healthsymptoms.  A principal-components analysis of 32 healthsymptoms identified 12 health factors, each generallyassociated with a particular body system (eyes, nose,throat, chest, central nervous system, etc.).  The  12health factors have been regressed linearly on  50-100personal, workplace, and spatial characteristicsidentified from the questionnaire and buildingblueprints.  Significant variables (p <0.01) areincluded in a second logistic regression to determine afinal model.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH941208; June 1992, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996USING GAS REBURNING TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE ATMOSPHERICNOx EMISSIONS FROM FURNACES AND KILNSThis (Energy and Environmental Analysis Inc.) reportanalyzes a number of industrial processes and assessesthe suitability of using natural gas reburningtechnology to achieve reduced NOx emissions.  In gasreburning, a small amount of gas -- typically 10-15% ofthe total fuel input -- is injected above the primaryfuel zone to create a fuel-rich reburn zone where NOxis reduced.  Gas reburning has the capability to reduceNOx emissions by 50-65%, but its use in particularapplications is dependent on specific process andcombustion parameters.  The report identifies fiveindustrial processes as being suitable for natural gasreburning: glass melting furnaces; cement kilns; reheatfurnaces; process heaters; and waste-heat recoverysystems.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND513KA; Apr. 1994, 46 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996GAS REBURN TECHNOLOGY TO REDUCE NOx EMISSIONS INTANGENTIALLY-FIRED BOILERS [951321]There are several ways that owners oftangentially-fired boilers can reduce nitrogen oxides(NOx) emissions, in order to comply with the Clean AirAct Amendments of 1990.  This (ABB CombustionEngineering Services Inc.) report presents anddiscusses the development of a close-coupled gas reburntechnology for this purpose.  Close-coupled gas reburntechnology has the potential to be a relativelylower-cost derivative of standard reburning technology.A utility scale feasibility, test, and evaluationprogram is reported that examines the technology's NOxreduction capability and its boiler-performanceimpacts.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.ND513KB; Dec. 1994, 171 pp.  Price: $199.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOODS: A DATABASE FOR COMPUTERSThis (FDA) database, consisting of three 3-1/2 inch DOSdiskettes, provides comprehensive information on theU.S. Food and Drug Administration's monitoring,coverage, and findings of pesticide residues in foodsunder the regulatory monitoring (i.e., toleranceenforcement) component of the FDA pesticide program forFY 1993.  It covers domestically produced and importedfoods representing about 100 countries.  The databasecontains three sections.  The first section is a largedetailed data file that presents FDA pesticidemonitoring coverage and findings by country/foodproduct/pesticide combination.  The other two sectionsare smaller summary files that provide an overview bycountry/pesticide combination without regard topesticide, and by country/pesticide combination withoutregard to product.  They are accompanied by a searchprogram and report formats that enable users to performsimple searches and generate reports.  The raw data byindividual sample, from which the three files arecompiled, are also provided.  The diskettes containtext only; users must provide their own search andretrieval software.  They are formatted in Dbase IIIPlus.  Memory requirement is 640 K, and an IBMcompatible 486 computer is recommended for practicalprocessing speed.  The files are compressed, 1.44 Mhigh-density.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950107; 1993, 3 diskettes.  Price: $699.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANAGING BOTTOM-SEDIMENTS CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCESThis (Army Corps of Engineers) report contains theproceedings of a joint U.S/Japan experts' meeting onmanagement of bottom sediments containing toxicsubstances (Nov. 19-21, 1991, San Pedro, CA).  Themeeting provided a forum for in-depth discussions onthe dredging and disposal of contaminated sediments.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950115; May 1994, 345 pp.  Price: $369.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996REMOVING PCBs FROM CONTAMINATED SOIL USING THE CFSYSTEM(tm) SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESSThis (Science Applications International Corp.) reportcovers a treatability study of the removal of PCBs fromcontaminated soil using the CF System(tm) SolventExtraction Process.  Soil samples were obtained fromthe Springfield Township Superfund Site, DavisburgMichigan, taken from a specific area of that siteknown to have some of the highest concentrations ofpolychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).  The samples wereshipped to Hazen Research Corporation, Golden,Colorado, where CF-System's Solvent Extraction pilotplant is located.  The results show that the process iseffective in reducing the concentration of PCBs in sitesoils.  Removal efficiencies range from a low of 91.4%when two extraction cycles are used, to 99.4% when fiveextraction cycles are used.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960116; Apr. 1995, 85 pp.  Price: $109.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996SOLVENT EXTRACTION FOR SEPARATING HAZARDOUS WASTE-SITECONTAMINANTSThis (Science Applications International) bulletindeals with solvent extraction, which does not destroyhazardous contaminants, but is a means of separatingthose contaminants from soils, sludges, and sediments,thereby reducing the volume of the hazardous materialthat must be treated.  Generally, it is used as part ofa series of unit operations, and it can reduce theoverall cost for managing a particular site.  Thebulletin provides information on: the applicability ofthe technology; the types of residuals produced; thelatest performance data; site requirements; the statusof the technology; and sources for further information.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950116; Apr. 1994, 11 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONTAMINATED SOIL RESTORATION USING VAPOR EXTRACTIONThis Master's thesis (from the University of Texas)presents a review of vapor extraction technology forremediation of contaminated soils.  Effectiveremediation of sites contaminated with VOCs (volatileorganic compounds) requires a sound understanding ofregulatory issues, technology options, and the sitehydrogeology.  A technology that is increasingly beingused for the remediation of VOC-contaminated sites issoil vapor extraction.  Soil vapor extraction, alsoknown as soil venting and soil air stripping, allowsremediation of VOC contamination without the need forexcavation.  In soil vapor extraction, a vacuum pump orblower moves air through the soil near the contaminatedzone.  As contaminated air is removed, cleaner airmoves through the soil to replace it.  This airmovement can also promote microbial degradation ofcontaminants at many sites.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950117; May 1993, 77 pp.  Price: $99.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996VACUUM VAPOR EXTRACTION FOR INNOVATIVE SITE REMEDIATIONThis (Consortium for the American Academy ofEnvironmental Engineers) report deals with vacuum vaporextraction, an innovative site and waste remediationtechnology that, with other innovative processes, isthe culmination of a multi-organizational effortinvolving more than 100 experiments over a two-yearperiod.  It provides the experienced practicingprofessional with guidance on application of thisinnovative processes, which is considered ready forfull-scale application.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960119; 1994, 222 pp.  Price: $249.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996IN SITU RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) HEATING TO ENHANCE VAPOREXTRACTION OF CONTAMINANTS FROM SOILThis (Westinghouse Savannah River Co.) report presentsand discusses a field demonstration program involvingin situ radio frequency heating to investigate itseffectiveness as an enhancement to vacuum extraction ofresidual solvents (primarily trichloroethylene andperchloroethylene) held in vadose zone clay deposits.Conventional soil vacuum extraction techniques aremass-transfer limited because of the low permeabilitiesof the clays.  By selectively heating the clays totemperatures at or above 100 C, the release ortransport of the solvent vapors are enhanced as aresult of several factors, including: an increase inthe contaminant vapor pressure; an increase indiffusivity; and an increase in the effectivepermeability of the formation caused by the release ofwater vapor.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950118; Jan. 1994, 130 pp.  Price: $159.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996OXYGEN-ENRICHED CO-INCINERATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLIDWASTE (MSW) AND SEWAGE SLUDGEThis (NREL) report deals with co-incineration of MSWand sewage sludge.  Federal regulations banning oceandumping of sewage sludge, coupled with stricterregulations on the disposal of sewage sludge inlandfills, have forced municipalities (especially thosein the northeast U.S.) to consider alternate methodsfor disposal of this solid waste.  Co-incineration ofMSW and sludge has proven to be economically attractivein both Europe and Japan, but has not yet proven to bea viable sludge disposal technology in the U.S.,because of a history of operational problems inexisting facilities.  The most prevalent problem in co-incinerating MSW and a dewatered sewage sludge (15% to25% solids) is incomplete sludge combustion.Incomplete combustion is primarily a function of sludgeparticle problems that occur when the surface of thesludge particle dries and hardens while the inner massis unaffected.  This phenomenon is commonly referred toin the industry as the "hamburger effect."This report details a new process being developed forthe disposal of a dewatered sewage sludge.  It providesa comprehensive summary of the pilot demonstration testprogram for oxygen-enriched co-incineration of MSW andsewage sludge, including description of: the pilot testfacility; the instrumentation; the methods of datacollection; data analyses; how the tests were executed;and the test results.  The report also providesrecommendations for the future development of thistechnology in the current marketplace.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950217; Jan. 1994, 146 pp.  Price: $169.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996BIO-OXIDATION TREATMENT OF PETROLEUM-CONTAMINATED SOILThe need for effective treatment, throughout the U.S.,of petroleum-contaminated soil has escalated due to theincrease in the number of underground storage tank(UST) systems being upgraded in response to EPAregulations.  Remedial options for excavatedcontaminated soil have, in the past, been limited todisposal in land treatment facilities or treatment bythermal processes.  This (EPA) report reviews andassesses the state of the art of bio-oxidationtechnologies, focusing on above-ground soil mounds.  Itcovers: the factors that affect biodegradation; thetypes of biotreatment systems; a survey of constructionand performance characteristics; design considerations;cost estimates; and research recommendations.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950221; Oct. 1992, 17 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996A VIDEO PRIMER ON BIOREMEDIATION TECHNOLOGIESThis (EPA) 36-minute VHS color videotape programprovides: an introduction to the basic concepts behindbioremediation; an overview of how the technology iscurrently being used; a perspective on the futurepotential of the technology; and answers to somecommonly raised questions about bioremediation.  It istargeted to a technical audience, particularly thoseinvolved with environmental issues, but does not assumeany prior knowledge of biological processes.  Theobjective of the program is to familiarize the viewerwith the essential concepts of this technology and toprovide a basis for understanding technical discussionsin this area.  The video should be useful forengineers, scientists, managers, site owners, andregulators involved in site remediation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: VHS Video No.NH950223; Aug. 1993, 36 minutes in color.  Price:$219.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996DECOMPOSITION OF TOXIC MATERIALS BY BIOREMEDIATIONThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns the decomposition of toxic materials bybiological means, including for example, bacterialdecomposition of: jet fuel; wood preservatives;explosives; crude oil; halogenated organics; dieselfuel; aviation fuel; creosote; and more.  It alsocovers the enhancement of decomposition rates byaddition of nutrients.  The report contains acollection of abstracts of available reports, studies,papers, and other documentation, with references fortheir acquisition and extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want.  It will be updatedto include the latest information available at the timeyou place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950224; minimum of 137 citations as of July 1994.Price: $279.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS AND IMPACTS INVOLVING THERELEASE OF NON-INDIGENOUS MICROORGANISMSThis (Environmental Research Laboratory) paperdescribes the EPA's research program in biotechnologyrisk assessment involving a study of the fate andeffects of non-indigenous microorganisms in aquatic andterrestrial environments.  Information from the studiescan be used to assess the risk of biotechnologicalproducts -- both genetically engineered or natural, butnon-indigenous -- in the environment.  Examples ofresearch are cited in the report.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.NH950301; 1994, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996PATENTS CONCERNING WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS FOR SWIMMINGPOOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBSThis report (from the U.S. Patent BibliographicDatabase) consists of a collection of up to 250selected patent abstracts concerning water treatmentcompositions, processes, and systems for swimmingpools, spas, and hot tubs.  The many inventions relateto, for example: the design and fabrication ofchlorinators, sterilizers, purifiers, and sanitizers;filters with electrolytic action; chemical dispensingsystems; hydrochlorinating systems; and more.  Thereport, which contains extensive indexing to make iteasy to find exactly what you want, will be updated toinclude abstracts of the most current issued patentsavailable at the time you place your order.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960126; latest 50-250 patent abstracts, updated to thedate of your order.  Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ADVISORY GROUPS IN WATER QUALITY PLANNINGThis (Pennsylvania State University) document is anintroduction to the field of advisory groups in waterquality planning, for persons with a non-technicalbackground.  It presents information on advisory groupsand their functions, organization, and impact on waterquality planning.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960127; 1995, 20 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996NONPOINT WATER QUALITY POLLUTION FROM AGRICULTURE,FORESTRY, AND MININGThis (Pennsylvania State University) instructor's guideintroduces the field of nonpoint source pollution topersons with non-technical backgrounds.  It providesinstructors with activities and worksheets to aid inteaching about nonpoint source pollution of water fromagriculture, forestry, and mining.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960128; 1995, 25 pp.  Price: $69.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WASTEWATERMANAGEMENTThis (Pennsylvania State University) document presentsan introduction to the field of environmentalassessment for persons with a nontechnical background,and includes information on the environmental impactsof wastewater management.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960129; 1995, 24 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALTERNATIVE FINANCING FOR STATE WATER PROGRAMSThis (EPA) paper examines the need for increasedfunding to support implementation of state programrequirements under the Clean Water Act and the SafeDrinking Water Act.  It identifies alternativefinancing mechanisms that can be used, together withgeneral revenues, to fund state water quality programs.It also describes several financial management optionsthat are designed to maintain control over, and provideflexibility in, managing program resources, as well asinstitutional arrangements that can offset programcosts and leverage state resources.  It lists stepsthat EPA can take to support the use of alternativefinancing mechanisms by states, and to assist states inclosing the funding gap in water programs.  (This 1989report has recently been re-announced and re-releasedby EPA.)(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960130; 1989, 50 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996WATER POLLUTION EFFECTS OF METALS ON FRESH WATER FISHThis report (from the NTIS Bibliographic Database)concerns laboratory and field studies regarding theeffects of metals on fresh water fish.  Topics include,among others: the toxicity effects on fish species;bioaccumulation; fish physiology; acidification anddetoxification; aquatic ecosystems; water qualitymanagement; environmental monitoring systems;pollution effects on food chains; and more.  The reportcontains a collection of up to 250 abstracts ofavailable reports, studies, papers, and otherdocumentation, with references for their acquisitionand extensive indexing to make it easy to find exactlywhat you want.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960131 latest 50-250 citations, updated to the date ofyour order.  Price: $299.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996CANDIDATE PROCESSES FOR IN SITU TREATMENT OF MIXED VOCAND RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATERThis (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) report describesthe screening and preliminary evaluation of candidatetreatment for use in treating mixed contaminantvolatile organic compounds (VOCs) and radionuclides ingroundwater.  Treating mixed contaminants presentsunusual difficulties.  Typically, VOCs are the mostabundant contaminants, but the presence ofradionuclides results in additional health concernsthat must be addressed, usually by a treatment approachdifferent from that used for VOCs.  Furthermore, thepresence of radionuclides may yield mixed solid wastesif the VOCs are treated by conventional means.These issues are specifically addressed in theevaluation of candidate treatment processes for testingin this program.  Moreover, because no research orearly development of a particular process would beperformed, the technology review also focuses ontechnologies that could be readily adapted andintegrated for use with mixed contaminants.  Theobjective is to couple emerging or available processesinto treatment modules for use in situ.  The findingsreported in this document encompass all activitiesthrough the treatment process evaluations.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960132; Oct. 1994, 112 pp.  Price: $139.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996MODULAR RISK ANALYSIS FOR ASSESSING SITES CONTAININGMULTIPLE MIXED RADIOACTIVE WASTESThis (Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories) reportconcerns modular risk analysis for assessing mixedwaste sites.  Human-health impacts, especially to thesurrounding public, are extremely difficult to assessat installations that contain multiple waste sites anda variety of mixed waste constituents (e.g., organic,inorganic, and radioactive wastes).  These assessmentsmust address: different constituents; multiple wastesites; multiple release patterns; different transportpathways (i.e., groundwater, surface water, air, andoverland soil); different receptor types and locations;various times of interest; population distributions;land-use patterns; baseline assessments; a variety ofexposure scenarios; etc.  Utilizing a modular/GIS(geographical information system)-based approachovercomes difficulties in (1) analyzing a wide varietyof scenarios for multiple mixed waste sites and (2)communicating results from a complex human-heath-impactanalysis by capturing the essence of the assessment ina relatively elegant manner -- so the meaning of theresults can be quickly conveyed to all who review them.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960133; June 1994, 33 pp.  Price: $79.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH 104,000,000 CUBIC FEET OF LOWLEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTEThe Fernald Site, a DOE uranium metal productionfacility that ceased production in 1989, is now beingremediated by the DOE under terms of a consentagreement with the EPA and the State of Ohio.  It isestimated that the cleanup will generate 104,000,000cubic feet of low-level radioactive waste, includingconstruction debris, pit sludge, radium residue, and ahuge volume of uranium-contaminated soil.  The wastehandling strategy for this huge volume of wasteincludes minimizing remedial waste generation,recycling material when economically feasible,free-releasing clean material, and volume reduction.It is anticipated that large-scale radium residuevitrification and sludge drying equipment/facilitieswill be constructed onsite for waste treatment prior tooff-site disposal.  Fernald waste disposition willinclude both onsite disposal (if approved under CERCLA)and off-site disposal at both commercial and DOE wastedisposal facilities.  The waste disposition strategyselected reflects a diverse variety of technical,political, regulatory, and economic factors.  This(Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Corp.)paper describes the current views at Fernald on whatcan be done with 104,000,000 cubic feet of Fernaldwaste.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960134; 1995, 14 pp.  Price: $59.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996FUTURE EPA REGULATORY ISSUES INVOLVING ENVIRONMENTALRADIATIONThis (EPA) report concerns future issues and challengesin the study, management, and regulation ofenvironmental radiation.  It focuses on seven majortopics: (1) nuclear energy production and environmentalquality; (2) radioactive waste management; (3)non-ionizing radiation; (4) dose-response models andpopulation susceptibility; (5) radon in indoor air; (6)control of nuclear materials from dismantled warheads;and (7) institutional readiness to deal with futureissues in environmental radiation.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960135; Mar. 1995, 63 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATION via NewsNetJanuary 1996THE POTENTIAL RISKS OF NUCLEAR SHIPSThis translation from Denmark (Technical University ofDenmark) represents an evaluation of the potentialrisks of nuclear ships.  Reasons are given why nuclearship accidents will not lead to accidents of themagnitude of the Chernobyl accident.  This is due tothe much lower content of radioactive material and todifferent reactor designs.  A review is given of thetypes of nuclear ship accidents that have actuallyoccurred, with extra consideration given to reactivityaccidents and loss of coolant accidents that could leadto serious radiation consequences for the crew and theenvironment.  The report also discusses the long-termrisks of sunken nuclear ships and sea-disposed reactorcompartments.  Based on available accident data, anattempt is made to estimate the probability of futureserious nuclear ship accidents.(Order this ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS & REMEDIATIONreviewed report from InfoTeam Inc., P.O. Box 15640,Plantation, FL 33318-5640; Phone (954)/or(305)473-9560, Fax (954)/or(305) 473-0544: Report No.N960136; July 1994, 22 pp.  Price: $89.00, prepaid.)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-8IA086-000616-B017-16http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002741 text/html 43141HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:25:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:04 GMTContent-length: 42954Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev62.html Sample Issue Copyright ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet JANUARY 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (441 words) UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREE TO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL (402 words) NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTS TO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER (145 words) LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUP SPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLS ATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA. (771 words) OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITES FOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH (744 words) MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUT N.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS (433 words) GETTING INTO THE ACT AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION (255 words) GEL COMPOUND AUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENT FUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER (751 words) ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA. MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENT FOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOIL (641 words) RADIATION ASSESSMENT ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE (524 words) INFO FOR INVESTMENT? RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS KEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES (681 words) CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSBioremediation Shifts: FIND/SVP Inc., a New York-basedworldwide consulting and research firm, recently published a170-page report, The Market for Bioremediation Products andServices. The study focuses on the restoration market astrends shift from research to actual cleanup. Since itsbirth in the mid-1980s, the remediation market has grownrapidly. "Bioremediation is not only the mostenvironmentally benign cleanup technology, it is often theleast expensive and the fastest. At a recently documentedgroundwater contamination site, non-biological cleanupmethods would have taken up to 50 years to purify the waterand surrounding soils, while bioremediation took only twoyears to do the job."   But there are "formidable challenges" despite the growingnumber of sites that require cleanup. The report puts intoperspective the mood of the 104th congress which appearsready to eliminate the Environmental Protection Agency(EPA). There also is a complicated entanglement ofregulations that inhibit growth and practical application ofresearch. "Not only is hazardous waste assessment andcleanup frequently a complex process, negotiating thebureaucratic bidding process can be even more daunting."Ethical implications surrounding the introduction ofgenetically engineered life forms to degrade contaminationare another area of concern.   These formidable challenges are not enough, however, toprevent a compound annual growth rate of 16 percent to theyear 2000, according to FIND/SVP. Although the mood incongress is hostile to EPA, there is support for militarysite cleanup and the timing is such that results fromresearch are ready for large-scale implementation. "Thedevelopment of many new cost-effective and time-savingbioremediation technologies...will [be favored] over othercleanup methods." FIND/SVP also predicts cleanupresponsibilities will shift from federal to state andprivate-party payers. The report should prove beneficial tobusinesses that seek to expand and streamline efforts in afairly optimistic market. The Market for Bioremediation andServices is priced at $2,250 and can be obtained bycontacting FIND/SVP, Department RGV, 625 Avenue of theAmericas, New York, NY 10011-2002. To see the table ofcontents, visit Web site http://www.findsvp.cpm/. For moreinformation, call David Weiss at FIND/SVP at (212) 807-2604.EMERGING MARKETS: Interest in environmental goods andservices continues to grow in Central Europe and the formerEastern Bloc despite political and economic unrest. Manycountries like the Czech and Slovak Republics, Hungary andPoland are adopting Western-style environmental regulations.Privatization also has put cleanup and preventative concernsin the hands of individuals rather than unaccountable,state-run bureaucracies. Still, creating a climate conduciveto sustaining a development ethic is difficult in tighteconomic times. Pollution prevention and remediationprograms could slow without adequate funding or enforcementof regulations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996UKRAINE, G-7 FINALLY AGREETO REMEDIATE CHERNOBYL   Closure and remediation of Ukraine's troubled Chernobylnuclear power plant may soon begin as a result of the Dec.20 accord between Kiev and the Group of Seven (G-7) mostindustrialized countries. Meeting in Ottawa, the partiessigned a memorandum of understanding that $2.3 billion ininternational financial aid would be made available to helpUkraine close Chernobyl by 2000, according to a statementissued after the event.   Canada presently holds the G-7 chairmanship and the dealwas signed by Canadian Environment Minister Sheila Copps andUkrainian Environment Minister Yuri Kostenko. The EuropeanUnion also is a signatory.   In addition to closure and remediation, the plan callsfor the development of replacement energy sources, includingthe construction of two water-cooled reactors, the statementsays. The two new reactors meet all Western safetystandards, officials said. Western nuclear officialsrepeatedly have said they would like all the graphite-moderated RBMK reactors to be dismantled, replaced withwater-cooled units or otherwise upgraded to meetInternational Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards. Theproblem, they say, is funding.   "The closure of Chernobyl will be an important steptoward improving nuclear safety, not only in Central andEastern Europe, but throughout the entire world as well,''the statement quotes Copps as saying.   Kostenko has criticized Western governments for focusingtoo much attention on Chernobyl while ignoring safetyconcerns associated with the former Soviet Union's 11similar graphite-moderated reactors. Following the signing,however, he appealed to the West to be promptly forthcomingwith the financial assistance. The Ukraine EnvironmentMinister said he is concerned about a meltdown occurring atRussia's Khorsk facility which, because it is near Ukraine,would be as devastating to Ukraine citizens as was theChernobyl accident.   Although not legally binding, the MOU creates a backdropon which concrete closure plans can be based, Kostenko said.The fact the deal is not binding prompted outrage fromenvironmental groups, which said such errors as failing toset a specific shutdown date are major problems. In itsstatement, Greenpeace International said offering to helpUkraine finish work on two more reactors wascounterproductive.   Aid package specifics include: $498 million in grantsfrom G-7 member states, $349 million of which will go tonuclear safety and decommissioning; and $1.8 billion in loanfinancing from international agencies. Of the total $2.3billion, nearly $1.9 billion will be invested in new energy.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996NORWAY, RUSSIA WILL COMBINE EFFORTSTO CLEAN UP SPENT FUEL NEAR BORDER   In a bid to dispel concerns about radiation hazards posedby waste facilities on Russia's Kola Peninsula and NovayaZemlya Island, Moscow and Oslo agreed to cooperate onroutine inspections and public notifications. In anagreement reached in Moscow Dec. 15 between Russian DefenseMinister Pavel Grachev and Norwegian Defense MinisterJoergen Kosmo, the two countries will work together tomonitor and eventually dispose of military nuclear waste,especially spent fuel held near the Norwegian border.   Russian authorities have denied there are any majorradiation risks on Kola or Novaya Zemlya and want to usecooperation with an internationally trusted state likeNorway to help dispel some of the negative press. Althoughno concrete evidence of radiation leaks has been reported,people working with such organizations as Norway's Bellonaenvironmental group say Russian authorities deny thempermission to inspect many military sites.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996LOCKHEED TAKES-ON CLEANUPSPARGING FROM HORIZONTAL WELLSATTACKS VOC PLUME IN PINELLAS, FLA.   An ambitious air sparging system at Lockheed-Martin'sPinellas Plant, near Largo, Fla., aims at remediating anentire vinyl chloride plume. Since September, the processhas dramatically reduced contaminant concentrations at allmonitoring wells. Air sparging consists of injectingcompressed air below the water table. As air bubbles upward,volatile compounds partition into the gas phase and arecarried out of the ground water by rising air. Although airsparging has been the subject of much research, often insmall field test cells, large-scale deployment of thetechnology has been rare. The ground water contaminant plumebeing remediated is ideal for  a  pilot  study,  said  BrentWeesner, engineer in charge of the project at Lockheed-Martin's Pinellas Plant near Largo, Fla. The plume is about175 feet long and 75 feet wide, and contains vinyl chlorideat concentrations up to 40 ppb. The plume is well-characterized. It occurs in an aquifer consisting of veryfine sand about 30 feet thick. A survey using numerousHydrocone probes defined the bottom of the aquiferaccurately. The plume is confined mostly to the upperportion of the aquifer, as shown by Hydrocone samples. Allbut two of about 30 samples taken at 25 feet depth showed novinyl chloride.Forget the Monitoring   Weesner's concept was to go straight for remediation ofthe plume, rather than taking the more conventional approachof carrying out extensive monitoring. Costs for air spargingwere expected to be similar to those for an extendedmonitoring program.   Seven horizontal wells were installed at a design depthof 28 feet beneath the plume. Lengths ranged from 460 to 560feet. Wells were drilled from two locations using the "rivercrossing" method, in which the drill string was brought backto the surface at the far end of the drill run. This allowedpulling the casing through the borehole with a cable, ratherthan pushing it into a blind hole from the drillinglocation.   Well installation was relatively uneventful, Weesnersaid, in part because of "a great team effort" by thecontractors, GTS Inc., Meriden, Conn. (203-238-4567) andConsutec, Tampa, Fla. (813-889-7181). The pipe-pulling headused at first allowed sand to enter the end of the casing.The contractors designed a better pulling head and had itbuilt locally.Special Slotting   The well casing consisted of two high-densitypolyethylene (HDPE) pipes, of 2-inch and 4-inch diameters,with sand pre-packed between them. Inner and outer casingshad 15 mil slots, cut parallel to the length of the casingrather than across the casing. Although lengthwise slots areunusual, they were used in this case to preserve the tensilestrength of the casing, because it had to be pulled throughthe borehole. Consutec developed special slotting methodsfor this job.   Another unusual feature of the installation is that theseven horizontal wells are divided into 15 control zones forair injection, with one to three control zones per well.Each control zone is separated from adjacent parts of thesame well, and has its own air control and metering equip-ment. This arrangement allows concentrating the spargingefforts in the most contaminated portions of the plume, andavoids wasting air on portions that have already beencleaned up. One well with only a single control section wasplaced in the middle of the plume so that if sparging hadnot worked as planned, the well could have been pumped tocontrol the spread of the plume.   Sparge air is collected by a system of pipes laid intrenches 2 feet deep and backfilled with pea gravel. Pumpsdraw the air to a treatment pad, where a carbon filtrationsystem traps the vinyl chloride for later destruction.   Results have been very encouraging so far. Spargingoperations started in early September. By October, samplingshowed 1.9 ppb vinyl chloride in one of 19 monitoring wells,and no detectable concentration in the other 18 wells.Weesner was concerned, however, that filter packs in themonitoring wells might act as conduits for air, so thatsparging would be most effective close to the wells - inother words, the well samples might not be representative ofmost of the aquifer.   During the November sampling, well purging was moreintensive to assure representative sampling. The spargingsystem was shut down on a Tuesday, and wells were purgedboth Wednesday and Thursday. This time, concentrations werehigher, but still much lower than before sparging - vinylchloride concentrations of 1.0 ppb, 1.2 ppb, and 1.9 ppbwere detected in three wells, and none in the remaining 16wells.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996OAK RIDGE OFFERS FIELD SITESFOR COLLABORATION, RESEARCH   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites atthe laboratory for collaborative ground water research.Research at these sites has focused on water and contaminantmovement in heterogeneous fractured media. Some of thespecific sites available are:   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)are particularly suitable for studies of subsurfacetransport processes. Each has a trench excavated across itsoutflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, andcontain six pans pressed against the face of the trench tocollect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracerdistribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects ofsolution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are locatedthroughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipmentis interfaced for computerized data collection.   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site wasdeveloped for investigating new ground water tracertechniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and hasbeen instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some ofthem multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels andtemperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals fortwo years. During the last three years, three principaltests have been conducted at this field site:A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neonto test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport;A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-sizetracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,to measure fracture-flow velocities; andA test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers offracture flow.   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has beenused for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methodsin fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil andsaprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling portsinstalled close to the pairs of wells. Many data areavailable from the site, including six pumping tests,natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfurhexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemicalanalyses.   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium werereleased in a open borehole in a fractured shale. Tritiumwas monitored in the injection well and in five monitoringwells for the first five years, with an additional samplingafter 16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium bypumping were unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium wasstill present after 16 years. Results of this test have beeninterpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-treat methods.   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and EngineeringSciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak RidgeNational Laboratory; (423) 576-0567; fax: (423) 576-3989; e-mail: gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the WorldWide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/   The trend toward fast, field-based assessment of soil andground water contamination received a boost from a newstandard developed by the American Society for Testing andMaterials (ASTM). The standard, PS 3, Provisional StandardGuide for Accelerated Site Characterization of SuspectedPetroleum Release, is aimed at petroleum-contaminated sites,but clearly indicates the growing interest in rapid sitecharacterization. The standard does not offer prescriptiveadvice for cleanups. Instead, it lists tools than can beused to collect samples and tests to analyze the samples.The standard also provides guidance on conducting sitecharacterizations.   In the past, field investigators at contaminated sitesusually drilled borings, took samples and had them analyzedin a laboratory. This produced data that were often veryaccurate, but at the cost of waiting weeks for results.Often the results showed that additional samples wereneeded, and a drilling rig had to be re-mobilized to thesite.   "The task group believes that it is better to get moredata in a matter of days, even though it may be of slightlyless quality, than a few data points with a higher qualityfor which you might have to go back and forth to the siteover the course of a couple of years," said Gilberto Alvarezof Subcommittee E50.01, part of ASTM Committee E-50 onEnvironmental Assessment.   Contact: Gilberto Alvarez, EPA, (312) 886-6143.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996MODULARIZATION, AUTOMATION CUTN.Y. SUPERFUND SITE CLEANUP COSTS   Capital and operating costs for ground water and soilcleanup at a Long Island Superfund site have been minimizedby modularization and automation, said Steve McInerney,senior process engineer and project manager for Retec Co.,Concord Mass. The Shore Realty Superfund Site is a formerhandling facility at Glenwood Landing in Hempstead Harbor,N.Y., and was heavily contaminated with petroleum andsolvent hydrocarbons during 36 years of operation.   Retec selected four technologies for site cleanup - soilvapor extraction, air sparging, ground water pump and treat,and bioremediation. The ground water system captures freeproduct at the downgradient side of the site. EPA's pre-construction estimate of construction cost was $2.3 million.Actual construction costs, however, were $2 million, asavings of about 15 percent.Components Pre-Assembled   McInerney attributed a significant part of the saving tomodular construction of treatment plant components. Tanks,mixers, pumps and other components were pre-assembled into afew modules at the factory, rather than being assembledpiece by piece at the site. Although this somewhat increasedthe cost of the components, it allowed greater savings inthe cost of installation at the site.   Electrical power and control wiring also were assembledand terminated in boxes on the modules. Each module thus hadonly two connection points where it was tied into power andcontrol wiring. Except for the thermal oxidation unit thatdestroys vapor-phase contaminants, no controls wereinstalled on the modules. All units were tied to controlslocated on a central panel.Estimates Exeeded Actuals   Operating costs were estimated at $500,000 per year atthe feasibility study stage, but actual costs are about$300,000 per year. One reason for lower costs is carefulcontrol of electrical consumption. About half the totaloperating costs are for a large compressor that drives thesparging system. Retec has put much effort into optimizingthe system operation. Sparging rates are kept as low aspossible, and sparging is pulsed to increase systemefficiency.   The plant is highly automated to keep operating costslow. The plant is computer-operated; the human operatorvisits the plant as needed. If a problem develops, thecomputer system automat-ically calls the plant operator'sbeeper and notifies the operator of the problem's severity -from level 1, for minor problems, to level 4, for a totalautomatic shutdown. The computer system also continuouslycollects data from the system for monitoring its operation.McInerney downloads these data by telephone every two tothree weeks for inspection of the plant's operations andcontinuing efficiency.   Contact: Steve McInerney, Retec; (508) 371-1422.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996GETTING INTO THE ACTAGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS ANNOUNCEENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP COOPERATION   The American Crop Protection Association (ACPA) and theAgricultural Retailers Association (ARA) announced jointguidelines to assist the environmental cleanup of retailagricultural chemical dealer sites. These sites often havebeen sources of ground water contamination because of spillsand improper waste disposal.   The guidelines call for both voluntary and fee-basedreimbursement mechanisms aimed at accelerating assessmentand remediation of contaminated sites. Common elements ofthe guidelines, whether voluntary or fee-based, include thefollowing:Confidential environmental audits;Cleanup standards keyed to the future use of the site; andAcceptance by state authorities of completed remedialprograms.Incentives   Key features of voluntary programs include incentives toproperty owners, provided sites do not represent immediatethreats to health or the environment, and flexible cleanupschedules. Key features of fee-based programs are maximumand minimum balances for the remedial fund, significantfinancial deductibles for dealers and growers who initiatecleanups, ceilings on total reimbursement per remediationand collection of fees at the retail dealer level.   To date, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Illinois have enactedlegislation establishing chemical cleanup programs.Approximately 20 more states, including Ohio andPennsylvania, have established voluntary remediationprograms available to everyone, including dealers, growersand industrial users of agricultural chemicals.   ACPA is a trade organization of manufacturers,formulators and distributors of agricultural crop protectionand pest control products. ARA is an organization thatprovides information and education to retail farm supplydealers.   Contacts: Allan Noe, ACPA; (202) 872-3840, and JimEgenrieder, ARA; (202) 457-0825.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996GEL COMPOUNDAUSTRALIAN RESEARCHERS PREVENTFUELS FROM REACHING DOWN UNDER   Remediators concerned about safe transportation ofhazardous liquids such as organic solvents, can look toresearch being conducted at the University of SouthAustrailia where an in-situ gelation process is beingdeveloped. Techsearch, a non-profit group that functions asa laision with the community, is working with theUniversity's Polymer Science Group at the Ian Wark ResearchInstitute to lessen the risk of hazardous liquid cargowhich, if spilled in large quantities, can cause deleteriousaffects and long-term environmental damage. Explosion,flammability, noxious fumes, poisoning, smoke, odors,irritants and ground water contamination have been a resultof past spills.   By rapidly injecting a mixture of materials into theorganic liquid, chemical cross-linking occurs in a shorttime and a solid network is formed. Solidification preventsthe volatile liquid from escaping holes or ruptures in thewalls of containers damaged during an accident. Gelationalso decreases concentrations of petrol fumes and reducesthe explosion front of fuel which cuts back the possibilityof fire.10 Percent Solid   Geoffrey Swincer and Janis Matisons of the University'sSchool of Chemical Technology discovered the catalyticprocess and tested it in laboratory experiments. Certaincompounds - rapidly reacting polymers, monomers, andfunctional molecules such as silanes - undergo a rapidcross-linking action when in contact with fuels which becometrapped in individual cells. The cellular network thatresults resembles that of a honeycomb structure. Hard orgel-like to the touch, the compound may only be 10 percentsolid, 90 percent liquid, when measured by weight.   The ratio of compound to fuel is relatively low - onepart compound to 30 parts fuel - which is less than 4percent by volume. Swincer and Matisons feel that continuedresearch to produce even more efficient gelling compoundswith lower reactive ratios. They also believe that the realadvantage of the process is its speed and that this factorwill lend itself to successful comercialization. Reactiontimes have been less than one minute in low-level laboratorydemonstrations. Large volumes of fuel can be gelled inruptured tanks or large storage facilities through the useof a progressive injection system. These delivery systemscan be an integral part of any storage facility ortransportation container. The gel forms a cork or sealaround the point of rupture to prevent further outflow, andthe solidification of the liquid fuel into a mass preventsit from running underground or into sewer lines and streams.Damage is quickly limited to the immediate vicinity of thespill.Multi-Point Injection   Conceptualized by Swincer and Matisons, the strategybehind successful delivery of the gel compound intransportation tanks is to create a multi-point injectionsystem, similar to sprinkler systems in large buildings,around the inner circumference of the container. Activationwould occur upon some predetermined signal, via automaticdetection or manually from a control station. Following thesignal, the entire body of fuel would be surrounded by gel,the point of rupture sealed, and the core of the liquidpenetrated. A secondary system of directional nozzles, likethose in fire extinguishers, can be applied to any fuel thathas escaped initial treatment. This backup can be used byocean going tugs and other emergency vehicles.Fuel Recycling   Once the gel compound has done its job, it has to becleaned up with shovels and loaders, or by heavy industrialsuction. A gelled slick at sea can be controlled with boomsbefore being collected and transported by tanker to bedumped or recycled. One significant advantage of the processis that fuel can be retrieved by breaking up the gelstructure in a specially designed mixer followed by aprocess of filtration and distillation. Compared to moreconventional means of cleanup and recycling, the amount offuel lost is far less. Recycling crude after gelation couldbe part of the refining process. Researchers estimateremaining non-toxic solids after recycling to be less than10 percent of volume and suitable for landfill disposal.   Researchers also will have to evaluate potentialexothermic reactions of rapid gelation of large volumes offuels. The production of heat generated from the processdoes not pose a problem in the laboratory, but may in thefield. Evaluating this risk will form part of the nextstudy.   Contact: Jani Matisons or Geoffrey Swincer at the IanWark Research Institute, Warrendi Road, The University ofSouth Australia, The Levels, South Australia 5095,Australia; phone: +61 8 302 3694; fax: +61 8 302 3683.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996ENVIRO HAZ TECH OF PA.MOBILE INJECTION TREATMENTFOR DENSE CONTAMINATED SOILBy Elena Marcheso Moreno   Turning contaminated land into usable construction siteshas great appeal in the competitive world of buildingdevelopment. Enviro Haz-Tech, an environmental remediationcompany in Hegins, Pa., has developed a series of MobileInjection Treatment Units (MITUs) that can help remediatedifficult soil conditions, both on unbuilt and built sites.   Enviro Haz-Tech specializes in treatment of all types ofsoils contaminated with petroleum or other hazardousmaterials. The patented MITU technology particularly appealsto building developers because it can handle densesubsurface contaminated soils under buildings. Cleaning thesoil in place saves developers the costs of transportationand disposal associated with the alternative solution ofdumping the contaminated soil into landfills, orincinerating it.Huge Cost Savings   By actually treating the soil on-site, the MITU systemcan help a land owner save between 40 percent and 60 percentcompared to removing it, Enviro Haz-Tech estimates. Once thetreatment is completed, new soils are not required in orderto develop and build on the site.   Enviro Haz-Tech's soil treatment unit is comprised of aJohn Deere modified hydraulic excavator mounted on a customtrenching unit equipped with a series of interchangeableinjection systems and full vapor recovery. It includesproprietary manifolds, pumps, storage tanks, computers,monitors, and hydraulic controls. The operator canmanipulate all controls from within the cab of the self-contained unit.   In addition, the trencher is completely enclosed and hasair emission collection systems that transfer vapors to on-board treatment equipment. Compliance with air-qualitystandards is achieved through computerized monitoring oforganic and inorganic vapors, and other toxic or combustibleemissions.Soil Injection   The MITU operator excavates contaminated land within apredetermined grid, trenching contaminated soil andinjecting it with hot-air, bio-chemicals, slurries, andstabilization compounds, as required for remediation. Allunits use rotary carbide cutting blades that can penetrateall soils, even dense rock, to depths of 9 meters. A MITUMini model was also developed to inject and mix soils to amaximum depth of 2.5 meters beneath building basements,concrete slabs, and other structures. The unit's carbideteeth rotate at three speeds to  break  up  soilformations   in   46-centimeter widths. Once it has reachedthe required depth, one of a variety of injection unitsdistributes the Enviro mitigating agent into the soil. Soilpasses through the sealed housing, where it is treated.Microbial and nutrient mixtures are delivered into thechamber to enhance bioremediation; hot air to encouragevolatile stripping; cement slurry for slurry wallconstruction; and absorbants to collect free product. Oncethe soil is treated, it is pushed through the undercarriageof the MITU, reappearing as a clean, fine-grained topsoil.In all but the most difficult site conditions, the MITU cantreat up to 55 metric tons per hour.MITU Versatility   In the past, bioremediation strategies have succeededonly when employed on porous or semi-porous soils. The newMITU approach handles all types of soils, according toEnviro Haz-Tech. In addition to vapor recovery, oilscontaminated with metals or pesticides can be cleaned withthis multiple injection system, which has the ability toinject remediation agents in the necessary form-solid,liquid, gas, or slurry.   When the MITU completes its job, the land left canimmediately be used for buildings that will be occupied bypeople. The company recently completed a clean-up project inPottsville, Pa., on a site when petroleum had beendistributed. Although the storage tanks were no longerpresent, the site was contaminated by past seepage ofpetroleum, kerosene, and bunker fuel. Enviro Haz-Techcleaned upthe site, which is now being developed for a100,000 mixed-use warehouse and shopping mall project.   For more information about the MITU system, or to inquireabout domestic and international joint ventures. Contact:Bruce Bruso at EHT/CBA (717) 682-8742.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996RADIATION ASSESSMENTARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTEby Gordon Feller   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problemsrelated to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense NuclearAgency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation intended to assist the countries of the formerSoviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent theproliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess the radiation and conventional environmental damageat sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles werebased, transported, operated, or maintained, and help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal andlow-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances. As partof the effort to transfer expertise in the environmentalrestoration field, Arthur D. Little will conductinternational conferences co-sponsored by DNA and theBelarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the worldwill be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety ofenvironmental restoration experiences, technologies, andmanagement issues.   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active groundwater movement,which can exacerbate groundwater pollution. Otherorganizations involved with Arthur D. Little on theEnvironmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps ofEngineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los Alamos TechnicalAssociates, Technology Management Company, the EnvironmentalChemical Corp., the Environmental Hazards SpecialistsInternational, Environmental Careers Organizations, theWorld Environment Center, and Clean Sites, Inc.   Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largestenvironmental impact assessment ever conducted in the FormerSoviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.Back to Headline List CopyrightENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY 10, 1996INFO FOR INVESTMENT?RECENT EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTSKEY TO BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIESRussia Having Trouble With CFCs: Russia is asking for moretime to cut ozone-threatening substances. At a majorinternational conference of government representativesconvened in Vienna to review the 1987 Montreal Protocol onozone protection, Russian Federation Environment MinisterViktor Danilov-Danilyan said Russia needs more time and alarger pool of investment aid in order to developsubstitutes to ozone-harming substances such aschlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the Montreal Protocol,signed by 150 countries, such industrialized countries asRussia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 and the rest ofthe signatories by 2010. Minister Danilov-Danilyan said theRussian Federation is now producing only half the ozone-threatening chemicals it was in 1987, but he added that thedrop was a by-product of the fall in industrial output. Theminister was quick to point out that he and his governmentwould  have  preferred  to  be able to meet the deadline, asother governments are doing, but that the economicconditions prevailing within his country are making itimpossible for the principal factories from even payingtheir workers, let alone their taxes and electric bills. Itwill be impossible for the Russian government to force suchenterprises, even if they are state-owned (and many are not)to comply with the protocol when the ministry has nofinancial capacity to support the enterprise's change-overto non-CFC production or usage.German, Swiss, Finnish Waste: Germany and Switzerland havedecided not to send spent nuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 forprocessing, Krasnoyarsk Krai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchinwas quoted as saying. The waste would have been processed atthe RT-2 plant - still under construction - in the formerlysecret nuclear center in Siberia. The Russian authoritieshad hoped to finance the project by accepting foreign waste,enabling them to process their own stocks. The Swiss andGerman pullout will deal a major blow to the project. Thedecision is likely to be hailed by environmental groups,which have strongly opposed the importation of nuclearmaterials, arguing that Russia's waste storage sites arealready overflowing. Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclearfuel from a Finnish nuclear power plant reportedly hasarrived in Russia for processing at the Mayak plant inChelyabinsk-65. An English translation of the KomsomolskayaPravda newspaper says it is not yet clear whether thenuclear residue remaining after processing will be shippedback to Finland or kept inside the Russian Federation.Nuclear Safety Threatened: Nuclear safety may be threatenedby workers at Russia's nuclear power plants, who say theymay shut down the facilities unless they receive overduewage payments. Officials say they have scheduled warningprotests, but it is not clear what form they will take.Energy consumers owe nuclear power plants about 2.5 trillionrubles (US$555 million), and on average workers have notbeen paid for three months, according to the deputy head ofRosenergoatom in Moscow.German Assistance: A German company has signed a contractwith Russia's Kursk nuclear power plant to construct anuclear waste storage facility and to provide 240 containersto store the plant's radioactive waste. The German Companyfor Nuclear Containers, a Nukem subsidiary, will controlproduction quality, train specialists and provide the know-how for production. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia'snuclear safety agency, the solid waste storage facilities atthe Kursk plant are full.Troubled Kazakhstan: The amount of radioactive wasteaccumulating at uranium mining and processing plants inKazakhstan reportedly is reaching alarming proportions.Since this large, very poor Central Asian country becameindependent in 1991, the quantity of radioactive wastestored in Kazakhstan has grown to 219 million metric tons.The republic's Ministry of Ecology and Biological Resourcesclaims the aggregate radioactivity from the waste comes to250,000 curies, which is "many times more than the acceptednorm." Kazakhstan does not have the means to deal with thewaste because under the Soviet Union's regime disposal was anational responsibility carried out by the government inMoscow. Today, there are neither any Kazakh laws norbilateral agreements with Russia which adequately addressthis type of nuclear waste disposal dilemma.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-9IA086-000616-B017-43http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev70.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002756 text/html 21556HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:26:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:21 GMTContent-length: 21369Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev70.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet October 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FOODSTUFFS: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL AGREE ON LABELLING (891 words) DEREGULATING PUBLIC SERVICES IN THE INTEREST OF CONSUMERS. (177 words) CRESSON PUTS CASE FOR BETTER FOCUSED RESEARCH PROGRAMME (362 words) STEEL CANS RECYCLING RATE EXCEEDS 40% (206 words) EIB LENDS TURKEY ECU 50 MILLION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. (141 words) INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL OF THE SEA INVESTS JUDGES. (216 words) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT: MAKING A COME-BACK (180 words) CHEMICAL INDUSTRY: COMMISSION RIGHT TO REFUSE CFC IMPORT LICENCE, SAYS COURT (720 words) CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996FOODSTUFFS: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL AGREE ON LABELLINGfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Delegations from the European Parliament and the Council of Ministersreached a compromise on October 16 - through the Conciliation Committee -on the labelling and advertising of foodstuffs, thus settling a row overthe proposed amendments to Directive 79/112/EEC). The Parliament claimsthe agreement reflects its commitment to the principle of free trade inthe Union, as stated in the ruling by the European Court of Justice onOctober 26, 1995 in the "bearnaise sauce case", and whose scope theCouncil appeared anxious to limit. By contrast, negotiations between theParliament and Council on the labelling of novel foods have yet to beconcluded and are being pursued.On June 15, 1995, the Council of Ministers adopted a common position onthe amendment of Articles 3 (list of requisite details for inclusion inlabelling), 6 (single ingredient foods), 7 (quantitative declaration ofingredients), and 14 (language used on labelling) of the proposal for aDirective. On October 25, 1995, the Schnellhardt report (EPP, Germany) wasapproved in second reading by the European Parliament, which adopted fiveamendments: one to Article 1 of Directive 79/112 (trade name of a food),three to Article 6 (list of ingredients), and one amendment to Article 7(quantitative declaration of ingredients). With the Council unwilling toaccept three of the five amendments tabled by the plenary session, theconciliation procedure was initiated on December 22, 1995.In its ruling on the "bearnaise sauce" case, the Court of Justice deemedGermany to be in breach of Article 30 of the EC Treaty, which prohibitsquantitative restrictions on imports, and all measures having equivalenteffect. In Germany, the traditional recipe for bearnaise sauce is based onbutter and eggs. The authorities demanded that imported saucesmanufactured according to a different recipe should bear the mention"bearnaise sauce made from vegetable oil" and not the generic name"bearnaise sauce". The Court ruled that Germany has no right to demandsuch an indication on labelling of the product, as the term "bearnaisesauce" is quite sufficient.The joint text to emerge from the conciliation talks provides for aproduct to be sold in other Member States under the legal name it carriesin the Member State of production - except in very exceptional cases. Thecompromise takes account of pressure from certain Member States followingthe "bearnaise sauce" ruling, by stipulating that the trade name can becomplemented by additional information printed adjacently. On the expressdemand of the European Parliament delegation, these provisions are howeverincluded under certain conditions: the list of ingredients (and otherprovisions of the Directive) must not prevent consumers in the MemberState where a product is marketed from determining the real nature of thefood, and there must be no risk of confusion with other products.MEPs believe this provision will have little impact in practice, as the"bearnaise sauce" ruling clearly indicates that a list of ingredientsshould be sufficient to prevent any confusion on the part of the consumer.Moreover, the text of the Treaty must take precedence over secondarylegislation.In respect of people suffering from allergies, the Parliament securedCouncil approval for clear labelling of the specific vegetable origin ofstarches entering into the composition of products and likely to containgluten.It now remains for the two institutions to formally adopt this compromise,the Council by qualified majority, the European Parliament by a simplemajority. However, the Parliament's delegation emphasised that it will notrecommend its adoption by the plenary session unless the EuropeanCommission pledges to bring forward a specific proposal on the labellingof alcoholic beverages, which are not covered by the present Directive.Novel foods.Are novel foods (a term covering genetically-modified products: soyabeans, sugar beet, flavour-saver tomatoes, etc.) different fromtraditional foods and if so, to what extent? This question fuelled a firstexchange of views between delegations from the European Parliament and theCouncil on October 16 at the Conciliation Committee.Parliament is demanding that food labels should inform consumers of allthe characteristics and properties that distinguish a novel food or foodingredient from an existing equivalent food or ingredient. The Council ofMinisters believes such information is only justified where there is a"significant" difference with the traditional food.The Conciliation Committee will have to settle the issue and, under thecontext of co-decision procedure, draw up a compromise text for a proposalfor a Regulation on the marketing in the Community of novel foods and foodingredients. In second reading on March 12, 1995, the European Parliamentadopted six amendments to the common position approved by the Council onOctober 23, 1995. Compromise proposals are currently being examined andthe delegations may reach an agreement in the coming weeks.This Regulation must guarantee that novel foods and food ingredientspresent no risk to public health or the environment and are the object ofdetailed labelling. It will also define procedures on the European levelfor the marketing of these products throughout the Community. It says thatgenetic engineering must only be used to improve the taste, flavour andshelf life of products, or to protect against insect attack or ensureresistance to herbicides.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996DEREGULATING PUBLIC SERVICES IN THE INTEREST OF CONSUMERS.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Just as France was reaffirming the importance of the inclusion of publicservices in the Maastricht Treaty, at the European Council in Dublin onOctober 5, Rome was hosting an International Forum on "the deregulation ofpublic and consumer services", organised on the initiative of the EuropeanCommission and Italy's competition and markets authority. Following onfrom its recent Communication on general interest services in Europe, theCommission was anxious to relaunch the deregulation debate by emphasisingEuropean citizens' interests (and expectations), in the presence ofrepresentatives of institutions, industry, utilities and consumerassociations. Faced with the reticence of certain Member States andsectors concerned, the Commission has put its faith in thecitizen-consumer to support the ongoing process. But the man in the streetstill has to be convinced of the advantages to be gained from deregulatingpublic services, and reassured of the maintenance of "unalienable" generalinterest services. The Rome meeting was intended at a first step towardsthis goal.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996CRESSON PUTS CASE FOR BETTER FOCUSED RESEARCH PROGRAMMEfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486Addressing a gathering at the University of Bonn, in Germany, on October16, Edith Cresson, the European Commissioner with responsibility forResearch, argued that the 5th European Framework Programme on Research andTechnological Development (RTD) (1999-2002) must not be a mere extensionof its predecessors. The Commissioner emphasised the importance ofevolving away from research focusing exclusively on technologicalperformance, and towards research focusing better on economic and socialneeds. The Commission guidelines for the 5th Framework Programme werepresented in September in the form of a working paper ("Inventingtomorrow") designed to launch the debate.Mrs Cresson highlighted her own creed on European research policy whichshould, first and foremost, serve the needs of society. She insisted thisgoal is not at variance with the need for strong basic research in Europe:contemporary research is indeed characterised by an increasingly rapidconvergence of theoretical breakthroughs and practical results.Turning to the place of research/industry Task Forces in the 5th FrameworkProgramme, Mrs Cresson indicated they should in principle remain assupport structures for projects targeted at themes of great social andeconomic importance. She also highlighted the relations between RTDpolicy, regional and cohesion policy, an issue of much concern in Germany,insisting that "while Union research actions can contribute directly tostrengthening the economic and social cohesion of different regions,seeking to obtain this effect by sacrificing the criteria of scientificexcellence would be a grave error". It would, she argues, be moreappropriate to "coordinate the implementation of research programmes andregional policy actions".The European Commissioner recalled the timetable for the introduction ofthe 5th Framework Programme:- The Commission will present a more detailed working paper before theyear's end, describing in greater depth the scientific and technologicalobjectives to be pursued and the procedures for implementation; thisdocument will however remain sufficiently open to stimulate a genuinepolicy debate on the options proposed.- A formal proposal will be presented at the beginning of 1997, with aview to its adoption at the beginning of 1998.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996STEEL CANS RECYCLING RATE EXCEEDS 40%from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The recycling rate for steel cans in Europe reached 41% in 1995, anincrease of more than 20% in just one year, according to APEAL, theAssociation of European Packaging Steel Producers. This puts the industrywell above the target of 15% for all materials set out in the Directive onpackaging and packaging wastes. The Association claims that about amillion tonnes of steel were collected and recycled last year. Germany issetting the trend in Europe with a recycling rate of 67%, followed by theNetherlands (58%), France (40%) and Belgium (30%). Spain and Britain aretrailing somewhat with 17 and 16% respectively. APEAL forecasts thatrecycling rates will reach 65% by 2005. In Europe, food tins account for50% of steel packaging, industrial packaging such as drums for 20%,beverage cans 10%, aerosols 10%, and other objects 5%.The members of APEAL are: the British Steel Tinplate (GB), CockerillSambre (B), Corporacion Siderurgica Nacional (Sp), Hoogovens PackagingSteel (Nl), ICMI (I), Norsk Blikkvalseverk (N), Rasselstein Hoesch (Ger),Sollac (F).APEAL, 89 avenue Louise, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium. Tel: (+32) 2/537 91 51,fax: (+32) 2/537 86 49Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996EIB LENDS TURKEY ECU 50 MILLION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The European Investment Bank is lending ECU 50 million for anenvironmental protection project in Turkey. The loan is being advanced toIzmit Greater Municipality to help cover the cost of collection andtreatment of industrial effluents in the province of Kocaeli, one of themost industrialised provinces in Turkey. The project will halt thecontamination of local rivers and thereby will help to protect and improvewater quality in the Gulf of Izmit (Marmara Sea). Financing is grantedunder the environmental section of the "Off-Protocol Facility", benefitingfrom a 3% interest subsidy from the Community Budget, under the EU'sRedirected Mediterranean Policy, designed to support investment in thefields of regional cooperation and environment protection, developinglinks at regional levels and with the Union's economy.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL OF THE SEA INVESTS JUDGES.from EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The investiture of the 21 judges who are to sit on the InternationalTribunal of the Sea, a United Nations institution set up to arbitratedisputes over fishing, navigation and pollution, was held in the Germantown of Hamburg on October 18. The ceremony was attended by UNSecretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who called on more countries tosign the Tribunal's Charter. Notable exceptions include the United Statesand Britain, while France and Russia have still to ratify the document.The basis for the Tribunal's work, the Agreement on the Law of the Sea hasthus far been signed by 107 of the UN's 185 member countries. MrBoutros-Ghali explained that the Tribunal will be charged withimplementing provisional measures where the marine environment isseriously threatened, and should lead to a more rapid resolution ofdisputes over fisheries, navigation and pollution. It will also have thepower to order the release of impounded vessels, against the deposit of aguarantee. The Tribunal's rulings will not be subject to appeal. Wheredisputes arise, States will be free to appeal either to the Tribunal or tothe International Court of Justice in the Hague. The Tribunal is chairedby Thomas Mensah of Ghana.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT: MAKING A COME-BACKfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486The European Commission is said to be pondering the idea of resuscitatinga proposal that has been deeply buried for several years now and seeks toensure that the environment is taken into account at the start of thedecision-making chain. European Commissioner for the Environment RittBjerregaard is inciting her colleagues to adopt the draft environmentalimpact assessment Directive for the policies, plans and programmes of theMember States. It is scheduled to appear on the provisional agenda for theCommissioners' October 30 meeting. The existing Directive on theenvironmental impact assessment of public and private projects proposes animpact assessment much further up the political decision-making chain. MrsBjerregaard's new Directive is intended to ensure the Member States'programmes and strategies are effectively vetted for their environmentalimpact. Green MEPs and environmental protection lobbies have accused theCommission of holding up the proposal, pending a decision on the majortrans-European transport networks, which they claim would by their verynature contravene the proposal.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetOctober 22, 1996CHEMICAL INDUSTRY: COMMISSION RIGHT TO REFUSE CFC IMPORT LICENCE, SAYSCOURTfrom EUROPE ENVIRONMENT, 22 October 1996, No. 486In an October 16 ruling, the Court of First Instance of the EuropeanCommunities dismissed an appeal by Efisol of France against the EuropeanCommission's refusal to grant it a licence to import chlorofluorocarbons11 (CFC 11) in 1994. After obtaining an import quota of 1,800 tonnes ofCFCs for 1994, Efisol expected the Commission to grant it an importlicence as is usual following attribution of a quota. The Commissiondeclined to do so. Efisol, meanwhile, had already ordered and transportedsome of the CFCs in question at a cost of over two million French Francs.The Court found that Efisol had acted unwisely, but admitted that theCommission had not acted entirely correctly either.Under Regulation 594/91, trade within the EU of CFCs imported from thirdcountries is subject to quotas granted by the Commission to the firms inquestion (CFCs are now banned in the EU). The quota, however, must besupplemented by an import licence granted by the Commission for CFCs to beimported. A firm desiring a licence must submit an application to theCommission describing the substances it wishes to import, the quantity andthe use to which they will be put. The various possible uses provided foron the application form include "feedstock in the manufacture of otherchemicals".After an exchange of letters between Efisol and the Commission, the Frenchcompany indicated that the CFCs to be imported would be used as "feedstockin the manufacture of other chemicals", specifically polyurethane foam.The Commission did not react rapidly enough to the provision of what waslater found to be inaccurate or even erroneous information by Efisol. CFCsare not completely destroyed or broken down during the manufacture ofpolyurethane foam and therefore this process does not meet the definitionof the "manufacture of other chemicals". It was the French Ministry thatinformed the Commission that the imported CFCs would not be used toproduce other chemicals.Efisol placed orders with its Russian suppliers on February 17 and 20,1994, only a few days after submitting its application for a licence onFebruary 15 and before it had received a response. On February 24, theCommission informed Efisol of its refusal to grant the import licences.One train was already rolling towards France carrying a cargo of CFCs 11and another was headed for Russia to pick up another load. When informalnegotiations failed, Efisol demanded compensation for the costs oftransporting the first load and running the empty train and for lostproduction and sales. The Commission claimed that Efisol had "attempted tomislead the Commission as to the exact use to which the substances were tobe put" and had "purchased orders from its Russian supplier (...) beforethe Commission denied the application for the licence". The parties arealso at loggerheads over the issue of whether a licence shouldautomatically be granted following the attribution of a quota. TheCommission considered the two separate actions.The Court found against Efisol, which claimed that the Commission hadviolated the principle of legitimate expectations, arguing that once thequota had been allocated, the Commission was required to issue a licence.The Court said that a "cautious and informed operator would not haveinitiated rail transport of the cargoes ordered without waiting for theCommission's decision and without taking the necessary steps to protectits interests if its application for a licence was refused". The importrights granted with the attribution of a quota become effective only whenthe import licence is granted, the Court said. By placing orders only twodays after applying for a licence, the "the complainant put itself indanger". The Court further ruled that it is scientifically inaccurate todescribe polyurethane foam as a "chemical". However, the Commission"applied Community Regulations incorrectly" by granting Efisol a quota forthis type of use, the Court said. "The Commission's behaviour was not inkeeping with Community Regulations and thus could not have raisedjustified hopes on the part of the complainant". Since "the emergence ofconflict was fuelled by the Commission's action", the Commission wasordered to pay all the legal costs.* Case T-336/94, ruling of October 16, 1996Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENVIRONMENTBack to Headline List WT02-B37-10IA086-000616-B017-69http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev57.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002812 text/html 51497HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:26:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:06 GMTContent-length: 51310Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev57.html Sample Issue Copyright E & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet JUNE 25, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Calif. operators push environmental plan (1035 words) Enviros face united front in badlands battle (593 words) NRC touts 'super' environmental agency (373 words) Emissions-control process patented (562 words) Indiana considers bird netting rules (315 words) ERCB calls for drilling waste management (389 words) DOE seeks input to production strategy (347 words) Twenty-five operators fined $130,800 (414 words) SVE leads in EPA market survey (327 words) OSPRA audits on schedule (241 words) 1992 saw record EPA fines (87 words) Correction (118 words) Controversial well draws ire (236 words) Edwards signs oilfield bill (169 words) Environmental patents (246 words) EPA to update regs (159 words) MMS releases Gulf reports (351 words) BDM forms Russian venture (63 words) Alberta mulls new well fee (222 words) EPA issues PM-10 rule (144 words) Wildlife centers planned (88 words) Expanded UIC regs opposed (260 words) Calendar (239 words) CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Calif. operators push environmental plan     Western States Petroleum Assn. has unveiled ablueprint for California's Kern County that may enableoil and gas producers, environmentalists, endangeredplants and animals, and county, state and federalgovernment officials to co-exist peacefully andbeneficially.     The specifics of the plan are contained in a WSPA"white paper" designed to be consistent with theprotection of endangered species outlined in a 1989memorandum of understanding among Kern County,the California Fish & Game Dept.'s oil, gas andgeothermal division and the federal Fish & WildlifeService and Bureau of Land Management.     "It's a great first step," said WSPA's MikeEmanuel, of the white paper's chances of leadingtoward an agreement among the parties involved.     Other principles guiding development of the paperincluded meeting requirements of the federal andCalifornia endangered species acts while allowing foreconomic growth and development in Kern County;providing a reliable process for landowners tocompensate for or mitigate impacts on sensitivespecies; and distributing the conservation burdenbroadly and fairly among public and privatelandowners, based on the impact of their activities onsensitive species.     A look at the makeup of Kern County'senvironment makes clear the need for some kind ofcoordinating plan. Oil fields in the county account forabout 592,000 b/d, or two out of every three barrelsproduced in California. Kern County blankets thesouthern end of the San Joaquin Valley, which wasrecently described in a guide book as follows: "Nonational park, no recreation area, no wildlife refugeanywhere in the contiguous 48 states has a widervariety of rare and endangered birds, animals and plantlife than can be found in the southern San JoaquinValley."     WSPA's paper calls for providing incentives forpreservation and development to occur in patterns thatpreserve large, connected blocks of highly valuedhabitat. The plan would divide the valley floor into fourzones, including three for which compensation fordevelopment would be required and a fourth in whichno compensation would be required because of theabsence of valuable habitat.     The latter area, a "gray zone," represents heavilydisturbed areas that do not fit into the overallconservation strategy, such as oil fields with wellspacing of four acres or less.     Compensation for other zones would be based on aratio no greater than 3-to-1, which would be used tocalculate the level of compensation required.Compensation for development within the three zoneswould be in the form of credits generated by thepermanent preservation of habitat, granting ofconservation easements or other specified measures.     Red, green and white zones would be used todetermine the habitat value of any parcel within theplan area in terms of habitat units (h.u.).     Three habitat units per acre would be offered for ared zone, the lands of highest value for conservationpurposes; two units for a green zone, land lessimportant than a red zone but still valuable forconservation purposes, particularly to provideconnectivity across the reserve system; and one habitatunit for a white zone, covering a large area with widelyvarying, but typically low, biological values that couldnot contribute significantly to long-term conservationstrategy.     White zone lands generally would not be availablefor compensation.     A formula would be adopted for adjusting habitatunit values based on consideration of connectivity withother habitat. Landowners would receive transferablehabitat unit credits for granting land for preservationpurposes or taking other specified conservationactions.     A monitoring plan would be established, creatingthe ability to adjust the valley floor habitat conservationplan over time as necessary to meet conservationgoals.     Landowners who preserve habitat would receivecredits based on the habitat unit value of the landpreserved, and owners who disturb habitat wouldcompensate based on the habitat unit value of the areadisturbed at the compensation ratio.     If the ratio is 3-to-1, compensation for taking ineach of the three zones would be as follows:     ** Red zone (worth 3 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 9 h.u./acre of impact, which could be done witheither 3 acres in the red zone or 4.5 acres in the greenzone.     ** Green zone (worth 2 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 6 h.u./acre of impact, which could be either 2acres in the red zone or 3 acres in the green zone.     ** White zone (worth 1 h.u./acre) -- Compensatewith 3 h.u./acre of impact, which could be done witheither 1 acre in the red zone or 1.5 acres in the greenzone.     While the approach doesn't place an absolute cap ondevelopment in any one zone, it effectively would capthe total loss of habitat value at 25%, because at a 3-to-1 compensation ratio, 75% of the habitat value wouldbe protected from development.     The approach based on habitat value would providea more meaningful conservation than one based onacreage, according to WSPA, because the habitat valuemeasure provides strong incentives to compensate inlarge, connected areas of highly valued habitat, as wellas strong disincentives to disturb those areas.     The plan also recognizes habitat that is restored toan established standard. If an oil field is restored to theestablished standard after abandonment, therebyundoing a habitat disturbance for which habitat creditswere previously provided as compensation, thelandowner could reuse those credits.     Among conservation advantages claimed for theapproach are providing incentives that will result in avery high percentage of habitat preserved in the mostsensitive areas, strong positive incentives to restoreland to native habitat after it has been put to atemporary industrial use such as oil operations, andstrong incentives for habitat to be preserved in large,connected configurations.     Among economic advantages claimed for the planare providing both large and small landowners a timelyand predictable means of obtaining value for high-value habitat on their property; a timely, predictableand flexible means of compensating for habitat losswith minimal costly survey requirements; a certainequity among landowners with lands of differenthabitat quality; and ways for landowners to minimizetheir compensation requirements over time by doing agood job of cleaning up after themselves by restoringland to native habitat.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Enviros face united front in badlands battle     An unlikely coalition of oil and gas producers,ranchers, business people, politicians, and Indians havejoined forces in North Dakota to oppose a plan to turna huge chunk of the state's western badlands into awilderness preserve.     At issue is a proposal by wildlife andenvironmental groups spearheaded by the Sierra Clubthat Congress declare 191,000 acres in the state as awilderness area. Eighty-two percent of that lies in theLittle Missouri National Grasslands area of thebadlands. The remaining acreage is in the SheyenneGrasslands near Lisbon, N.D., and the J. Clark SalyerNational Wildlife Refuge in McHenry and Bottineaucounties.     The proposal, detailed in the environmental groups'publication "Badlands on the Brink," would allowhunting, hiking, camping and livestock grazing, butwould ban further oil and gas development. Motorizedvehicles would be banned except for ranchers makingrepairs and improvements.     More than 100 opponents of the plan got togetherlast week in Dickinson, N.D., to talk strategy. They areworried that strict preservation will damage oil andcattle businesses and eventually doom Dickinson andother, smaller towns in that part of the state.     The proposal was dealt a blow at the meeting whenthe Three Affiliated Tribes, a Native American grouplisted by the Sierra Club as a sponsor of the plan,withdrew its support and said it will cancel its SierraClub membership.     "It's going to take a lot of the economicdevelopment away from the tribe, and oil developmentand cattle ranching," said tribal Vice Chairman IvanJohnson. He said the tribe didn't know it was listed asa sponsor for the wilderness proposal until tribalofficials started fielding calls from area ranchers.     County, city and school boards in the westernsection of North Dakota depend on taxes from oil andgas revenues to fund their budgets. Five countieswould be affected by the wilderness plan. For the state,oil tax revenues made up 10% of the 1989-91 generalfund budget.     Mike Armstrong of Dickinson, an independent oilproducer, said at the meeting it's natural for oil and gasoperators and ranchers to join forces. "We need toprotect the resources they're trying to take from ourstate. All this land is open to public use now, exceptthe private land."     Those at the meeting decided to start a letter-writingcampaign to the state's congressional delegation andadvocated "arm twisting" North Dakota Gov. EdSchafer to join their cause.     The group -- which still needs a name -- will form aworking association of ranchers, oil and gas producers,businesses and government officials. They plan tocompile resolutions from groups opposed to the plan,gather economic impact statistics and print a brochuredefending badlands development.     Alice Benitiz, lands director for the RockyMountain Oil & Gas Assn., attended the meeting andtold E&PE the Sierra Club's push to have thegrasslands designated as a wilderness area smacked of"sour grapes."     Benitiz said, "The badlands and other areas ofNorth Dakota have been studied for almost 20 yearsby the U.S. Forest Service to determine their suitabilityas wilderness areas." And each time, she said, theagency had decided the region could not be managedas wilderness because of the level of development andimportance of oil and gas production and ranching tosurrounding communities.     "The environmental groups have failed through thevery public process in which they were involved to getthe Forest Service to halt oil and gas activity," she said."And this mechanism [legislation] is the only way theyhave left."Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993NRC touts 'super' environmental agency     The National Research Council has proposed in areport due out later this summer that the U.S. makesweeping and fundamental changes in the way ithandles environmental problems.     Entitled Research to Protect, Restore and Managethe Environment, the 241-page study takes dead aim atthe way the federal government conductsenvironmental research. Existing programs are poorlystructured, uncoordinated and hampered by the lack ofclear leadership at the highest levels of government, theNRC report said.     NRC recommended establishment of a nationalenvironmental council, chaired by the vice president,composed of the heads of the federal environmentalagencies, and aided by advisory committees made upof representatives from the scientific community, thepublic, state government, and the private sector.     The council would provide leadership andcoordination among federal agencies for environmentalresearch and oversee implementation of a national planto identify a research agenda and the responsibilities ofindividual agencies.     NRC also proposed the creation of anenvironmental assessment center to convey policyoptions to the national environmental council,Congress and the involved parties. If the U.S. is tomake major improvements in the quality of itsenvironmental research and policy programs, NRCsaid EPA has to be elevated to cabinet status with theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin., the U.S.Geological Survey and parts of NASA becoming partof a Dept. of the Environment.     Washington distributes about $5 billion annually tomore than 20 federal agencies for environmentalresearch. But, NRC points out, there "is nocomprehensive national environmental research plan tocoordinate the efforts" of the agencies.     "Moreover, no agency has the mission to developsuch a plan, nor is any existing agency able tocoordinate and oversee a national environmentalresearch plan if one were designed," the report adds.     Science and engineering "have the tools to addressenvironmental problems of enormous consequence toour social and economic well being," the study said."But we aren't using those tools most effectively."     Bridges between policy, management and scienceare weak, the report said. And there is no organizedsystem to communicate assessments of environmentalproblems to decision-makers and policy-setters.     To order a copy of the report, contact the NationalAcademy Press at 800-624-6242.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Emissions-control process patented     Radian Corp. and the Gas Research Institute havecompleted work on an emissions-control process fortriethylene glycol dehydrators that maximizesemissions recovery while retaining hydrocarbons forresale.     The process, know as Recovery-BTEX, or R- BTEX,was developed by Radian as part of research on glycoldehydrators sponsored by GRI. Radian's Phil Lowellrecently patented the process (U.S. Patent No.5,209,762); the patent rights have been assigned to GRI.     R-BTEX addresses the issue that all natural gas,whether it's produced directly from the sourceformation or from a storage reservoir, contains somewater that must be removed to prevent hydrateformation and minimize corrosion duringtransmission. Glycol dehydrators remove water fromthe gas stream, but in the process also remove somevolatile organic compounds (VOCs); among them arebenzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylene, collectivelyknown as BTEX.     When glycol is regenerated, absorbed water isboiled off along with the volatile hydrocarbons,including BTEX, and released into the atmosphere.     In 1989, Louisiana's Environmental Quality Dept.spearheaded an effort to quantify the amount of BTEXand other VOCs released from glycol dehydrators. Thedepartment surveyed more than 200 glycoldehydrators processing at least 5 mmcf/day of naturalgas that were operated by producing, processing,pipeline and storage companies.     The study found that levels of BTEX and otherVOCs from glycol units were high enough to be aconcern for the industry. There are an estimated 30,000glycol dehydrators in use in the U.S. The Clean AirAct has potentially wide-ranging consequences forglycol units because BTEX are included in the list of189 air toxic pollutants and may be emitted at levelsthat would cause many glycol units to be defined asmajor sources.     If so, the units would be required to use andcomply with the maximum achievable controltechnology (MACT) standards. And while MACTtechnologies are considered state-of-the-art andefficient, industry contends they are not necessarilydesigned to be cost-effective.     Radian's process is based on the establishedtechnologies of stripping, condensation and phaseseparation. GRI says R-BTEX provides a cost-effective alternative for controlling BTEX emissions.R-BTEX is designed for new or retrofit applications.     Since the water recovered from the gas is used asthe coolant, the process operates at condensertemperatures below those reached using air cooling.And in most cases, that makes possible a 95%recovery of hydrocarbons as saleable liquids. R-BTEXcan control BTEX emissions by as much as 99.9% ifvented BTEX is controlled at the condenser vent andflash tank.     Researchers said the blowdown water from the R-BTEX cooling tower has a very low concentration ofdissolved organics and can sometimes be directlydischarged without further treatment.     Two tests were conducted last year using two gas-processing scenarios to evaluate the effect of gaspressure, BTEX concentration, glycol recirculationrate, and reboiler temperature on process performance.For each test, the production rate was 75 mcf/day ofgas.     One test was conducted in a high-pressure field of900 psi with gas containing 750 ppm BTEX. Theother was carried out in a lower pressure field of 400psi with gas containing 300 BTEX.     In the first case, researchers recovered 9.2 b/d ofBTEX with emissions of 0.78 lbs/day. In the secondtest, 7.4 b/d were removed with emissions of 0.63lbs/day of BTEX.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Indiana considers bird netting rules     The Indiana Natural Resources Dept. is drawing upregulations for mandatory covers on drilling andproduction reserve pits.     Sparking the movement is an incident that occurredthis spring north of Princeton, Ind., in Gibson County.Two wood ducks were pulled from a pit by officialsfrom the department and the U.S. Fish and WildlifeService. The ducks later died.     Their deaths spurred a criminal inquiry and receivedwidespread publicity in the Illinois Basin. The incidentwas also discussed at last month's meeting of theIndependent Petroleum Assn. of America inWashington.     Migratory birds and other wildlife are protected byfederal laws under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act andthe Endangered Species Act. But Jim Slutz, head ofthe department's Oil and Gas Division, said it is oftenup to the individual state to enforce the oil industry'scompliance with regulations.     He promised strong action in this and other reservepit events in Indiana, including steep fines and civil andcriminal charges. Federal violations also carry stiffpenalties and fines.     To date, oilfield operations in the Midwest andAppalachian states have dodged the bird nettingcontroversy. But state legislation requiring netting onreserve pits is also being considered in Illinois andKentucky, said Craig Howard, president of theIndependent Oil Producers Assn., Tri-State.     "A lot of attention is being given to the EndangeredSpecies Act and the necessity to prevent entry intopits," he said. "It has become a serious issue, eventhough the Gibson county incident is the only one toreceive publicity during the past 40 years."     Department officials have begun to inspect morereserve pits around the state, looking for violations.Howard said some Illinois Basin producers havebegun to install bird netting, or are using storage tanksto recycle drilling fluids or hold produced water to bein compliance with federal laws or any state laws thatmay be forthcoming.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993ERCB calls for drilling waste management     Alberta's Energy Resources Conservation Boardhas directed provincial oil and gas operators to submita waste disposal plan with well license applicationswhen hydrocarbon- or salt-based mud will be used orproduced during drilling.     Re-entry situations that use an oil- or salt-basedrilling fluid system but don't need a well licenseapplication require a waste disposal plan. Producerswill also have to retain the plan in their files because itwill be needed when they apply for a reclamationcertificate afterward.     The plan must indicate the type of hydrocarbon orsalt used in the mud, estimated volume of drillingwaste to be generated, any additives, additionaltreatment processes used such as incineration or reuse,equipment used to reduce soil contamination and wastevolume and method of handling completion fluids.     If an operator intends to use landfarming to disposeof waste, the plan must provide a location and generaldescription of the site indicating:     ** Estimated oil content is resulting soil mix (if oil-        based).     ** Present land use, topography, vegetation type,        soil horizon used for disposal, topsoil depth, and size        of disposal area.     ** Measures used to contain surface and subsurface        migration of contaminants.     ** Procedures, timing and frequency of the        landfarming operation and depth of initial        incorporation into the soil.     ** Schedule for any waste-soil mixture cultivation        or tilling.     ** Type of soil amendments which may be used to        promote biodegradation.     ** Analytical tests and sampling locations which        will be used to determine initial soil-waste quality, and        to monitor hydrocarbon degradation and salt levels.     ** Time required to complete the landfarming        procedure and the criteria used to determine when        completion reached.     ** Proximity to residents other than the landowner.     ** Name and telephone number of person        responsible for the disposal operation.     If the well is to be located on public land, the wastedisposal plan will be reviewed by either the AgricultureDept.; Food, and Rural Development; or theEnvironmental Protection Dept. The plan for wellsdrilled on private land will be reviewed by ERCB'sEnvironment Protection Dept. The plan must beapproved before the operator can spud the well.     According to ERCB, the purpose of the plan is tomake sure the operator "has considered the long-termsoil reclamation steps required when producing aparticular waste type," and to determine where andhow these treatments are being used in the province.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993DOE seeks input to production strategy     The Energy Dept. is asking for input from oil andgas producers as it prepares a domestic oil and gasinitiative to create jobs and increase domesticproduction while protecting the environment.     Speaking at a recent oil and gas waste managementseminar sponsored by the Independent Oil & GasAssn. of Pennsylvania, Nancy Johnson, a DOEprogram manager for environmental research andanalysis, urged operators to comment on the initiative.     DOE Secretary Hazel O'Leary announced theproject in April; the agency hopes to complete its draftstrategy for submission to President Clinton by LaborDay.     Johnson acknowledged oil and gas operators faceincreasing environmental costs and liabilitiesstemming from a constant flow of new and morecomplex regulations. She stressed the importance ofbasing policy analysis on cumulative regulatoryimpact.     For example, a DOE study determined theindustrial waste provisions proposed in a ResourceConservation and Recovery Act bill last year wouldhave resulted in a 9% decrease in oil reserves, a 3%decrease in gas reserves, the loss of 13,000 explorationand production jobs, a $27 billion decrease in federaland state tax revenues and would cost industry $40billion initially plus $5 billion annually for compliance.     Johnson said DOE wants to hear from industrywhat it considers priority concerns, regional issues,research needs, and innovative ideas for problemsolving through federal, state and industry co-operation.     Meanwhile, about three-quarters of DOE'srequested $101 million for natural gas programs isaimed at utilizing fuel cells ($50 million), advancedturbines ($24 million) and other uses ($5 million).Also proposed is some $17 million for resource andextraction programs, $3.4 million for delivery andstorage, and $2.9 million for environmental researchand analysis.     The proposed $80 million petroleum budget targets$70 million for oil recovery programs and $3.6 millionfor environmental research and analysis.     Comments for the domestic oil and gas strategyshould be directed to Len Coburn, Office of Oil andNatural Gas Policy (EP-52); or Donald Juckett, Officeof Fossil Energy (FE-30), Dept. of Energy, 1000Independence Ave. SW, Washington, D.C. 20585.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Twenty-five operators fined $130,800     The Texas Railroad Commission racked up another$130,800 in fines over the last two weeks as it charged25 oil and gas operators with violations of commissionwell plugging and pollution rules.     So far in 1993, the commission has levied$1,312,401.32 in fines, compared to only $543,666 insuch penalties assessed during the same period lastyear.     The following operators were fined for single wellviolations: Atlantic & Gulf Pet Corp. of Houston($3,000), Hash Oil Co. of Albany ($3,000), RCBRecord Co. of San Antonio ($3,000), Kevin FranksEnterprises of Morton ($3,000), Seagull Resources ofCalgary, Alberta ($3,500), and Trinity Valley Oil &Equipment of Houston ($3,000).     Two companies were cited for two-well violations.Sonora Oil Co. of Rockwall was ordered to pay$3,000, and Global Energy & Minerals of Houstonwas penalized $5,000.     Dohn Operating of Ganado was fined $20,000 forfour inactive and unplugged wells; Red RiverHydrocarbons of Scottsdale, Ariz. was assessed$9,000 for four wells; and Gene Creswell of Grahamwas assessed $15,000 for five wells.     In addition, M-P Petroleum Inc. of Houston wasordered to pay $3,500 for discharges of oil and gaswastes; Deryl G. Bolin of Carrizo Springs was fined$1,500 for an unplugged well and for an oil spill;Diamond S Operating of Livingston was ordered topay $4,000 for an unplugged well and for failing tobackfill pits; Kana Resources of Snyder was assessed$6,000 for oil and saltwater discharges; andGoldenwest Oil Co. of Olney was fined $24,500 for10 inactive and unplugged wells and for oil andsaltwater discharges.     Nine operators agreed to pay a penalty withoutadmitting any violation of commission rules. ClaudeRobinson Oil & Gas of Borger was assessed $800 foreight unplugged wells; Keystone Operating Co. ofAlice was penalized $1,500 for four wells; Lorac Inc.of Dallas was ordered to pay $1,500 for one well;Hillin-Simon Oil Co. of Midland was assessed $3,000for injection without a permit; Robert C. Wash of BigSpring was penalized $1,000 for a basic sediment spillat a former tank battery; S.E. Brown Trustee of Alicewas ordered to pay $9,000 for failure to backfill pitsand for injection without a permit; Sandco Oil & Gasof Lafayette, La., was assessed $500 for one inactiveand unplugged well; K&F Oil & Gas Management ofKilgore was penalized $3,000 for an oil and saltwaterspill; and Impact Energy of Kerrville was ordered topay $500 for an unplugged well.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993SVE leads in EPA market survey     An EPA report coming out soon projects thevolume of contaminated soil amenable to soil vaporextraction at 2 1/2 times the amount that could besubjected to in situ bioremediation.     Soil vapor extraction has been used in 17% ofcleanup treatment remedies applied so far but is stillconsidered innovative because information on meetingcleanup targets is hard to get. It's a lot easier to trackwhat's been removed than what's left behind.     So said Walter Kovalick, head of EPA's 4-year-oldTechnology Innovation Office in Superfund and anacting deputy administrator for solid waste andemergency response. He described the new report lastweek at a conference in St. Paul, Minn. The report, 21/2 years in the making, projects market share involumes of soil to be treated by various innovativetechnologies during the next five to eight years.     For example, the soil vacuum extraction (SVE)market was put at 3.2 million cubic yards, in situbioremediation at 1.2 million cubic yards, in situ soilflushing at 980,000 cubic yards, and soil washing at840,000 cubic yards. Kovalick said bioremediation hasbeen lagging, while soil flushing and soil washinghave been moving up.     The market survey focuses on 550 sites at theremedial design stage and 738 that are going throughthe remedial investigation and feasibility study process.     Contamination volumes were aggregated from sitesin various cleanup programs: Superfund, 1,600 to2,000 sites (including 400 to 800 in the discovery orlisting part of the process); RCRA corrective action,3,500; underground storage tanks, 295,000; DefenseDept., 7,313; Energy Dept., 4,000; other federalagencies, 350.     Although no information was available on thenumber of state sites, Kovalick said states had spent$428 million and have cleanup fund balances of $2.2billion.accounted for 61% of thermal treatments.     The report, Cleaning Up the Nation's Waste Sites:Markets and Technical Trends, No. PB93-140762, willbe available from the National Technical InformationService, 703-487-4650. TBack to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993OSPRA audits on schedule     The Texas General Land Office says it hascompleted about half its audits of coastal facilities thathave submitted oil spill contingency plans required bythe state's 1991 Oil Spill Prevention and Response Act(OSPRA).     GLO began the series of random audits in Januaryand to date its 22 inspectors have examined some 300of the 600 oil-handling facilities scattered along theTexas coastline from Louisiana to Mexico, includingproduction sites.     Timothy McKinna, who is in charge of the landoffice's spill division, said the random audits will likelybe completed by the end of August. He told E&PEabout 100 facilities have passed inspection and beencertified by the agency; the remainder are in theprocess of making changes to their plans to bring theminto line.     McKinna said companies' compliance with therequirements of OSPRA has improved as the auditshave progressed. "When we began random on-siteaudits in January, we discovered a variety of problemsthat made plans that looked good on paper unworkablein reality," he said. "Some of the plans were socumbersome that personnel would never have theinclination to study them, much less understand them."     If an operator doesn't have a workable contingencyplan in place, the way in which the land office conductsthe audits doesn't provide much opportunity to cobbleone together. GLO auditors normally give an operatoronly about an hour's notice that they're coming toconduct the inspection.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 19931992 saw record EPA fines     The filing of criminal charges againstenvironmental polluters is the fastest growingcomponent of EPA's enforcement efforts, an agencyreport says.     EPA's just released EnforcementAccomplishments Report for Fiscal Year 1992 saysthe year saw record fines levied for both civil andcriminal environmental violations. The report creditsthe growth of criminal enforcement to the new residentagent offices opened in Houston, Los Angeles,Buffalo, N.Y., St. Louis, and Miami.     To order a copy of the report, call EPA's PublicInformation Center at 202-260-2080.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Correction     In the May 14 issue, E&PE incorrectly statedColorado surface owners were asking that the state Oiland Gas Conservation Commission raise the surfacedamage bond of Gerrity Oil & Gas Corp.       Instead,the case involved wells being drilled by ElkExploration. Gerrity has no applications pending for asurface damage bond increase before the commission.     The case was heard in part at the commission'sApril meeting and continued until its June hearing.After more than 10 hours of hearings, the commissionrecommended a bond in the amount of $15,250(E&PE 6/11).     Covering three wells, the per well bond amount is$5,083, or $83 more than the standard $5,000 requiredfor a single well by the commission's rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Controversial well draws ire     The comment period for a Bureau of LandManagement draft environmental impact statementfavorable to the drilling of a controversial proposedexploratory well in South Florida has been extended 90days to Aug. 18.     Shell Oil wants to drill a 18,850-foot directionalwildcat on the Miccosukee Indian reservation under theeverglades in Broward County.     The project has drawn the fire of environmentalistsand state and local officials because the Biscayneaquifer, the region's main underground water supply,begins within five miles of the proposed well. Shellsays the well will not affect the aquifer, butenvironmentalists maintain it will.     The Florida Legislature and South Florida WaterManagement Board have passed resolutions calling onboth the BLM and Bureau of Indian Affairs, the twofederal agencies charged with reviewing and approvingthe EIS, to kill the plan. In addition, Broward Countycommissioners passed a resolution threatening alawsuit if the well is approved. If approved by bothagencies, the final EIS will probably be published nextFebruary or March.     Anticipation of a discovery of hydrocarbons by thewell is low. So far, only 14 of 202 exploratory wells inSouth Florida have produced oil or gas, and the onlywell drilled in Broward County was a duster.     For a copy of the draft EIS, contact Robert Abbey,District Manager, Bureau of Land Management, 411Briarwood Dr., Suite 404, Jackson, Miss. 39206, orcall 601-977-5400.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Edwards signs oilfield bill     Louisiana Gov. Edwin Edwards has signed intolaw the Oilfield Restoration Act to clean up E&P sitesstatewide.     Heavily supported by oil and gas interests, the lawlevies a fee of 1"/barrel on oil and a 0.2"/mcf ofnatural gas produced in the state, with a $10/yr chargefor non-producing wells.     Levied at the wellhead, the fees will be collected inthe same way as the state's severance tax, usingmonthly producer payments. The money will go intothe Oilfield Site Restoration Trust Fund, and willfinance the reclamation of about 2,000 knownorphaned and abandoned sites in Louisiana.Temporarily abandoned or saltwater disposal wells instripper fields are exempt.     There is a $10 million ceiling and a $6 million flooron the fund; it's expected to generate $4-5 million in itsfirst year. The fund will be administered by acommission made up of the Natural Resources Dept.secretary and six others who will be selected by Gov.Edwards from industry and environmentalorganizations.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Environmental patents     M.M. Francis and T.R. Jack have patented aprocess for biodegradation of oily waste in a passivelyaerated bioreactor that contains a porous, substantiallyoleophilic matrix, such as peat. The process may beused to treat the types of oily wastes conventionallydisposed of in landfarming operations. The techniqueprovides the potential to reduce the loss of leachatesand to control the loss of volatiles (Canadian PatentNo. 2,032,610).     F.D. Rowsell has patented a method for collectingand recovering oil spills in water. The spills are treatedwith amine-substituted water-swelling clays added tothe spill in amounts that herd oil into islands separatedby surfaces of water containing no oil. The clays canalso be added to oil spills in an amount that producesquasi-solid, buoyant organoclay-oil flocculate clumpsthat float in the water and can be collected from thesurface (U.S. Patent No. 5,176,831).     J.B. Rodden of Shell Oil Co. has patented a systemfor removal and disposal of minor amounts oforganics from contaminated water. The process uses apump to feed water from the body of contaminatedwater to the system, where indirect heat exchange anddirect steam addition raises its temperature. A strippingvessel uses gas to strip the heated water and removethe volatile contaminants (U.S. Patent No. 5,176,798).     To order a copy of a patent, call 800-247-8678 orwrite Petroleum Abstracts, 600 south College, Tulsa,Okla. 74104-3189.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993EPA to update regs     EPA is proposing to update a portion of the outercontinental shelf air regulations for the OCS lyingoffshore Southern California.     Appearing in the June 18 issue of the FederalRegister (58 FR 33589), the notice says the portions ofthe OCS air regs that are being updated relate to therequirements for OCS sources for which the SantaBarbara Air Pollution Control District, Ventura CountyAPCD and San Luis Obispo APCD are thecorresponding onshore areas. Deadline for commentsis July 19.     The 1990 Clean Air Amendments require EPA toperiodically update the requirements applying to OCSsources located within 25 miles of states' seawardboundaries to keep them consistent with therequirements of the corresponding onshore areas(E&PE 9/4/92).     Comments on the update should be mailed (induplicate if possible) to EPA Air Docket (A-5), Attn:Docket No. A-93-16, Environmental ProtectionAgency, Air and Toxics Division, Region 9, 75Hawthorne St., San Francisco, Calif. 94105.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993MMS releases Gulf reports     The Minerals Management Service has publishedthe following reports dealing with environmentalstudies in the Gulf of Mexico.     Adaptation of the Minerals Management Service'sOil-Weathering Model for Use in the Gulf of MexicoRegion. The report (OCS Study MMS 92-0023) hasbeen extensively modified and adapted for use on apersonal computer. The database is extensive andcontains over 9,000 analyses including Louisianaoffshore fields.     Mississippi-Alabama Shelf Pinnacle Trend HabitatMapping Study.  This report (OCS Study MMS 92-0026), prepared by Continental Shelf Associates,summarizes the geological and biologicalinvestigations in selected blocks offshore Mississippiand Alabama. Bathymetric and side-scan sonarsystems were used to produce hard-bottom featuresand topographic habitats in the study area. Biologicalsurveys were performed to characterize the regions,and data were analyzed to describe biotic zonation asthey pertain to physical characteristics of theenvironment.     Proceedings: 12th Annual Gulf of MexicoInformation Transfer Meeting. This 557-page report(OCS Study MMS 92-0027), summarizes thepresentations given at the meeting. The meetingprovides a forum for "scoping" topics of interest orconcern relative to the environmental assessments orstudies that support offshore oil and gas activities inthe Gulf of Mexico OCS Region.     Gulf of Mexico Regional Studies Plan, Fiscal Year1993. The 216-page report (OCS Study MMS 92-0030) provides a concise description of studiesproposed for funding during FY 1993 for the MMSregion's environmental studies program.     Chemosynthetic Ecosystems Study: LiteratureReview and Data Synthesis. Prepared by Texas A&MUniversity, this study (OCS Study MMS 92-0033)brings together knowledge of chemosyntheticcommunities in the Gulf from the time of theirdiscovery until 1992. It contains sections on historicalperspectives, seep associations and types, regionalgeological settings and origins of petroleum,paleoecology, associated fauna and microflora, generalbiology, community distribution and description, andconceptual models.     When ordering copies of these reports, refer to theMMS numbers in parentheses above. To order, contactMinerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCSRegion, Public Information Unit (MS 5034), 1201Elmwood Park Blvd., New Orleans, La. 70123-2394,telephone 504-736-2519.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993BDM forms Russian venture     BDM International Inc., a diversified technologycompany in the waste cleanup business, has formedEast/West Technology Partners Ltd. to bring advancedtechnology of the former Soviet Union to Westerncustomers.     BDM's partners are Intex Corp. and the Russiancompany Technology Exhibition and Investment Inc.     Among other technologies, the company is offeringa long-lasting catalytic deodorizer that breaks downcertain smellychemicals.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Alberta mulls new well fee     Alberta regulators are considering imposing a one-time fee on first-time drillers in the province andapplying the proceeds to restoration of orphanwellsites.     The Energy Resources Conservation Board saysthe C$10,000 fee would go into a fund to be used toreturn orphan wells in Alberta to an environmentallyacceptable state. Operators with a history of drilling inAlberta will not pay the fee, but any newly formedcompany or any operating in the province for the firsttime will be subject to the charge.     Operators now pay a C$500 well licensing feealong with an orphan well surcharge of C$40 for everywell suspended in 1992. For 1993, this surcharge wasincreased to C$60/well.     The ERCB has identified some 17 orphan wells todate. Costs for each well vary, depending on theamount of work needed to properly abandon and cleanup a site.     The C$10,000 fee is still in the proposal stage, andis not expected to become standard procedure prior tothis summer. However, while Alberta has some 700oil and gas companies registered in the province, anestimated 3,000 companies own all or part of variousAlberta wells.     This leads to difficulty in tracking down someowners, and officials believe this is exactly the kind ofproblem the new orphan well fee could help alleviate.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993EPA issues PM-10 rule     EPA has issued the final rule revising themaximum allowable increase for particulate matterunder the requirements for prevention of significantdeterioration (PSD) of air quality.     Published in the June 3 issue of the FederalRegister (58 FR 31622), the revisions affect theregulations in 40 CFR parts 51 and 52 which specifythe increments for particulate matter with a diameter of10 micrometers (PM-10) or less.     The effective date for the rule varies. For the federalPSD program, the implementation date is June 3,1994. For EPA-approved state PSD programs, therule goes into effect on the date when the state's revisedprogram, containing the new increments, is approvedby EPA.     For additional information, contact Dan Deroeck,Air Quality Management Division (MD-15), Office ofAir Quality Planning and Standards, EPA, ResearchTriangle Park, N.C. 27711, telephone 919-541-5593.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Wildlife centers planned     A permanent network of wildlife rescue andrehabilitation centers, partly financed by interest earnedfrom the state's Oil Spill Prevention and ResponseTrust Fund, may open in California.     Provision for the permanent R&R network foranimals is contained in the amended version of a billsponsored by state Sen. Diane Watson. The centerswould serve the Los Angeles-Long Beach and SanFrancisco areas, as well as San Diego, Port Hueneme,Monterey Bay, and Humboldt Bay.     Additional money would come in the form of$500,000 in federal funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Expanded UIC regs opposed     An expansion of the underground injection controlregulations proposed by EPA has drawn criticism byindependent operators.     The Federal Advisory Committee is considering thedraft rule being prepared to cover constructionrequirements for Class 2 wells under the SafeDrinking Water Act.     The rule seeks to expand the area of reviewrequirements to all wells, increase specific wellconstruction requirements, and would mandateincreased mechanical integrity testing.     The expanded requirements were proposed assafeguards to protect drinking water contaminationfrom injected oil and gas wastes. Trade groups like theIndependent Petroleum Assn. of America andPennsylvania's Independent Oil & Gas Assn. contendthe changes are unwarranted and would be particularlyburdensome to smaller producers.     They say studies by the Government AccountingOffice and American Petroleum Institute found onlyfour cases of aquifer contamination from the nation's170,000 active injection wells and 2.2 millionabandoned or inactive wells.     The economic estimate provided in the draft ruleforecasts that up to 65% of the total $124 millioncompliance costs for the first five years would falldisproportionately on "small entities" such as stripperoperations concentrated in geographical areas likeAppalachia.     The independents also point to a 1987 EPA reportto Congress that concluded strippers constitute aspecial subcategory of the oil and gas industry thatshould be considered independently and whichwarrants special regulatory actions tailored to theiroperation.     Barry Russell, IPAA vice president and generalcounsel, told E&PE industry has urged EPA to "goback to the drawing board and recalculate the energyand cost impacts of any UIC program changes."Back to Headline List CopyrightE & P ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJUNE 25, 1993Calendar     NORM Survey and Control Certification Course,June 30, New Orleans; July 7, Baton Rouge, La.; July14, Lafayette, La.; July 21, Houston; July 28, NewOrleans. Sponsored by Radiation Technical ServicesInc. For information, call 800-336-3741.     NORM in the Oil and Gas Industry, Aug. 9,Houston; Sept. 20, Dallas; Oct. 4, New Orleans; Nov.8, Houston. Sponsored by Renfro Associates Inc. Forinformation, call 214-596-8807.     Third Annual Symposium on Groundwater andSoil Remediation, Sept. 8-10, Quebec City, Canada.Sponsored by Environment Canada. For information,contact Lise Gendron, Environment Canada, VillagePlace Cartier, 3rd Floor, 425 St. Joseph Blvd., Hull,Quebec K1A 0H3, 819-953-9368, Fax 819-953-7253.     Clean Gulf '93, Sept. 14-16, New Orleans. Thisthird annual conference on oil spill prevention,response and technology in the Gulf Coast region issponsored by Louisiana's Oil Spill Coordinator'sOffice and Texas General Land Office. Forinformation, call Sean Guerre at 713-621-8833.     Soil Remediation for Petroleum Extraction, Sept.21-22, Houston. Two-day short course sponsored byHolliday Environmental Services. For information,call 351-7591.     Second International Conference on Health, Safety& Environment in Oil and Gas Exploration andProduction, Jan. 24-26, 1994, Jakarta, Indonesia.Sponsored the Society of Petroleum Engineers andSociety of Indonesian Petroleum Engineers, theconference is a forum on the environmental, health,and safety issues in worldwide oil and gas E&P. Forinformation, call 214-952-9393.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-11IA086-000616-B017-92http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002828 text/html 42222HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:26:33 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:10 GMTContent-length: 42035Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev31.html Sample Issue Copyright GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ***FOCUS REPORT*** Global Cooperation on Climate Change: Experts Recommend Paths to Effective Action (1488 words) ***POLICY TRENDS*** United Nations Confirms 1992 World Conference on Environment (215 words) CFC Taxes Now in Effect in US (327 words) China Releases Results of Afforestation Programs (211 words) Mexico City Improves Air Quality by Restricting Driving (290 words) Cairo Conference Sets New Tone of Cooperation Among Countries (268 words) ***SCIENCE UPDATE *** Scientists Lower Estimates of Potential Sea Level Rise (364 words) Researcher Documents Acid Precipitation's Effect on Spruce Seedlings (290 words) Antarctic Ozone Hole Broke Up Earlier Than Expected in 1989 (311 words) Tree-Ring Research Used in Study of Climate Change (355 words) ***INDUSTRY WATCH*** Energy-Efficient Lights are Selling, But Producers Face Challenges (445 words) UK Residential Investment in Energy-Saving Equipment Drops 12% in 1989 (191 words) General Motors Displays Advanced Electric Car (319 words) Carrier Introduces CFC Recycling Unit for Large Chillers (121 words) US EPA Proposes New Controls on Municipal Waste Incinerators (317 words) HOTLINE: (172 words) CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Global Cooperation on Climate Change:  Experts Recommend Paths toEffective Action     This year will mark the beginning of formal negotiationstoward an international framework convention on climate change.Protocols to add specific and binding targets will follow, or mayeven accompany the convention.  What lessons can we learn fromprevious agreements?  What obstacles will negotiators face?  Is aglobal agreement likely to be effective, or could regionalagreements and unilateral actions be stronger in the short term?To help answer these questions, GECR spoke with some of theleading figures in the current drive to define the elements of aconvention on climate change.     The 1985 Vienna Convention on Protection of the Ozone Layer,and the subsequent Montreal Protocol, are widely seen as modelsfor future global environmental agreements.  The ViennaConvention (which itself was partially modeled after the 1977Barcelona Convention) was established as an interim agreementwhen it became apparent that a specific protocol would not yethave wide support; however it was a definite, formal statement ofcommitment by governments to future action on the ozone depletionproblem.  The Montreal Protocol, signed two years later, addedlegally binding deadlines for the reduction of ozone-depletingchemicals.     This two-step process (convention followed by protocol) wasnecessary for the ozone treaty, but should the same procedure befollowed for a climate change agreement?  Why not aim for anaccord that includes protocols, particularly one on CO2?  "Ithink that will delay it," says Ambassador Richard Benedick, thechief US negotiator of the Montreal Protocol, now on detail fromthe US State Department as senior fellow of the ConservationFoundation/World Wildlife Fund in Washington, DC. "People aren'tready for a protocol [on CO2], and I think you have to go througha process to get there.  I believe in partial solutions -- infact, the Montreal Protocol is already a partial solution forclimate change -- and we ought to disaggregate rather thancomplexify.  The framework convention could have some teeth, butwe shouldn't try to cram it up with too much.  It will load downthe convention, and we'll never finish it.  I'd rather go step bystep."     A framework convention will be difficult enough to negotiate(the current goal is to have a convention ready for signature atthe UN's Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992),but producing the relevant protocols could prove an even greaterchallenge.  As Benedick points out, we already have onegreenhouse gas treaty in the Montreal Protocol, but creating anagreement that can reduce carbon dioxide worldwide while stillserving the short- and long-term interests of developed anddeveloping countries will test the limits of the parties'diplomacy, cooperation, and patience.  Carbon dioxide carries farmore economic and political weight than CFCs ever could.     Some observers are concerned that a truly effectiveinternational agreement to limit carbon dioxide emissions won'tbe signed by more than a handful of countries.  According toMichael Grubb of the Royal Institute of International Affairs inLondon, UK, a treaty with any given reduction target would proverelatively easy for parties like the US and the USSR to complywith:  neither currently uses energy efficiently, and they havemany options available to reduce emissions.  But Japan or France,which are already quite energy-efficient in terms of CO2emissions, might argue against such "equal reduction" targetsbecause it would be unfairly expensive for them to take emissionsdown another percentage.  Thus, any agreement based on equalreductions could result in a "lowest common denominator"compromise, which may not be strong enough to address the problemof global emissions.  Richard Benedick says this becomes less ofa problem if the treaty establishes a retroactive baseline yearfor emission levels back to the mid-eighties, for example, socountries can credit their existing energy-efficiency policiestoward the targeted levels.  Still, setting that baseline yearcould be problematic:  Japan began major measures to reduceemissions in the 1970s.  Do we want to go back that far?     This example merely hints at the complexity of establishingtargets that a majority of countries will accept.  And once goalsare established, ways to achieve and enforce them must still besettled.  A number of agencies, groups, and individuals arecurrently analyzing carbon taxes (domestic and international),leasable or tradeable emission permits, and other regulatory orincentive options, to see which ones might be most effective andpolitically feasible.     The idea of a Law of the Atmosphere is gaining some support,although as Peter Faross of the European Commission headquartersin Brussels explained to GECR, "a lot of countries are verysensitive when you try to touch on their sovereignty rights.  Andthe broad and ambitious approach of a full-fledged law for theatmosphere might be a very time-consuming process.  You mayarrive at the point where it's too late to implement thenecessary action because the discussions would last too long."The unsigned Law of the Sea stands in testimony to the politicalunpopularity of international control systems.     Peter Thacher, former deputy executive director of theUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and assistantsecretary general of the UN, who now works with the WorldResources Institute in Washington, DC, says that the appropriateway toward international cooperation on the global warming issueis through a comprehensive action plan, much like the "ActionPlan to Protect Stratospheric Ozone" that UNEP developed forgovernments in 1977.  An action plan for climate change wouldcontain a legal chapter, calling for negotiation and earlyadoption of a framework convention and the first of severalprotocols to deal with individual greenhouse gases, such as CO2.The plan would also have a scientific chapter to implement --with heavy involvement of the International Geosphere-BiosphereProgram -- the intensified research and monitoring that is neededto help bring other greenhouse gases under international control.This calls for an additional chapter to ensure that internationalmechanisms and funding are adequate to mount a stronger globalresearch effort.  "These funds are needed today," Thacher says,"and should not be delayed until treaties are ready."     Thacher acknowledges that negotiating internationalconventions and protocols could take time.  What about otheractions in the meantime?  "I think the `big boys' ought to tacklethis on their own, unilaterally taking steps in their ownself-interest," Thacher told GECR.  The industrialized nationshave their own organs, such as the Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development (OECD), to do this if they want toavoid using the UN.  "They can all benefit by looking at policyimplications of improving energy efficiency.  I think that oughtto get started without waiting for a package deal in which thedeveloped countries are involved.  They ought to get startedbecause that's where the big CO2 cutbacks can be achieved in theshortest time."     Michael Grubb takes a similar view: "You have to askseriously whether you really need to get all countries involvedat this stage, and you may well conclude that you can do morewith less:  70% of global carbon emissions are produced by theUS, Europe (East and West), and the USSR, so you may getsomething useful from a more limited number of countries."  Grubbstresses that global participation is ultimately necessary, butnotes that unilateral, bilateral, and regional efforts could beimportant stepping stones on the way toward that goal.     Conversations with sources at the OECD and the EuropeanCommission indicate that neither body expects to developagreements among its members apart from the UN's global treaties,but both are working on climate change issues on their own andthrough the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).The OECD will hold a meeting in late January among its membercountries to discuss the questions they will need to considerwhen they develop climate change policies.  The discussionsshould help OECD countries work out some of their differences inorder to facilitate the formal IPCC negotiations.  TheInternational Energy Agency (IEA) and the OECD are collaboratingon an energy and greenhouse gas "outlook" up to the year 2005,which will provide the basis for evaluation in 1990 of thepotential for and costs of specific sectoral actions to reduceemissions.  And the European Commission is creating a coherentenergy saving program called SAFE, which it expects to releasethis year.     The IPCC will present the elements of a framework conventionat the Second World Climate Conference (29 October - 7 November1990); formal negotiations will begin then or shortly thereafter.Cooperation will be hard-won, but essential.  In his 1968 essay,"The Tragedy of the Commons," Garrett Hardin wrote that "we arelocked into a system of `fouling our own nest,' so long as webehave only as independent, rational, free-enterprisers." If weknowingly choose not to abandon free enterprise and rationality,then to avoid the tragedy of the global commons we mustcompromise some of our independence.  Global solutions will taketime and will be imperfect, but in the end, it seems they'll bethe ones that matter.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990United Nations Confirms 1992 World Conference on Environment     In late December, the 44th session of the United NationsGeneral Assembly formally approved a proposal to go forward withthe long-planned World Conference on Environment and Developmentto be held in Brazil in 1992.  The conference, which will be thesecond UN-sponsored world meeting on the environment (the firstwas held in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972), is expected to last twoweeks, and will be timed to coincide with World Environment Day(5 June, 1992).  An open-ended preparatory committee, based inthe UN General Assembly, will meet five times to plan theconference, with the first meeting planned for March 1990 in NewYork.  The committee will hold its subsequent meetings in Genevaand Nairobi, with a final meeting in New York to solidify plans.     During the UN session, developed and developing countrieshad to negotiate the locations of the planning meetings, as wellas which body of the UN would be responsible for planning theconference.  Industrialized countries originally favored theUnited Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as the appropriateplanning group, with meetings to occur in Geneva.  Developingcountries objected to this choice on the grounds that they arenot well represented in Geneva, and they felt that their needswould be better served by a planning committee drawn from theGeneral Assembly.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990CFC Taxes Now in Effect in US     As of 1 January 1990, US producers and importers ofchlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) must pay a base tax of $1.37 per poundof chemical, with adjustments according to the particularchemical's ozone depleting potential.  Importers of productsmanufactured with the use of CFCs (such as automobiles,electronic equipment, refrigerators, etc.) are subject to thetax, which will be passed on to consumers.  The tax wasoriginally sponsored by Representative Peter Stark (Democrat,California), and was incorporated in the Omnibus BudgetReconciliation Act of 1989.  The Internal Revenue Servicereleased initial guidelines on 22 December; final regulationshave not yet been issued.     The base tax will rise incrementally, with an increase to$1.67 per pound in 1992, jumping to $2.65 per pound the followingyear.  From 1995 on, the rate will increase by $.45 annually.Halons, recycled CFCs, CFCs used for manufacturing rigid foaminsulation, and CFCs used as feedstocks (i.e., entirely consumedin the process of producing another chemical) are not currentlycovered by the law.  Manufacturers of CFCs and halons for exportare exempt unless they surpass their current level of exports, inwhich case they must either pay the tax or apply to theEnvironmental Protection Agency for new allowances.  Halon andrigid foam manufacturers will pay the full tax beginning in 1994,but are required to pay a reduced base rate ($.25/pound) from1991 until then.  US companies can still produce ozone-depletingchemicals outside the US without paying the tax, so long as thechemicals are not imported into the US.     Floor stocks are covered by the tax in cases where inventoryis being held for sale or for use in further manufacture.Companies (defined by employer identification number) that holdtotal floor stocks of less than 400 pounds are exempt from thistax.  The GECR Document Service will provide all relevantdocuments (legislation, IRS guidance, a list of products subjectto the tax, etc.).  Call the GECR Hotline for more information,at TEL: +1-617-648-8700.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990China Releases Results of Afforestation Programs     China has planted enough trees in its northern provincesover the past 12 years to increase forest cover by over 25million hectares (250,000 square kilometers), according to aChinese official news agency report released 5 December 1989.The country began the afforestation program in 1977 to "harmonizethe development of agriculture, forests, and animal by-products,and to control sand expansion."  Grain production in areas nowprotected by trees has risen 10% - 30%, and grassland in theregion has increased by 20%.     According to the report, 16.5 million hectares (165,000square kilometers) of forest were planted by airplane, with therest planted manually.  The report states that total forestcoverage in the 13 northern provinces has increased to slightlymore than 7%, up from 5% in 1977.  China plans to spend "severaldecades" constructing additional forest protection systems in theregion.     Because the figures for the total afforested area seem high,GECR checked Chinese-English translation of the figures withseveral sources, but we were not able to get independentconfirmation of the areas from China.  According to WorldResources 1988-89, published by the World Resources Institute inWashington, DC, "China has the world's largest reforestationprogram, planting new forests at the rate of more than 4.5million hectares per year."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Mexico City Improves Air Quality by Restricting Driving     The government of Mexico City, in response to public concernabout winter air pollution levels, has implemented a program torestrict driving in the Mexican capital from 20 November 1989through 28 February 1990.  According to Ramon Ojeda, the city'sdirector of prevention and control of contamination, "each car inthe metropolitan area has to be idle one day a week from Mondaythrough Friday."     Stickers, coded with a color specific to the day that a caris not allowed on the road, have been affixed to license plateson all city-registered vehicles (automobiles andnon-passenger-carrying trucks).  Cars from outside the city arerestricted based on the last digit of their plate number.Weekends are unrestricted, as is the period from 10 pm to 5 amevery night.  Taxis and buses are not included in the program.     According to Ojeda, Mexico City has 2,300,000 vehiclesregistered, and the program has decreased the number of vehicleson the road by over 400,000 per day.  Vehicles caught driving ontheir restricted day are impounded and held for 24 hours.  Ownersmust pay a fine equivalent to one month's minimum wage salary(currently 380,000 pesos, or US $125.00) to recover their cars.Since the program began, the city has issued 7,000 fines, whichOjeda sees as a relatively low figure, and a sign that mostpeople are obeying the rules.  "The public has supported theprogram enthusiastically, and there weren't any complaints,"Ojeda told GECR.  "To the contrary, they want it to continue allyear."  The city's public transportation system seems to belittle affected by the program, since most people are electing tocar-pool.  Ojeda is enthusiastic about the program, saying that"now the skies are clearer:  you can see the volcanoes."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Cairo Conference Sets New Tone of Cooperation Among Countries     The World Conference on Preparing for Climate Change, heldin Cairo, Egypt from 17 - 21 December, 1989, set a new tone forglobal cooperation, according to John Topping, president of theClimate Institute in Washington, DC.  The conference was convenedby the Climate Institute, the United Nations EnvironmentProgramme (UNEP), and the government of Egypt, and wasco-sponsored by 20 international agencies and organizations.     Conference participants released the "Cairo Compact," aproclamation toward a concerted world-wide response to theclimate crisis, which recognizes among other things theresponsibility of all countries, including developing nations, totake measures in their own self-interest to reduce emissions.     This was the first major world conference on climate changeto be held in a developing country, and Topping told GECR that adistinguishing feature of this conference was the strong sense ofcooperation and common purpose -- and a relative lack of the"North-South" tensions that have tended to plague such meetingsin the past.  "The Egyptians set the tone, which allowed it to besuccessful in creating a sense of global commitment," Toppingtold GECR.  The proclamation was initially endorsed by developingcountries as well as the industrialized nations.     The conference focused strongly on adaptive measures, "notbecause emission control isn't critically important -- it is, andwe're obviously very concerned about it -- but the problem isthat a lot of the developing countries will be affected even under astringent emissions control scenario."  Topping says that theconference helped underscore industrialized nations' concern forthe safety and welfare of people in developing countries, notjust concern about their emissions.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Scientists Lower Estimates of Potential Sea Level Rise     Predictions of sea level rise of up to 1.5 meters by theyear 2100 are probably overestimates, according to studiespresented at a recent meeting of the American Geophysical Union(AGU).  Over 4,000 scientists met in San Francisco, California,USA, on 4 - 8 December 1989 to discuss a wide variety of topics,including global warming and sea level rise.     Thirty years of observations of the Antarctic ice sheet haveled Charles R. Bentley, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison,Wisconsin, USA, to conclude that the polar ice cap may actuallybe removing water from the sea, accounting for a sea level dropof 5 mm per year.  Bentley believes that the short-term responseto global warming is increased snowfall over Antarctica aswarming air takes up and holds more water.  This snowaccumulation would outpace any melting of the ice sheet,according to Bentley.  Bentley stresses the importance of viewingthe Antarctic ice sheet as a dynamic system that responds toclimate changes over long periods of time.     Satellite observations by H. Jay Zwally of the NationalAeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Space FlightCenter, in Greenbelt, Maryland, USA, show that the Greenland icesheet is thickening as a result of increased precipitation, andZwally suggests that the thickening will continue.  Researchconducted by Tad Pfeffer, Mark Meier, and Tissa Illangasekare, ofthe University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA, indicatesthat meltwater runoff from arctic glaciers may take a significantamount of time to reach the ocean as it refreezes while fillingin snowpack pores as deep as 50 meters.     According to Meier, by the year 2050 -- the time atmosphericCO2 is projected to double -- melting of small glaciers may havecontributed about 0.15 meters to sea level rise, thermalexpansion may contribute a 0.2 meter rise, and human factors(such as pumping groundwater into the oceans) may contributeanother 0.2 meter rise.  Greenland would contribute a 0.08 meterfall in sea level, and Antarctica would lower levels by anadditional 0.31 meter.  Meier cautioned that the picture is stillquite uncertain, but that "it's beginning to look now as if searise will lag behind warming by a significant amount."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Researcher Documents Acid Precipitation's Effect on SpruceSeedlings     Acidic clouds that envelope high-elevation forests for up to35% of the year in the eastern US can cause more severe damage totrees than acid rain does, according to Jay Jacobson of the BoyceThompson Institute of Plant Research at Cornell University,Ithaca, New York, USA.  The acid clouds have a pH of 3.5, severaltimes more acidic than acid rain, which has an average pH of 4.The rising and lowering of the clouds over mountaintops causesthe acid measured on tree leaves to become concentrated to pHlevels as low as 2 as the water evaporates, Jacobson told GECR.Jacobson studied the effects of acidified water vapor on redspruce (Pinea rubens) seedlings, a species that dominates manyeastern US mountaintop forests.     In greenhouse and field studies, Jacobson determined thatthe effects of acidic mist depended on the relativeconcentrations of sulfuric and nitric acid.  Acid precipitationgenerally has a higher concentration of sulfuric acid than nitricacid, along with small amounts of ammonium ions.  Sulfuric acidalone was more damaging to needles by causing localized death ofplant tissue and premature loss of needles from the seedlings.Nitric acid mist appeared to influence nutrient relationships byincreasing nitrogen levels and decreasing levels of calcium andmagnesium in the leaves.  However, sulfuric acid mist affectedthe spruce needles at lower concentrations than did nitric acid,Jacobson told GECR.     Jacobson's research is part of the five-year federallyfunded National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program, whichinvolved more than 700 scientists and a half billion dollars inresearch money.  Funding expires this year; Jacobson told GECRthat some of the work is unfinished and inconclusive, but he saysit is unlikely that federal funding for the program will berenewed.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Antarctic Ozone Hole Broke Up Earlier Than Expected in 1989     The 1989 Antarctic ozone hole got off to an earlier andstronger start than the 1987 hole, but it started to break up amonth earlier than expected, according to Mark Schoeberl of theNational Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) GoddardSpace Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, USA.  "The polarvortex in 1989 began to break up in mid-to-late October; in 1987,it held intact all the way through November," Schoeberl toldGECR.  The total amount of ozone "ended up going down to almostexactly the same level as or perhaps slightly higher (by about 10Dobson Units) than 1987."     The breakup of the ozone hole is controlled by two majorfactors, Schoeberl explained: one is the intrinsic resistance tobreakup of the ozone hole caused by the ozone reduction itself,and the other is the nature of the forces that tend to break upthe polar vortices.  These forces are extremely variable fromyear to year and are unpredictable.  A more active dynamicalstratosphere that would tend to break up the hole or prevent itsformation "generally goes with the QBO (the Quasi-BiennialOscillation, a switching of tropical winds from east to west thatoccurs approximately every 27 months)," Schoeberl told GECR, "butthis year was an exception."  Normally, with an easterly QBO, theozone hole is not as deep, as was the case in 1988.  Tropicalwinds were still easterly in 1989, but "the link was brokenbetween the QBO and the zonality of the flow."  The vortex flowtended to follow east-west latitude lines in 1989, keeping thepolar stratosphere quiet enough to cause ozone depletion nearlyas great as in 1987's record-setting hole.  "Then we had a bigdynamical event in October and the hole started to break up."When the polar vortex is disrupted, undepleted air comes into thesystem and ozone levels begin to rise.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Tree-Ring Research Used in Study of Climate Change     Scientists in the US, USSR, China, Argentina, New Zealand,Canada, India, Australia, and Europe are studying the rings oflong-lived trees for clues to historic and prehistoric climatechange.  Certain species of trees can accurately indicate periodsof drought and temperature fluctuations, and may be used toreconstruct past climate events and trends.     Malcolm Hughes, Director of the University of Arizona'sLaboratory of Tree Ring Research in Tucson, Arizona, USA, isstudying the rings of giant sequoias as a potential climaterecord.  The trees can grow to at least 2,600 years old, and theyshow "a good drought signal," with extremely narrow rings in dryyears.  Sequoias can thus show the frequency of severe droughtsin the region surrounding the trees.     Researchers have to select carefully the tree species andthe individuals sampled to ensure that the growth ring responsecan be correlated to the parameter being studied.  "A bristleconepine at a high elevation has a different response than one atlower elevations," David Meko of the Laboratory of Tree RingResearch points out.  Long-lived trees are often few and farbetween, and getting good spacial coverage of a particularspecies can be a problem.  The tree ring record must becalibrated with known instrumental records in order to be usedwith confidence, which can prove difficult if records are scarcefor the parameter (soil temperature, rainfall, etc.) beingmeasured.     Gordon Jacoby, of the Tree Ring Laboratory at Lamont-DohertyLaboratory in New York, USA, says that his group has recentlyreconstructed  northern hemisphere temperatures for a 300-yearperiod using tree rings, and the reconstruction shows a warmingtrend within the last hundred years "that is unusual in thecontext of the 300 year record."  Jacoby was able to sample manyindividuals of the same species (white spruce) over almost 90degrees of longitude.  "We covered about 25% of the circumpolararea in a fairly homogeneous data set."  White spruce is limitedby thermal properties such as air temperature, groundtemperature, and soil temperature, and is moisture-stressed whenthe active zone above the permafrost is extremely cold, reducingthe tree's ability to take up water.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Energy-Efficient Lights are Selling, But Producers FaceChallenges     The market for compact fluorescent lamps, which have typicallife spans of 8,000 to 10,000 hours and can save users 75% ormore of the costs associated with standard incandescent bulbs, is"growing at about 25% per annum," according to Vivienne Charrettof Thorn Lighting in Enfield, UK.  Much of that growth can beattributed to incentive programs by electric utilities, such asrebate offers, options to lease rather than purchase expensivelight bulbs, and giveaways.  Carol O'Neill of Philips LightingCompany's US division in Somerset, New Jersey, told GECR thatgrowth in sales can also be attributed to media attention,efforts by environmental groups, and general concern about globalwarming.  Still, O'Neill says that compact fluorescents, while"experiencing explosive growth," represent a minute percentage ofoverall lighting sales.     Producers face a number of obstacles in their effort tobring compact fluoresents to a wider market.  Amory Lovins,director of research at the Rocky Mountain Institute in OldSnowmass, Colorado, USA, says that "we need to decoupleutilities' profits from their sales so they will no longer berewarded for selling more electricity, nor penalized for sellingless.  And when they do something smart to cut your bill, theyneed to be allowed to keep part of the savings as extra profit."     Other concerns, according to Lovins, include a lack ofproperly trained installation technicians, the fact that no onecurrently provides retrofit components in bundled packaging,limited competition in certain areas (central Europe, Australia,New Zealand) that allows manufacturers to sell at excessivemarkups, and the need for more imaginative marketing.  "I haven'tyet seen any compact fluorescent manufacturer go for the greenmarket by pointing out that each lamp takes a ton of CO2 out ofthe air over its life [when compared with other lamps]," Lovinstold GECR.     Energy-efficient lamps appear to be selling better overallin Europe and the UK than the US.  Vivienne Charrett of Thornclaims this is due to the cost of energy: "The country with theleast penetration of compact fluorescents is France, where thecost of energy is exceptionally low."  Fred Steinmeyer of Osramin Munich, West Germany agrees, saying that Europe recognized theneed to save energy earlier than the US.  Dick Dowhan of GTEconfirms that the difference could be attributed to Europe'searly start on the market, but he also cited Europe's 220-voltsystem as a reason:  customers don't notice as much of adifference between incandescents and compact fluorescents asAmericans do.  Amory Lovins says, "I don't think it has much todo with electricity price.  I think it's a function of utilityparticipation, and least-cost-planning or an equivalent process."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990UK Residential Investment in Energy-Saving Equipment Drops 12% in1989     The British government's scrapping of numerousenergy-efficiency programs in the past two years has directlyaffected domestic purchases of energy-saving  equipment,according to Andrew Warren of the London-based Association forthe Conservation of Energy (ACE).  Using sales figures fromrelevant trade associations, ACE found that residentialinvestment in energy-saving products dropped significantly in1989, down 12% from already declining 1988 levels.     Purchases of weatherstripping (draft proofing) were down15%; double-glazed windows dropped nearly 20%; and economicalheating equipment (energy-efficient boilers, thermostaticradiator valves, etc.) declined by 6%, with Warren forecasting a12% drop.     Warren points out that the cutting of incentives andeducation programs for energy efficiency directly conflicts withUK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's stated commitment to fightglobal warming.  "The policies are going in the wrong direction,"Warren told GECR, "and Thatcher's own government's submission tothe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) says that ifpresent trends in the UK continue, we will see CO2 emissionsleaping.  We're currently at 579.3 billion tons a year; we'relikely to see rises of 29% - 34% across the next 15 years, and upto 48% - 58% in 30 years."Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990General Motors Displays Advanced Electric Car     General Motors Corporation, the world's largest automobilemanufacturer, has unveiled a sophisticated electric car that canaccelerate from 0 - 60 miles per hour (0 - 96 km/h) in eightseconds, and can run for 120 miles (192 km) at highway speedswithout charging the batteries.  Recharging can be accomplishedin several hours by plugging into a conventional wall socket.The prototype vehicle, called the "Impact," could be on themarket by the mid-1990s, but several problems must first beovercome:  operating costs of the vehicle are currently abouttwice those for gasoline-powered cars because the entire batterypack must be replaced (at a cost of US $1,500) every 20,000 miles(32,000 km).  The company has also not yet tested the vehicle'scrash-worthiness.     Spokesmen for General Motors claim that given adequatedemand, the purchase price of the sporty-looking car would besimilar to gasoline-powered vehicles in its class.  The companyhopes to improve the life of the battery pack to bring operatingcosts down to those of conventional cars.  If the vehicle isexported from the US to countries where fuel prices are taxed, orif US fuel prices rose, the "Impact" could prove to be lessexpensive to operate than gasoline-powered models.     Electric cars are a mixed answer to threats of globalwarming:  while they do not burn fossil fuels themselves, thevehicles generally use utility-generated electric power torecharge.  Still, a recent report prepared by the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley, California, USA, suggests that anall-electric vehicle fleet could reduce CO2 emissions by up to43%, depending on the mix of energy sources used by utilities andthe efficiency of the vehicles themselves.  Other alternativesexist:  Solar powered cars are already in use in Europe, and anumber of companies and independent groups are developingversions for the US market.  GECR will report on these and otheralternative-fueled vehicles (such as hydrogen-powered cars) infuture issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990Carrier Introduces CFC Recycling Unit for Large Chillers     Carrier Corp. of Syracuse, New York, USA, has developed arefrigerant recovery and recycling system specifically designedto handle large-scale commercial chillers.  The company will sellthe equipment, called the Refrigeration Management System (RMS),worldwide to building owners when they purchase new centrifugalchillers from Carrier, and to owners of existing commercialair-conditioning units.     The RMS units come in two sizes:  one will handle 1,600pounds (720 kg) of CFCs and the larger unit has a capacity of3,300 pounds (1485 kg).  Carrier spokesmen advise that the pricerange for the equipment will be from US $6,000 - $12,000.  Therecycling unit draws a vacuum of 25 inches (62 cm).  For moreinformation, contact Rick Whitmyre at Carrier Corp., TEL:+1-315-432-6000.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990US EPA Proposes New Controls on Municipal Waste Incinerators     On 30 November, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)proposed new controls on municipal waste incinerators that wouldtrap five times more dusty particulates than currently required,along with 90 to 95% of sulfur dioxide and hydrochloric acid, and97% to 99% of airborne metals, such as lead and mercury.  The newproposal also requires "tail gas" cleaning of nitrogen oxides,which contribute to smog and acid rain, on those incineratorswhich process more than 250 tons of trash daily.  This isexpected to reduce the nitrogen oxide emissions by 40%.  Thesenew standards are expected to reduce 90% of the air pollutants by1994, a reduction of more than a quarter million tons annually,according to Robin Woods at EPA.     The proposal requires monitoring and verification ofemissions by trained and certified supervisors.  By 1993, plantswould also be required to recycle 25% of the trash they process.If approved, the new rules would be applied directly to the 150incinerators that will be constructed at 60 US facilities in thenext five years, with the 450 incinerators currently in operationat 200 plants being given several years to make the necessaryimprovements.  Dave Ryan at the EPA told GECR that it may be afull year before this proposal is approved and instituted.     Woods estimates the national costs associated with theproposed standards for new facilities to be $190 millionannually, which represents an increase of $13 per ton ofincinerated trash from the current $60 per ton.  It would cost$320 million a year nationally to improve existing facilities, anincrease of $12 per ton.  In both cases, this translates to anincrease of $20 per year per household.  Public hearings will beheld in Boston on 22-23 January, Detroit on 25-26 January, andSeattle on 30-31 January.  For more information on the publichearings, call Ann Eleanor of the EPA at TEL: +1-919-541-5578.Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1990HOTLINE:     Michael Grubb's paper "The Greenhouse Effect: NegotiatingTargets" (see this issue's Focus Report) is available for 10 pounds(including postage) from The Royal Institute of InternationalAffairs.  Call TEL: +44-1-930-2233 to order a copy... Anexcellent summary of debt-for-nature exchanges, with a history ofall exchanges completed to date (except for last August'sexchange to preserve wetlands in Zambia), is available fromConservation International in Washington DC.  Call TEL:+1-202-429-5660; FAX: +1-202-887-5188 for more information... USglobal change scientists can be happy:  1990 federal funding forclimate change-related research is five times greater than it wasin 1989.  Much of the growth can be attributed to redefinitionsand shifts of existing programs to fall under the "global change"umbrella.  A total of $664 million will be available, with theDepartment of Energy getting the biggest relative increase ($60million).  Most of the funding ($489 million of it) sits with theNational Aeronautics and Space Administration.     Call the GECR Hotline at +1-617-648-8700 for moreinformation on any news items covered in this issue.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-12IA086-000616-B017-108http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev47.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002838 text/html 7058HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:26:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMTContent-length: 6872Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev47.html Sample Issue Copyright GLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES --------------- Officers Elected at Global Climate Coalition (135 words) --------------------------- Wind Power Plant Construction Expands in Midwest (177 words) -------------------- European Commission Beefs Up Research Budget (256 words) Finns Push Coal at Expense of Nuclear Power (198 words) CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Officers Elected at Global Climate CoalitionWilliam O'Keefe, executive vice president of the American PetroleumInstitute, was recently elected chairman of the Global ClimateCoalition (GCC). O'Keefe will lead the GCC's efforts throughout 1996 to provide business and industry positions to scientific and policy debates regarding climate change.Working closely with executive director John Shales, O'Keefe willdirect GCC's nine committees, while Shales manages the dailybusiness and advocates on behalf of the Coalition.Other newly elected officers include vice chair for policy RobertMcFadden from American Automobile Manufacturers Association, chairof the operating committee Constance Holmes from the National Mining Association, vice chair of the operating committee Robert Beck from Edison Electric Institute and vice chair for the membership Edward Harper from the Association of American Railroads.For details contact Jane Agate at 202/628-3622.(PRNEWSWIRE: 12/22)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Wind Power Plant Construction Expands in MidwestIn Minnesota, Northern Alternative Energy, Inc. of Minneapolis andMicon Wind Turbines (U.S.) of Marshall are gearing up to expand theSibley, IA wind plant owned by IES Utilities, Inc.  When completed, the project will be the single largest turbine installation in the nation's midsection.The first U.S.-made 600-kW Micon M1500-600/150 turbine will beinstalled by Micon and NAE in Sibley, expanding the facility'scapacity to 925 kW from 325 kW.The annual energy output of the plant is anticipated to top 1.8million kWh after installation of the new turbine.  NAE presidentGreg Jaunich said that this largest single turbine in the Midwest "should demonstrate to utilities in the region the benefits of large, industrial-sized wind turbines for electrical generation."The nacelle and frame of the turbine were constructed by Micon andHutchinson Manufacturing Inc., which also assembled the generatorand its components.  Micon turbines are a Danish design.  The turbine, atop its 150-foot tubular tower, will be made by Thomas & Betts of Red Wing, MI.(WIND ENERGY WEEKLY: 12/25, p.3)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996European Commission Beefs Up Research BudgetMme. Edith Cresson, European Commissioner for Research, Education and Training recently proposed 318 research and development projectsthat have been approved by the EC as the European Community's participatory offering following the Fourth Framework Convention meeting on climate change.Addressed will be ozone depletion, global warming, floods,earthquakes, contaminated land and sustainable development.  TheEnvironment and Climate program will fund the research.The Environment and Climate program has a budget of ECU 532 million,which represents 4.3 percent of total Fourth Framework Programfunding covering 1994-1998.  Research to understand basic mechanisms of climate and other natural systems and how they impact natural resources will be performed.Technologies will also be developed to monitor, protect andrehabilitate as well as to conduct risk assessment.  Satellitesystems for earth observation and environmental research play a large part in the research.Past climatic changes and dynamics will receive increased attentionto help understand current weather patterns.  The EPICA projectswill complement three successful Greenland ice cap projects by studying ice cores in Antarctica that will allow scientists to interpret earlier climate shifts over a half-million years.Aerosols originating from dust, sea-spray, soot and suspended sulfurdioxide are known to be important in the earth's energy balance.Surrounded by cloud particles, they absorb radiation and also reflect it back into space.  Program ACE-2 will address the role of clouds and aerosols in the climate system and will also continue to look at processes of both natural and manmade aerosols.(EUROPEAN COMMISSION PRESS RELEASE: 12/21)Back to Headline List CopyrightGLOBAL WARMING NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Finns Push Coal at Expense of Nuclear PowerA radical overhaul of fuel taxation being undertaken by the Finnishgovernment could see a rise in construction of coal-fired powerplants at the expense of existing nuclear power.  Finland has agreed that it will not expand nuclear power generation nor build more nuclear-based power stations, a strategy that appears to argue for expanded coal-fired energy production.The Finnish move will bring Finnish taxation more into line withneighbors Sweden, Norway and Denmark which tax consumption, notproduction, as has been the case in Finland.  The tax burden on coal- fired production will be reduced by an amount to be determined when the legislature meets this month.Premier Paavo Lipponen told the legislature in December that the newenergy policy took into consideration the unpopularity ofnuclear-based production as well as the need for ways to improve coal- fired generation's cost-efficiency.Lipponen had run for election based on promises of higher taxes oncoal and peat-fired plants, but the about-face, explains AnttiKalliomaki, Finland's Trade and Industry minister, is because Swedish companies would like to export power into Finland because Finnish energy production costs have remained so much higher.(COAL & SYNFUELS TECHNOLOGY: 12/25)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-13IA086-000616-B017-145http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev63.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002858 text/html 64658HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:26:59 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:04 GMTContent-length: 64471Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev63.html Sample Issue Copyright WATER BRIEFING via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PORTUGAL HOPES EU LOAN FUNDING WILL SPARK MINI-HYDRO REVIVAL (762 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW SHOULD SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR DROUGHT CUTS? (945 words) COMPANIES WAIT FOR RAIN AS DROUGHT FEARS PERSISTS (594 words) SPAIN STAYS CAUTIOUS ON DROUGHT DESPITE RAINS (481 words) NEW YORK MEETS STRONG OPPOSITION TO PROPOSED WATER ASSETS SALE (944 words) ASEAN STATES PRESS CHINA TO CO-OPERATE ON MEKONG MANAGEMENT (414 words) NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT QUESTIONS AID FUNDING FOR DAM SCHEMES (490 words) JORDAN SAYS RED-DEAD LINK VITAL-ISRAEL NOT SO SURE (1241 words) AUCKLAND OPTS TO BOOST SUPPLIES WITH $55M PIPELINE FROM WAKATO RIVER (462 words) SAO PAULO SETS LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR MAJOR WASTEWATER PROGRAMME (505 words) PWA CHIEF FACES SECOND INQUIRY OVER CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION (302 words) NEWS MALAYSIA PLANS $1BN SPEND ON WATER SUPPLY 1996 -2000 (53 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW REPORT PROVIDES GOOD REFERENCE TO UK WATER COMPANY PERFORMANCE (457 words) SOUTHERN AND BRISTOL WATER COMPLETE INTERIMS REPORTING SEASON IN UK (433 words) TENDERS ISSUED FOR $38M FORTALEZA TREATMENT PLANT (99 words) EIB LENDS ECU100M VIA POLISH BANKS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMES (200 words) AMORIM BUYS MAJOR SHARE IN LUSAGUA (109 words) MINISTERS PLAN INCREASED SPENDING ON WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS (285 words) FRENCH GROUPS COMBINE IN BID FOR CONTROL OF MID-KENT WATER (246 words) UWR TO PARTNER JERSEY CITY FOR WATER SYSTEM OPERATION (157 words) WORLD BANK TO FUND $13.5M STUDY FOR REGION'S LARGEST DAM (226 words) CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PORTUGAL HOPES EU LOAN FUNDING WILL SPARK MINI-HYDRO REVIVALCompanies hope that a new European Union-backed government fund willbreathe new life into the mini-hydro power sector in Portugal, whereinvestment has been brought to a virtual standstill by fallingelectricity prices, a shortage of funds and, mainly, lack of supportfrom municipal authorities.Projects have received a welcome impetus in the shape of a Es1.1bn($7.3m) loan from Programa Energia, a fund set up in mid-1995 topromote the diversification, expansion and improvement of energyproduction and use.This first allocation of money from the fund goes to three companiesthat are investing in four small hydro-electric generating plants witha total capacity of just under 30 MW.They are Hidrocorgo, Hidroerg and HDN-Energia do Norte. Another 36similar projects are being evaluated by the Energia programme, which isexpected to mobilise a total investment of Es180bn, mainly focused onstimulating natural gas use, as well as rational energy utilisation anddiversification into renewable energy resources.Hidrocorgo is part of the Enersis group, the biggest mini-hydroconstructor and operator in Portugal, in which Midland ElectricityBoard of the UK has a holding of about 35%. Enersis has so farinstalled 50 MW in 15 mini-hydro plants.Antonio Sa da Costa, head of Portugal's Water Resources Association,told FTWB that since legislation permitting small-scale private energyproduction was introduced in May 1988, mini-hydro generating plantswith a total capacity of 140 MW and involving investments totallingEs30bn have been built in Portugal. Mini-hydro plants are defined ashaving a maximum capacity of 10 MW.The liberalisation led to a rush of project proposals and applicationsfor almost 1,000 licenses to build mini-hydros had been made by 1991.However, by 1993 only 120 licenses had been granted. Sa da Costa saysmany applications were for identical sites, others proved technicallyor economically non-viable, and many prospective investors found thattheir projects would be far more costly than they had anticipated.Companies have also been discouraged from entering the sector by a 40%drop in the price of electricity to industrial consumers from 1988 to1993. Until recently, small producers sold energy to Electricidade dePortugal, the state power utility, at rates based on industrialtariffs. Partly because of this, new construction of mini-hydro plantsalmost came to a halt after 1993, when funding from the EuropeanUnion's Valoren programme ended.However, Sa da Costa says the biggest obstacle to investment in mini-hydros is now a lack of support from municipal authorities andopposition from local populations. "Mini-hydros are one of the mostenvironmentally-friendly means of producing energy," he says. "But alack of information has led to opposition to small hydro plants in manyPortuguese localities, by residents who fear, wrongly, that the plantswill damage their rivers."The transfers of the approval of the water resource and public workscomponents of mini-hydros from a central body to local authorities hasput a further brake on expansion. Only one licence has been grantedsince the change was made in February 1994. "Lack of information andlack of support from water resource bodies are our biggest enemy," saysSa da Costa.Companies will be lobbying Portugal's new Socialist government for amore supportive approach to licensing. Sa da Costas believes that this,together with soft loans from the Energia programme, will stimulaterenewed investment in small-scale hydro-production.Portugal's legislation was changed in November, moving it towards theGerman model in the form of a commitment to pay producers of energyfrom renewable sources higher rates than companies who produce energyfrom fossil fuels. EDP's regulations have also been changed. Mini-hydroproducers were previously paid different rates according to the outputvoltage of the energy they supplied. A single rate has now beenestablished at the top end of the previous scale.A further 150 MW of mini-hydro capacity could be built by 1999.Portugal's total possible capacity is estimated at 300-400 MW. Currentcapacity accounts for 420 GWh a year - enough to supply about 600,000domestic consumers - out of Portugal's total consumption of about 24TWh. This saves the county an estimated Es2bn a year in oil bills.Funds under the Energia programme are loaned at zero interest and haveto be paid back over 12 years. No repayments have to be made for thefirst three years. Plants, costing an average of Es2bn-2.5bn, take amaximum of two years to build. This means companies can pay back theloans from the earnings of their generating plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SHOULD SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR DROUGHT CUTS?The latest (proposed) tweak of the regulatory screw must leave the UKwater companies wondering what else they are to made liable for. In aconsultation document published on 20 December the economic regulator,OFWAT, asks for comment on a suggested scheme of compensation paymentsto customers suffering supply cuts as a result of drought.OFWAT is responding to a government request for advice on compensationissues raised by the 1995 drought. The Environment Secretary  soughtthe advice in the face of the changed public attitude to water supply,now seen increasingly as a pure money making operation rather than apublic service; a hostile response to supplier pleas for conservationduring the drought indicated that, now water supply is a commercialoperation, the customer expects no cuts, whatever the reason. Before1989 the heads of the public water authorities would have had littlehesitation in pointing out that such expectations were unrealistic.Provision for supplying water and for carrying away storm sewage isbased on an assessment of risks made from analysis of past rainfallstatistics. On the supply side the infrastructure is sized to guaranteesupplies for particular minimum annual rainfall conditions judgedlikely to occur only once in a certain number of years. Storm sewersare similarly designed for particular likely `return periods', in thiscase looking at the maximum storm intensity and duration likely to beencountered. In both cases more rare events could be catered for, butwith a corresponding increase in infrastructure cost.It is only a little over a year since OFWAT concluded a detailed lookat company business plans and set price limits for the next five years.Those limits are based on certain service standards specified in a`Guaranteed Standards Scheme' (GSS). Suppliers are obliged to paycompensation if any of the standards are breached and all of the itemscovered, such as response times to account queries or consumercomplaints, are clearly within company control. Equally clearlyrainfall is outside company control and supply cuts caused by lack ofrain are not included in the GSS. Nevertheless the basic engineeringunderlying supply infrastructure has a proven record - there have beenno supply cuts under Emergency Drought Orders in England and Walessince 1976.Surely this was a realistic way to look at service provision and, ifcompanies are now to be required to cater for more severe droughtconditions than allowed for in current business plans the new targets,agreed by the economic and resources regulators, must first be clearlystated? If companies were then obliged to guarantee supplies inconditions of, say 75% rather than 80% of average long-term rainfallthey might reasonably be made liable to pay compensation, but only ifthe requisite infrastructure was not provided. This might be done bymore provision for inter-company or inter-regional transfers ratherthan from increased abstractions/infrastructure in the supply areaconcerned.Any open-ended liability for compensation may well provide, as theconsultation paper suggests, "....a powerful financialincentive.......to balance the costs of resources against the costs of(supply) restrictions," but, on the one hand the suggested dailycompensation payment of around #10 (based on average bills) seemslittle enough for the inconvenience that some consumers might suffer;on the other hand many might think that a rare inconvenience arisingfrom the vagaries of nature should not be disguised as something awater company could have prevented.This attitude was certainly apparent last summer when the watercompanies collectively rejected an OFWAT suggestion of compensation onthe grounds that the weather conditions were exceptional. One or twocompanies, not in areas threatened by supply cuts, later offeredcompensation where heavy demand caused loss of supply pressure but,according to the consultation paper, no suppliers have agreed that useof rota cuts or standpipes forced by drought will constitute a reasonfor compensation. That stance  was well judged - although such measureshave not been needed for nearly 20 years the trend in climate-inducedpressure on supplies can be seen from the 22-year record on hosepipebans. Bans on household use of hosepipes are an early step on the pathto conservation when drought conditions threaten. As the illustrationshows bans have been imposed on 10% or more of the population in 5 ofthe last 7 years but in only 3 of the previous 15 years.In commenting on another climate-induced supply problem over theChristmas/New Year period the Socialist opposition spokesman on theenvironment suggested that a higher staffing level in some companies inthe north-east of England might have produced a quicker response tosupply failures. He was talking about pipe bursts caused byexceptionally low temperatures followed by a rapid swing to warmerweather. Although the company pipes concerned will have been laid atdepths regarded as standard for forty or fifty years there was animmediate public outcry accompanied by newspaper and radio reportssuggesting possible fault on the part of the suppliers. Will lowtemperatures be next on the government list for a compulsorycompensation scheme?* The principle recommendations in the consultation paper are :Compensation payments of #10 per customer per day, up to a maximum of#100, for drought-imposed rota cuts or standpipe supply for a day orpart day.Compensation of #25 in any year for frequent poor pressure suppliescaused by drought conditionsAn entitlement for business customers to claim compensation for lossesarising from the imposition of Drought Orders. (Changes needed toprimary legislation)No general compensation for customers affected by hosepipe bans butaffected metered customers  may receive #25 per year compensation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996COMPANIES WAIT FOR RAIN AS DROUGHT FEARS PERSISTSFor suppliers and the resources regulator, the National RiversAuthority (NRA), drought fears have persisted into the new year afterheavy rainfall in September failed to continue into the later autumnand early winter. Perversely even the heavy rain that did occur missedmuch of the area worst affected by low rainfall last summer. By mid-December many soils were reported far from saturated and groundwaterrecharge and reservoir refilling was declared minimal.The NRA supplied a second resource status report* to the environmentminister in December. The report outlines the measures individualcompanies must take during the coming months to reduce the risk ofsupply interruptions next summer. A central theme is maximumabstractions from rivers to replenish reservoirs during the hoped-forwetter winter months, avoiding the need for environmentally damagingover-abstraction in the lower flow periods of summer. Severn Trent iscurrently involved in a Public Inquiry, facing protests from fishinginterests over proposed increased river abstractions. Yorkshire Water,where some areas remain under real threat of imposed rota cuts, is alsosubject to environmental protests over proposed abstraction increases.The NRA report lists company estimates of the possible 1996 outcomesassuming average and 80% of average rainfall. Only four of the tenmajor utilities express confidence for uninterrupted supplies nextsummer. It might have been more logical to report on a uniform knownrisk, for example the minimum rainfall conditions likely to recur ineach supply region once in ten years. This would mean rainfall of 70%of long term average in some areas and 90% in others. As it is the riskof 80% normal winter rainfall in Anglian region is 1 in 5 years and inthe North East 1 in 16 years.The speed at which the drought overtook England and Wales and theadverse public reaction to enforced supply restrictions has shaken theindustry. Only 10 months ago, in February 1995, even the NRA reportedthat the resources outlook was good. At some time or other in thefollowing summer months 7million people, including business customers,were banned from non-essential water use; 18 million were subjected tohosepipe bans and many suffered interrupted supplies or low flows attimes of peak demand. Now, in mid-winter, hosepipe bans continue inareas supplied by Severn Trent, North West and Yorkshire Water. SomeYorkshire customers may yet see standpipes used and, over large areasof the country, only exceptional rain in the coming 3 months will avertmajor supply inconveniences next summer.Suppliers had good reason to point to exceptional circumstances inrejecting suggestions of compensation payments. The illustration showsa continuous decline in rainfall from March to August. Accompanied byunusual levels of sunshine - above normal in each month to November -and with average temperatures at or above normal, this combined to setevaporation rates at record levels.There have been some positive outcomes. It has brought home to allconcerned, far better than any questionnaire, that the highest customerpriority is not clean bathing beaches or Class I rivers; it is acontinuous adequate water supply. The most immediate effect has been anew look at leakage and a revised company programme to cut losses. Inthe longer term it should send a message to government to maintain arobust approach to any new proposals from Brussels. If things go badlythis summer some revision of the Urban Waste Water Directive programmemay be needed, a matter the government  raised in Brussels in the run-up to the 1994 Prices Review.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SPAIN STAYS CAUTIOUS ON DROUGHT DESPITE RAINSThe wettest December for at least 30 years, following the first reallywet November after four years of the century's worst drought, hasbrought relief to vast areas of central-southern Spain.But experts were in general agreement that the drought was not over byearly January and there would have to be substantial rain this springbefore celebrations could start.In essence, most areas have their short-term domestic consumption needsresolved, but except for the western region  of Extremadura borderingPortugal, irrigation restrictions will continue. This in spite of thefact that many reservoirs in the southern water authorities of theGuadiana, Guadalquivir and Tajo (Tagus) rivers saw dramatic increasesin reserves in little more than two weeks.Some Andalucian dams in the south that were technically dry atChristmas held up to 30% of capacity by 3 January. The average held inthe dams in the southern water authority regions was Guadiana (27.4%),Guadalquivir (24.6%), Sur 24.4%) and Segura (12.5%). In nearly allcases, the figure had been below 10% at Christmas.The 14 dams run by Madrid's Canal de Isabel II water authority sawreserves increase by 27% to over 47% of capacity between Christmas Eveand January 3, but this was still below the 54.4% of exactly a yearbefore in full drought. Canal authorities remained cautious. Madrid'slast hydrological year which ended in September, was the driest since1912.The western half of Spain benefited most from the rain, to such anextent that Portugal had to ask Spain to retain the flow of the Tagusin the Valdecanas y Gabriel and Galan dams to avoid flooding thePortuguese city of Santarem. But in some parts of the south-east -Almeria, Murcia, southern Valencia - the improvement has been minimal.The exploitation directors of the Guadalquivir, Guadiana, Sur andSegura basins in the south, where more than eight million people sufferdaily restrictions, suggested that some restrictions could be eased bymid-January. However, this was less likely in Segura in the far south-east, where hydrographical confederation director Manuel Miron said onJanuary 2. "We have disgustingly splendid weather, with a completelyblue sky and temperatures above 25xC."In the Guadiana region bordering Portugal, confederation chairmanAntonio Alcaraz was jubilant. "For the first time in four years I amgoing to enjoy watching the partial emptying of a dam in Extremadura.We've had two anxious years to get emergency works built around thecity of Badajoz, and now we have too much water." The Guadiana dams inthe Andalucia (or far southern) area held an amazing 79% of capacity onJanuary 3.The Andalucian cities of Seville, Cordoba and Cadiz were likely to seedomestic restrictions eased as local dams filled, but Malaga and mostof the rest of the Costa del Sol will probably continue to sufferrestrictions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NEW YORK MEETS STRONG OPPOSITION TO PROPOSED WATER ASSETS SALESince the 1970s, New York City (NYC), America's most populated city,has struggled to balance a steadily eroding tax base against the risingcosts of providing municipal services to its eight million residents.The scenario is increasingly duplicated in virtually all large citiesacross the country. As part of the fiscal 1996 budget the Mayorproposed transferring title to its water and sewer system assets to theNew York Water Board (NYWB) for $2.3bn.The NYWB currently leases the water system from the city for a 40-yearterm in return for lease and rental payments. NYWB was established as aseparate entity because state law prohibits a government agency fromissuing debt and at the same time setting rates and collecting userfees, functions the NYWB performs. Although NYWB is considered semi-independent, its seven members are appointed by the Mayor and its staffare city employees.Under the budget proposal, the NYWB will borrow money to make thepurchase, repaying over 30 years with revenues from water charges. Thecity's Water Financing Authority (WFA), set up to finance the buildingand maintenance of the water and wastewater systems, will issue about$2.5 billion of revenue bonds (first and second resolution). NYC willthen retire or annul its current $1.3bn of outstanding generalobligation bonds originally issued for water and sewer projects beforeNYWB was created. The balance of the sale price will be used over thenext four years for critical repairs to a broad range of infrastructurecosting about $200 million annually. It would also eliminate the much-criticised $207 million tax receivables sale programme, under which thecity paid a bank to collect taxes and received an amount equal to thosetaxes a year before their due date.Capital assets involved in the sale are 18 reservoirs in three upstatewatersheds, thousands of miles of tunnels and mains, and 14 sewagetreatment plants. The price tag of $2.3bn was determined, not on thevalue of plant beyond its construction cost, some of which is very old,but on the projected lease payments the NYWB would make over the next30 years, assuming a 7% interest rate. Although there is a school ofthought that believes the proposed sale price doesn't reflect the truemarket value of the water system, which could be determined only bycompetitive bidding, a majority of the city council oppose outrightprivatisation.Proponents of the proposal argue that it means an end to NYWB'spayments to the city. Eliminating these rent payments will providesavings to hold down water rates. Water fees would be used to pay forthe bonds over 30 years, while the rent payments would be unending. Thesale is termed "rate neutral," and ratepayers will have new securitybecause the NYWB, instead of paying a continuing stream of rentalpayments, will owe a finite payment over a defined length of time. NYCcould use the approximate $1bn for capital and other projects, moneythat would have otherwise been borrowed at higher cost.Opponents of the proposal are equally vehement, one of whom is thecity's own Comptroller. For months he has resisted pressure from theMayor and council to sign the documents necessary to execute the bondtransaction. He characterised the proposal as an "illegal gimmick.""It's illegal," he claims, "because the WFA's authority does not extendbeyond borrowing for building and maintenance. It's `"gimmicky' becausewe will pay for the water system twice." Because of statements theMayor has made, the Comptroller also believes some of the $1bn bondrevenue will be used to pay for operating expenses not covered by taxrevenue shortfalls. It was this very practice that brought NYC to thebrink of bankruptcy in the mid 1970s.The New York Times has lined up with the opponents saying that "... thelegal issues are complicated and subject to differing interpretations.But we continue to believe that it would be unwise public policy forthe city to sell a vast and valuable asset to pay for constructionprojects over the next four years ... and the sale poses a potentialthreat to the upstate reservoirs once control of all the system passesfrom NYC ..."There is concern that the state Governor, thought to be sympathetic togreater development of upstate regions housing the reservoirs, couldchange the NYWB composition and weaken the city's control of the threewatersheds that supply its raw water (FTWB, Issue 51, p6).Municipal bond market operators have not forgotten that the city in1975 was plunged into a fiscal crisis when the then mayor borrowedmillions to meet operating expenses. They are watching these recentdevelopments closely as experts were already voicing concerns aboutNYC's existing debt level. In July 1995 Standard & Poors lowered thecity's credit rating in part because of this proposed sale.Court decisions now awaitedIn November the city council sued the city Comptroller in the New YorkState Supreme Court. It has requested a declaratory judgment on theComptroller's authority over the issuance of WFA debt. A ruling isexpected in February.In a further development on 11 December, a coalition of eight New YorkCity and Westchester County civic, housing and environmentalorganisations filed suit in the State Supreme Court in Manhattan toblock the sale. Spearheading these opposing groups is the NaturalResources Defence Council, a national environmental watchdog with astaff of 150 and 170,000 members. Their suit alleges that the proposedsale is illegal because the scheme would, among other things, divertapproximately $1bn in water and sewer monies for unrelated purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ASEAN STATES PRESS CHINA TO CO-OPERATE ON MEKONG MANAGEMENTLeaders of the seven Association of South East Asian Nations agreed topush for the integrated development of the Mekong basin at their summitin Bangkok. China, Laos, Burma and Cambodia will be invited to join aregional forum with ASEAN to channel investment into the six nationsthat depend upon the Mekong for much of their water supply, transport,energy and agricultural needs."We require a more co-ordinated approach, after individual governmentsand institutions have worked separately for the past few years. Thiswill be our first attempt at regional resource co-operation," Thaiprime minister Banharn Silapa-archa told the summit.The move follows Burma's agreement to work with other riverine nationsin developing the basin. This left only China outside the Mekong RiverCommission, a loose grouping of water users that is trying to promotesustainable development of the Mekong. Burma has promised to attendfuture meetings of the Commission, though only as an observer. Planningminister Brigadier-General David Abel said at a Bangkok seminar thatRangoon would join Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam in jointlyexploiting the river's potential. China is regarded as the primetarget, however, because the Mekong originates in Yunnan province andone-quarter of the 4,200-kilometre river is in Chinese territory.Financiers wary of funding further Chinese dams"Beijing is under pressure from international (financial) institutionsto negotiate with downstream countries before they will put up any morecash for dams. There's been too much bad feeling over their earlierschemes," said a European banker based in Bangkok.Water levels in the river dropped alarmingly in 1993 when China openedManwan dam, the first of eight reservoirs it is building on Mekongtributaries, prompting protests from neighbouring countries.The Commission is expected to press China for closer consultation onwater flows from the dams, especially with Laos and Vietnam. Land-locked Laos needs ample water in the dry season to irrigate its ricecrops, and much of the country is now facing a famine because ofinadequate supplies. Vietnam depends upon high river levels to dilutehigh saline levels in the Mekong delta, which is the country's mainfood producer.Initial response from the Chinese has not been too encouraging. Go Xin,vice-manager of Yannan's Environmental Monitoring Centre, told the Thaiseminar that  "The Manwan dam will help purify the water by breakingdown pollutants and will stop erosion of the river bank. It has noeffect upon the water flow downstream."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT QUESTIONS AID FUNDING FOR DAM SCHEMESNORAD, the Norwegian state development aid agency, has broken its ownrules regarding impartial evaluation of an African hydro power projectwhich is a candidate for development aid funding.The project under scrutiny is the Lower Kihansi development inTanzania, being undertaken by Tanesco, a local utility. A Norwegianfirm, Norplan, has conducted both the technical and the environmentalanalyses of the scheme, although NORAD guidelines say the companiesundertaking those functions should be quite independent of each other.NORAD support for Lower Kihansi was being considered, earlier thisyear, in connection with the possible participation in the project ofNorway's Kvaerner group. It was temporarily blocked on the advice ofNVE, the Norwegian state Water Resources and Energy Administration, andof the Directorate for Natural Resources Management (DN), an arm of theEnvironment Ministry. Both argued that Norplan's first environmentalanalysis was inadequate, and that a new study was needed to decide ifaid was appropriateA second study - again, by Norplan - was completed during the summer.The Norwegian environmental newsletter N & M Bulletin says that NVE hasclassified as "secret" all the documents connected with this lateststudy, but the newsletter "understands" that the second analysis "isjust as poor as the first. The result could be a new rejection by DNand ... NVE.""In its first statement DN expressed great concern about theenvironmental aspects of the hydro power scheme. In the affected areathere are many unique local species which could be completelyexterminated. The high waterfall in the river system creates... aspecially damp climate, which fosters a very rich fauna and flora.Another concern relates to the consequences of road building throughthe jungle, and the impact on the local population, which will feel thepressure from thousands of workers and others connected with the hugedevelopment."Chile project also questionedNorway's Environment Ministry is critical, too, of another giant hydroproject - Chile's Bio-Bio scheme - which has secured NORAD support. InAugust last year - despite strong opposition from Norwegianenvironmentalists - development aid minister Kari Nordheim-Larsenannounced that NORAD would provide so-called mixed credits for Bio-Bio.The newsletter claims to have a copy of an internal EnvironmentMinistry memo which is highly critical of the project, casting it as anexample of a scheme that has been granted support without adequatejustification. The Ministry believes the aid decision was dubious andsuggests `bit by bit' tactics were used to aid an apparently limitedscheme that paved the way for a larger projectThe same memo is sceptical towards third world hydro power projectsgenerally, pointing out that they "often have significant detrimentaleffects both on the environment and on the population groups affected.Far larger population groups, economic interests and environmentalvalues are affected, as a rule, than is the case with developments inour part of the world."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996JORDAN SAYS RED-DEAD LINK VITAL-ISRAEL NOT SO SUREThe Dead Sea lives down to its name. The only crops that grow around itare fed by a few streams and what's left of the Jordan River aftereveryone in the region has grabbed the bulk of the water and pollutedwhat's left. But regularly, there are heavy downpours on the hills thatflank its Eastern shore. These turn the usually light waters of theWadi Mujib into a raging torrent which pour through clefts in the rockwall into the Dead Sea with only minimal entrapment by a water-shortpopulation in Jordan's arid highlands of Moab.The Jordanian Government is now promoting a scheme to trap the watersof the Mujib and another nearby basin, the Hasa, to promote irrigateddevelopment at the lower end of the Dead Sea where the Jordanian andIsraeli authorities intend to create the Lowest Park on Earth. Zafer al-Alem, a senior official at the Ministry of Water and Irrigation, saysthe Mujib and Hasa entrapment scheme, known by its local name as theSouthern Ghors, should ensure a net gain of 54m cubic metres (mcm) peryear.The Southern Ghors Project is the smallest, but most immediate, ofJordan's major water schemes. But in essence it only helps to postponehard decisions concerning water use and water availability. TheJordanian authorities estimate that before they signed their PeaceTreaty with Israel in October 1994, their country's annual supply ofground and surface water totalled only some 670mcm. And yet, accordingto Mr. Qusei Qteishat, the Secretary General of the Ministry of Waterand Irrigation, by the year 2005 they will need 1,400mcm.Zafer al-Alem estimates that some 215 mcm/year should come Jordan's wayas a result of the Treaty, partly by use of water stored in the Israeli- controlled Sea of Galilee, and partly from new dams on the YarmukRiver that can go ahead given agreement between Israel and Jordan inone case, and Jordan and Syria in the other. In addition, Jordan hopesto complete a second priority project over the next seven years, thetransfer of water from the Disi aquifer in Southern Jordan, via a 310-km pipeline; expected yield 80-100 mcm/y.To make up the remaining 270 mcm/y it believes will be required by theyear 2005, the Ministry is planning an intensive campaign to re-useexisting water. But, as Zafer al- Alem told FTWB, "after ten years, theproblem will re-emerge. Then we will have to complete the Red-DeadCanal."But all these projects cost money and Jordan is not a rich country. Therelatively modest projects for the Southern Ghors are costed at$254.2m, while the Disi pipeline, for which a feasibility study iscurrently under way, is estimated at $405m. As for the Red Sea-Dead Seacanal, this is costed at anything from $3.2bn upwards.Detailed designs for the three dams in the Southern Ghors project atWala, Mujib and Tannur have already been completed, and detaileddesigns for the Mujib weir and conveyer system, the largest singleelement in the project, are due for completion in early 1996.The Jordanians see the Southern Ghors as a progressive project, to beimplemented over an eight-year period. This should make it easier tofinance, since they are looking for three-quarters of the money to comefrom foreign assistance, and donors generally prefer to disburse theiraid over a period of years.Jordan also wants to improve the quality of its water. "We haveambitious plans to clean the Jordan River, which receives a lot ofpollution," says Qteishat. "We plan to secure 10 mcm/y of desalinatedwater from the springs around Tiberias (Sea of Galilee)," which he sayswill be desalinated by Israel and passed on to Jordan. At present, hesays, "Israel pumps salt water out of Tiberias and passes it back tothe Jordan River. We want to make sure that no more waste water goesinto it."Israel plans to do this by constructing what it calls a brine line fromTiberias to the Dead Sea at a cost of $25.8 million. In addition, itwill also construct a desalination plant, possibly at Tabha, near somebrackish springs in the region, or else at Naharayim, near the borderwith Jordan. Such a plant would cost around $23m and, overall, theIsraelis estimate the cost of desalination and improvement of waterquality in the Sea of Galilee as costing them a total of $98.9m overthe five years the project is expected to take. However, as well assupplying Jordan with some 10mcm/y, a further 10-20mcm/y should beavailable for Israeli consumption.While Israel and Jordan are clearly committed in spirit, as well as inlaw, to co-operating in the development of the Jordan Rift Valley, itis clear that the level of cooperation can be expected to varyconsiderably from project to project. The northern schemes are ofimmediate benefit, and of generally definable and limited cost. Thepractical benefits are also immediately obvious. One Jordaniantechnologist involved in preparing his country's water plans, told FTWBthat Jordan expects to receive around 32 mcm/y of Israeli-sourced waterunder the treaty. Almost all of this will be piped directly to Amman,in effect providing almost one-third of the Jordanian capital's watersupply.Given the tensions surrounding water issues in the Middle East,Jordanian-Israeli co-operation on water management and developmentsince the 1994 peace treaty has been remarkable. Yet there are likelyto be some long term problems. The Jordanians are extremely keen on theRed Sea-Dead Sea Canal which they genuinely appear to consider offersthe best prospect of meeting their additional water requirements in theearly 21st century. The project would yield an estimated 400 mcm/yapiece to both Jordan and Israel, with desalination costs, Jordanianofficials aver, kept relatively low because the project can be poweredby the 400 metre level difference between the two seas.However, it is equally clear that the Israelis are not so keen on theproject. One senior Israeli official told FTWB: "We consider this is adream. We want to see the economics clearly in place; so you can seethere is a difference of opinion" between Israel and Jordan.To resolve such differences, the two countries have agreed to hire anexternal consultant to report on the economics of the project. TheJordanians hope the report will demonstrate the Canal's practicalityand financial viability. Since such a project would require massiveforeign aid, they are well aware that the Israelis will have to startbelieving in it themselves if the scheme is to prove a success. For,while aid donors may well be found if they see a real commitment fromboth parties, scepticism from one partner is likely to produceintensified scepticism amongst donors.The key is whether Israel, which has more money to spend on developingor importing alternative supplies, concludes that for political reasons- continuing good relations with Jordan - it can gear itself up tosupport the project with real enthusiasm. At present, this seemsunlikely. For Jordan, with less flexibility in terms of developingalternative water sources, the project is considered vital if it is tomeet its most basic needs; for Israel there is no equivalent pressure.As the Israeli official said: "We believe there is life without the RedSea-Dead Sea Canal."Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AUCKLAND OPTS TO BOOST SUPPLIES WITH $55M PIPELINE FROM WAKATO RIVERAuckland's Watercare Services has opted for a pipeline from the WaikatoRiver to meet future supply needs. In eliminating other optionsWatercare is back to a plan very similar to an emergency proposalfloated at the height of a major drought in 1994. (FTWB, Issue 42, p2).The water would be extracted from the river either by large diameterbankside wells or infiltration galleries and pumped from the existingArdmore treatment station. The project will initially yield 80,000cubic metres a day but would be designed to accommodate the possibilityof a second stage yielding 120,000 cubic metres per day around the year2013.The major difference over the previous emergency proposal is that thisproject will have to go through normal planning permission processes.The application to build the US$55m pipeline is likely to be filed inMarch. It could take a year for all the consents to be granted,following which there will be a 2 year construction period.  In themeantime Watercare Services, which is a corporate entity owned by theAuckland Regional Services Trust, is consulting local communities andMaori tribes about the project.Agreement of the Tainui tribe who claim ownership of the riverbed isnot a foregone conclusion. Nor is the agreement of all the localauthorities who will take the water. The Auckland district of WaitakereCity has considered going it alone with a combination of more efficientwater use and a dam project run by private enterprise.Law changes will ease planning and funding negotiationsNew legislation likely to be in place well before the process ofrequesting planning permission starts will, however, make it easier forWatercare Services to manage without the blessing of the receivinglocal authorities  such as Waitakere.Changes in the law will also provide more flexibility in selectingfunding options for this project and a major wastewater scheme. Infuture, Watercare Services will be able to borrow commercially whereasit currently has to give local authorities the right of first refusalon whether to fund a project and it would be hard for it to proceedwithout the backing of all the local authorities and loan guaranteesfrom them.Watercare will in future also be authorised to reflect investment costsin its pricing by including "the cost of its business requirements inits prices and charges." At present it must set prices at a level whichrecovers only the operating costs including interest and plannedmaintenance and renewals.Recent board changes at Watercare also mean the group is likely to bemore receptive to innovative finance proposals which involve privateoperators, to the contracting out of services and buying in water fromother authorities rather than operating a closed shop monopoly.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SAO PAULO SETS LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR MAJOR WASTEWATER PROGRAMMENew water use legislation in Sao Paulo took a major step forward inDecember with the approval of a master plan by the state council, aconsultative committee for the state assembly. The plan, Plano Estadualde Recursos Hidricos, covers the period 1996 to 1999 and is based onthe user-pays principle and on the French model of administrationwithin river basin boundaries.The next step is for a detailed law to bedrawn up and voted on in the assembly.Sao Paulo state has a population of 33 million and an area the size ofthe United Kingdom. For the purposes of the water resources plan thestate has been divided into 22 river basin administrative areas.Exploitation of state water resources, exclusive of treatment anddistribution, should have been charged for since 1991 according toState Law 7.663 but this has so far been unenforced through lack ofcomplementary detailed legislation.The first basin area to be created and where administration plans aremost advanced covers the Piracicaba, Capivari and Jundai riverssituated just north of the Greater Sao Paulo connurbation. The basincommittee has already received $1.7m towards sanitation and watersupply schemes this year from a state fund, Fehidro, which comes fromroyalty payments to areas flooded for hydroelectric schemes. Fehidroshould have $8.6m available for water schemes in 1996.The Piracicaba/Capivari/Jundai Basin Committee, made up ofrepresentatives from 57 municipalities and non-governmentalenvironmental organisations, has already held seven meetings and drawnup a resources master plan for the period to 2010. Most watercourseswithin the basin have, since 1977, been designated in the poor qualityclasses 3 and 4 and currently serve only to dilute the polluting effectof incoming waste waters. They are estimated to receive polluting loadsequivalent to a  biochemical oxygen demand of around 160 tonnes/day,principally from sugar mills and other large industrial plants and adomestic population of 2.2m.The Plan envisages raising most of the rivers in this industrialisedarea to class 2, drinking water standard, by 2010.The Sao Paulo state government hopes to provide waste water treatmentfor 80% of urban centres in the state by the year 2019. Currently only5% of the state's waste water receives treatment.Minas Gerais announces $825.3m, 4 year planLegal constraints do not appear to be affecting forward planning inMinas Gerais where the state water company Copasa, Companhia deSaneamento de Minas Gerais, has announced an ambitious $825.3m plan forthe period 1996-1999.The principal element of Copasa's plan is the Prosam project involvingwaste water treatment in state capital Belo Horizonte and thedepollution of the city's two main water courses, the Arruda and Onca.This involves building a comprehensive main drainage system and twolarge waste water treatment stations. Amongst other things the planenvisages provision of 356,000 new water supply connections and 154,000drain connections. The company hopes to cut drinking water supplylosses, currently the lowest in Brazil at 27%, down to 25%.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PWA CHIEF FACES SECOND INQUIRY OVER CONTRACT ADMINISTRATIONIn a second indictment by the government within two months the head ofThailand's Provincial Waterworks Authority (PWA) is to be investigatedover alleged mismanagement of a major contract.In this instance the charge concerns late completion of a drinkingwater contract. The PWA head, Visit Lorthirapong is said to have failedto enforce punitive measures against the contractor involved ininstallation of the Nong Khae district pumping station in centralSaraburi province. The work was completed 200 days late, incurring apenalty of $720,000, but no fine was ever collected."If found guilty of abusing his authority by the auditor's office, thePWA governor will face dismissal," said a spokesman for Deputy InteriorMinister Suchart Tancharoen, who ordered the investigation.This is the second charge against Visit  since the current governmentcame to power in early July. He already faces investigation forapparently defying an order by Suchart to delay the signing of a $160-million contract for the Putham Thani water treatment plant. Thatcontract went to Thames Water International of the UK and Karnchang, aThai construction firm. According to industry reports, Suchart hadfavoured a rival syndicate in the bidding. A review of the contract bythe Interior Ministry is nearing completion. Visit has told the inquirypanel that he signed the contract because it had already been approvedby the former government of Chuan Leekpai.Two unsuccessful bidders, led by Italian-Thai Development, Thailand'slargest construction group, and industrial estate operator MDX, lodgedofficial protests against the decision. Italian-Thai is known to haveclose ties to Suchart's Chart Thai party, which forms the core of thegoverning coalition.Visit has been suspended since the row broke, and is not expected toresume his post, even if he is cleared by the two investigations.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MALAYSIA PLANS $1BN SPEND ON WATER SUPPLY 1996 -2000Malaysia's deputy Works Minister said recently that around $1bn will beallocated to water infrastructure expansion in the country's 1996-2000national plan.Minister Datuk Railey Jeffrey said more than the RM2.4bn ($0.94bn) inthe 1991-1995 plan will be needed to satisfy a predicted 73% increasein demand to 11.4bn litres/day by 2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996REPORT PROVIDES GOOD REFERENCE TO UK WATER COMPANY PERFORMANCEBusiness Ratio Plus :Water Companies*   is probably the best collectionof publicly available information on water industry results collatedinto one reference book.The 1995 8th Edition covers the industry in England and Wales. For eachof the 10 regional water service plcs and the 20 or more water supplycompanies it provides a range of good hard fact - contact details,directors' names, turnover by subsidiaries, three full years' balancesheets and profit and loss details. The core businesses of the 10 plcsare treated to the same examination.A reference work of this sort is  out-of-date as soon as it rolls offthe presses, as is the information it includes but, until an on-lineversion is produced it's the best we can reasonably expect.The latest figures relate to the year ending March '95 and the sectorhas had interims, various bids and a long hot summer to cope with sincethen. Further developments up to the end of the third quarter of 1995are covered briefly in the Industry Comment section at the back of thebook. The performance analyses and league table positions are detailedand avoid the need to work them out. The ratios, the meanings of whichare defined, are grouped into six categories; profitability, liquidity,gearing, efficiency, employee performance and exports/sales. Leaguepositions of the individual companies are ranked in the same way. Thusat #1.17bn Thames Water plc had the highest turnover as at 31.3.95 andproduced the largest profit, #303.7m. Severn Trent employs 200 morepeople than Thames and has the greatest total assets of #3.69bn.Apart from Wessex Water which has a pre-tax profit margin of 51.1% noneof the Big 10 finds its way into the top five most profitablecompanies. Indeed eight of them are below the water supply onlycompanies average gross margin of 31.6%. Does this prove that small isbeautiful when it comes to water companies? Investors may find thisanalysis useful and industry players can keep an eye on what the othersare doing; it all depends on where your interest lies.Business Ratio Plus :Water Companies  does not go into the unregulatedbusinesses in any greater detail than to list their turnover. In thelong run this may be where the real differences and investor interestarise. For that we will need annual reports, latest interims and a lotmore specific company research but as far as it goes this is anexcellent basic handbook to the water industry in England and Wales.RW* Business Ratio Plus : Water Companies can be obtained from: ICCBusiness Publications, Freepost,Hampton, Middlesex TW18 1BR.    Tel:0181 783 0922. Fax: 0181 783 1940.  Price:  #195 plus p&pBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SOUTHERN AND BRISTOL WATER COMPLETE INTERIMS REPORTING SEASON IN UKSouthern Water plc, the last of the big 10 to report at the interimstage, is showing turnover up to #206.9 million from #190.6 millionlast year.The massive retained profit of #58.7 million, or 28.37% of turnover,continues a trend. The comparable figure was #86.9 million or 22.59% ofsales for the full year to 31 March and #52.5 million or 27.5% at thehalf way stage in 1994. It is not surprising then that Southern intendsto buy back its shares although it might have been more imaginative andexpanded the business rather than shrinking it.In fact it intends to fund the exercise by increasing the dividend byyear end so that the total cost to the company will be the same asbuying its own shares. Even so by then funds in the share premiumaccount and reserves look set to exceed #1bnIn addition to "returning value to shareholders" Southern also intendsto defer the permitted 1% price increase for 1996/7 and bring in a"customer benefit programme" costing #50 million. This will go towards"discretionary" spending on "distribution, foul water flooding andodour control."If Southern can achieve all this in such a drought year, with only ahose-pipe ban by way of emergency measures, is it charging too much forits services or investing too little in the infrastructure? Southernmay end up being praised for its prudence but like other suppliers the1996 outlook may depend on the extent of winter rains.Bristol Water Holdings plc increased turnover to #33.16 million from#31.31 million this time last year. Operating profits were up to #8.25million from #6.54 million in 1994 when they took into account a #1.1million re-reorganisation provision. This has now fed through to thebottom line of #4.78 million and retained profit of #3.75 million.Hopefully this will help ease net borrowings which still run at 68% oftotal shareholders' funds. At the full year they had been 91% and atthe interim stage last year 87%.Meanwhile shareholders' funds have crept up from #43.5 million to #47.7million since 31st March 1995 year end suggesting a move from debt toequity financing although without full view of the underlying numbersthis cannot be verified.Bristol still has large capital projects to fund, particularly theGloucester to Sharpness Canal which it estimates will cost #2 millionby the end of the century.Following restructuring and reduction of the workforce by 15% perhapsBristol is set fair for improved results at the full year.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TENDERS ISSUED FOR $38M FORTALEZA TREATMENT PLANTBrazil's state development bank, BNDES (Banco Nacional deDesenvolvimento Economico e Social) is expected to provide 75% of thefinance for a project to double treatment plant capacity at the Gaviaoreservoir which serves the city of Fortaleza in Ceara state, north eastBrazil.An announcement to this end was made by the bank's director ofprivatisation, Elena Landau on 4 December and tenders for the $37.8mbuild, operate, transfer (BOT) project were issued two days later.Private companies will be paid from water bills from a quarter ofCeara's connections over a period of 15 years.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996EIB LENDS ECU100M VIA POLISH BANKS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMESA credit line of ECU100m advanced by the European Investment Bank tofour foreign banks operating in Poland -  ABN-AMRO, Creditanstalt, INGBank, and Raiffeisen-Centrobank - is intended broadly for use on`infrastructure' projects.An EIB spokesman told FTWB the intended coverage could range frominstalling telephone lines to building tourist facilities, butenvironmental projects, including water/wastewater treatment schemeswould certainly qualify. Individual loans could range from ECU20,000 toECU 25m. depending on the intermediary bank chosen.The loans would be relatively cheap, with interest charged at 150 basispoints (1.5%) over Libor (London interbank offered rate), and repaymentover up to 11 years.The EIB raises market funds as cheaply as anybody, given its AAA ratingas a supranational institution. Furthermore, by lending through foreignbanks, the EIB has been able to obtain guarantees from the foreignbanks' parents in Amsterdam or Vienna, thereby avoiding thecomplications of extracting a government guarantee from the Polishauthorities, as would have been needed in the case of a Polish bank. Bylending through one single intermediary, the EIB has kept to a minimumthe number of margins that must be added to the basic cost of themoney.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMORIM BUYS MAJOR SHARE IN LUSAGUAThe Amorim group, Portugal's biggest cork products group and one of thecountry's largest business conglomerates, has acquired 50% of Lusagua,a water company, previously wholly owned by two Spanish groups, Aguasde Barcelona and Canal Isabel.The acquisition, made by increasing Lusagua's capital from Es100m($150,000) to Es200m, represents an important diversification for theAmorim group. The two Spanish companies retain the remaining 50%. Theacquisition was made shortly after Lusagua, in association with anothercompany, Aquagest, was awarded a concession to manage the water supplyand waste water treatment systems of Carvoeiro, the name given to agroup of municipalities centred on Aveiro in northern Portugal.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MINISTERS PLAN INCREASED SPENDING ON WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMSA total of $60 million has been allocated for provincial waste watertreatment plants in Thailand this year (1996), double the 1995expenditure. Included in an $84-million environmental fund, the moneywill be allocated under 1992 legislation that requires provincialgovernments to formulate local action plans."The funding has been raised substantially because of the heavyresponse from provincial administrations. There are at least fivemunicipalities that will begin waste water treatment plants (in 1996),"said Saksit Tridej, a senior official in the Environment Ministry.While the funding comes from the national government, local authoritiesmust conduct feasibility studies and provide land for the plants. Thesystem reverses a previous trend of centralised planning from Bangkok."It's a very effective method, as the government can allocate budgetsto local agencies to tackle pressing environmental problems," saidSaksit. "They are in a better position to know what is needed that weare."Resource studies planned in East and West provincesElsewhere the Industry Ministry has called for feasibility studies onimprovement of supplies to factories in the eastern and westernprovinces following complaints from manufacturers.Industry minister Chaiwat Sinsuwong said East Water, a partiallyprivatised water distributor, would be commissioned to overcomeshortages affecting much of the eastern seaboard, including supplies tostate-run industrial estates."The supplies need to be improved but also the pricing. Everyone iscomplaining that piped water is too expensive in these two areas," hesaid. "What may be needed is better resource management."Efforts to boost supplies have been thwarted by a shortage of suitablesites for reservoirs; the government is considering importing waterfrom Cambodia if new domestic sources cannot be found.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FRENCH GROUPS COMBINE IN BID FOR CONTROL OF MID-KENT WATERGenerale des Eaux's British subsidiary General Utilities, and itsBouygues Group counterpart Saur Water Services have announced that theyintend to launch a takeover bid for the UK`s Mid Kent Water.The French have indicated an offer of #4.40 a share, valuing Mid Kentat some #80m ($126m). But the bid will have to await the approval ofthe UK's Monopolies and Mergers Commission. This is not likely to be astumbling block, given the recent approval of the much more significantbid by Lyonnaise des Eaux for the regional water and sewage utility,Northumbrian Water. One difficulty might arise however from the adviceof the Mid-Kent board that shareholders should reject the bid.The two French-owned companies already hold 39% of Mid Kent, but wouldlike control.  General Utilities already owns Folkestone and DoverWater which serves the area adjacent to Mid-Kent on the east side,while Saur Water Services controls South East Water to  the west of Mid-Kent.Generale and Saur say a takeover would optimise water usage in the areaand thereby reduce the risk of water shortages.South East Water is the largest of the three companies with 618,000clients and an annual turnover of #50.9m. Mid Kent serves  525,000users and Folkestone and Dover, annual turnover #10.4m, serves151,000.In all, General Utilities provides water for 3.1m persons in the UK viafour companies, while Saur Water Services provides for 1.3m persons viatwo companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996UWR TO PARTNER JERSEY CITY FOR WATER SYSTEM OPERATIONUnited Water Resources (UWR), America's second largest investor-ownedwater services company, on 11 December won the contract to manage thewater system of Jersey city, an industrial community across the HudsonRiver from the tip of Manhattan Island. Population to be served isabout 240,000.The contract is subject to public hearings and approval of the NewJersey state public utility. UWR anticipates a successful outcome ofthe approval process and is scheduling a start this Spring. It will bethe largest public-private partnership for a municipal water operationin the country.The company says the proposal will bring major economic benefits toJersey City over five years through operating efficiencies, improvedbilling, job creation, plus the purchase of Jersey City's excess watersupplies.UWR is a holding company whose subsidiaries engage in water-relatedbusinesses, real estate, and environmental testing. It provides waterand wastewater services to about two million people in 13 states.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER BRIEFING via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WORLD BANK TO FUND $13.5M STUDY FOR REGION'S LARGEST DAMThe World Bank has agreed to fund the second stage of a feasibilitystudy for the Son La hydro-electric dam in Vietnam, which will be thelargest to be constructed in Southeast Asia.Bradley Babson, spokesman for the Bank's mission in Hanoi, said theinvolvement was conditional upon Vietnam using a recognised level ofdesign and construction and protecting ethnic minorities who live inthe area. "We are not financing the dam, but we may provide funds tomake sure that they do the studies for the dam in a way that will fitinternational standards," he said. Expected to take two years, the$13.5m study will look at the environmental impact and socialrepercussions from the relocation of thousands of local residents.An earlier study by Sweden's Sweco consultancy found that the projectwas economically viable, and recommended two sites on the Black River,a tributary of the Red River in northern Hanoi.Expected to have an electricity output of up to 3,794 megawatts, theproject will be twice the size of Hoa Binh dam, 190 kilometresdownstream, which is currently the largest in the region.Meanwhile, construction of a $110-million hydro-power plant has startedat Song Hinh in central Phu Yen province. Work on a series of dams witha power output of 370 million kilowatt hours began in 1991.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-14IA086-000616-B017-171http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122002939 text/html 50579HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:27:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:14 GMTContent-length: 50392Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev05.html Sample Issue Copyright GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINES (2378 words) NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULE (2887 words) BRIEFS UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'S SOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS. (318 words) SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGING TANKERS AND BULKERS. (345 words) ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSE SEDIMENTS. (334 words) WORLD SPILL BRIEFS. (539 words) OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE. (603 words) CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINESIn a compromise between the conflicting concerns of the nation'stwo largest oil spill removal organizations (OSROs), theU.S. Coast Guard (USCG) has issued final guidelines on a revampedOSRO classification process that will require responseorganizations to maintain "redundant" quantities of anycontracted or "nondedicated" response resources that they wish tocount toward their classifications. In the weeks preceding therelease of the final guidelines, the National Response Corp.(NRC) and the Marine Spill Response Corp. (MSRC) expressed verydifferent views regarding the way that the revampedclassification system should count nondedicated resources (OPB,15 Dec. 1995, p.1). MSRC, whose response network consistsprimarily of owned or "dedicated" response resources, argued thatnondedicated resources should not be counted toward an OSRO'sclassification unless the OSRO can demonstrate the ability todeploy those resources in a timely manner. In contrast, NRC,which makes extensive use of nondedicated equipment andpersonnel, contended that, for classification purposes, dedicatedand nondedicated resources should be considered equivalent.Under the final guidelines, an OSRO may count nondedicatedresources as part of its response capability, but it must arrangefor access to at least twice as much nondedicated equipment andpersonnel as it needs to meet the guidelines' response resourcestandards. "If an OSRO elects to use nondedicated resources,there must be a redundancy factor of 2 to 1," USCG wrote in thefinal guidelines. "This means that the OSRO must ensure theavailability of nondedicated response resources by contract orother approved means in quantities equal to twice what the OSRO"would be required to maintain if those same resources werededicated, according to USCG. "Ideally, dedicated resourcesprovide more of a timely response 'guarantee' than nondedicatedresources," Admiral James Card explained in a cover letteraccompanying the final guidelines. However, "historically, theresponse industry has depended to varying degrees on nondedicatedresources to perform some critical response functions," accordingto Admiral Card. "To better ensure the availability of thesenondedicated resources, we have required a redundancy factor of2 to 1 when using nondedicated response resources," Admiral Cardwrote.USCG's decision to require a 2 to 1 redundancy factor fornondedicated resources appears to be acceptable to NRC, but notto MSRC. "Everyone was waiting to see how USCG would handle theissue of dedicated and nondedicated resources," NRC PresidentMark Miller told OPB. "I think they have reached a compromisethat addresses the concerns of all of the parties involved,"Miller said. "With the tremendous inventory of dedicated andnondedicated resources that NRC has available, I fully expectthat the program we developed several years ago will stand upunder the new classification system," Miller said. MSRC CorporateRelations Director Greg Rixon told OPB that, although "redundantcontracts may increase the likelihood that nondedicated resourceswill be available in the event of a spill, MSRC still believesthat the only way to positively ensure response capability is tomaintain dedicated resources." In addition, MSRC contends that aredundancy factor of 2 to 1 does not provide sufficient assuranceof equipment availability, according to Rixon. "In our opinion,USCG would be close to achieving a reasonable assurance ofavailability with a redundancy factor of 3 to 1, and wouldprobably reach full assurance with a factor of 4 to 1," Rixonsaid.OSRO classification background: USCG classifies OSROs to helpvessel and facility owners select organizations that are capableof meeting their response planning requirements under the OilPollution Act of 1990 (OPA 90). Section 4202 of OPA 90 requiresvessel and facility owners to develop response plans that"identify and ensure, by contract or other means, theavailability of private personnel and equipment necessary toremove, to the maximum extent practicable, a worst-casedischarge." The OSRO classification process is voluntary;response organizations are not required to apply for OSROclassification. Although vessel and facility owners do not haveto contract with classified OSROs to meet the OPA 90 planningrequirements, plan holders who rely on classified OSROs areexempted from the requirement to document in their plans all ofthe response resources that they intend to contract in the eventof a spill.The newly released final OSRO classification guidelines replacethose contained in Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circular(NVIC) No. 12-92, which USCG issued in December 1992 (OPB,18 Dec. 1992., p.2). "After the implementation of NVIC No. 12-92,weaknesses were identified in the classification process thatprevented the program from realistically representing theresponse capabilities of an OSRO," Admiral Card explained in thecover letter for the final guidelines. USCG held public workshopsin January 1994 and June 1995 to solicit comments on the OSROclassification process and, during September 1995, issued draftguidelines on a revamped system (OPB, 22 Sept. 1995, p.1).According to Admiral Card, USCG received written comments on thedraft guidelines from about 70 organizations during the publiccomment period, which ended on 30 November 1995. "As a result ofthe comments received, and our own review, the draft guidelineshave undergone many changes," Card noted. He claimed that thefinal guidelines will allow USCG to "accurately and consistentlycalculate an OSRO's capability to respond to specific plan holderrequirements.""We continue to stress that using a USCG-classified OSRO does notin any way relieve plan holders of the responsibility to ensurethat their specific response needs are met," Card wrote in hiscover letter. "The revised classification guidelines provide agood indication of an OSRO's response capability by COTP zone,"Card noted. The OSRO classifications "do not, however, representa 'one size fits all' solution," Card wrote. "USCG created thevoluntary OSRO classification program so that facility and vesselresponse plan holders could list USCG-evaluated OSROs in lieu ofproviding voluminous detailed lists of response resources,"according to Admiral Card. "This was, and still is, the onlyregulatory benefit that plan holders receive from utilizing USCG-classified OSROs," Admiral Card explained.Final OSRO classification process: Although USCG has included newrequirements for nondedicated resources and other changes in thefinal guidelines, the final classification process is verysimilar to that outlined in the draft guidelines proposed duringSeptember 1995. Like the draft guidelines, the final guidelinesspecify that USCG will enter information about each OSRO'sresponse resources into a database--the Response ResourceInventory--and then use a computer program to classify theorganization. The program will assign each response organization"geographic-specific" classifications--that is, separateclassifications for each Captain of the Port (COTP) zone in whichthe organization operates. According to USCG, the computerprogram will automatically take into account an OSRO's ability totransport or "cascade" its resources in response to spillsoutside of the COTP zones in which the equipment is stored.For each COTP zone, USCG will assign a response organization oneof five OSRO classifications ranging from A (least capacity) toE (most capacity) in any or all of the following operatingenvironments: rivers and canals, inland regions, the Great Lakes,and oceans. The five classifications will reflect both anorganization's ability to deploy equipment within certain timeframes and its effective daily recovery capacity (EDRC)--afunction of the amount of boom, oil recovery equipment, andtemporary storage that the OSRO can access during a spillresponse. For example, to receive a class C rating in the inlandoperating environment of a particular COTP zone, an OSRO wouldhave to have an EDRC of 10,000 barrels per day. In addition, thatOSRO would have to be capable of mounting a spill response inthat COTP zone within the following time frames: 6 hours for aspill from a facility in a high-volume port; 12 hours for afacility spill in a non-high-volume port; 12 hours for a spillfrom a vessel in a high-volume port; and 24 hours for a vesselspill in a non-high-volume port.Like the draft OSRO classification process, the final OSROclassification process takes into account not only anorganization's total response resources, but also its ability todeploy various types of response equipment together as a"system." According to both the draft and the final guidelines,an organization's EDRC will be determined by the least-capablecomponent of its oil recovery system. For example, if an OSRO hasa temporary storage capacity of 30,000 barrels per day, but hasskimming or vacuum equipment that is capable of recovering only10,000 barrels per day, the OSRO's EDRC will be limited to10,000 barrels per day. During the classification process, USCGmay consider any of the following additional factors: theavailability of trained personnel to operate the organization'sequipment; the suitability of the OSRO's equipment for theenvironments in which it operates; the organization's ability toprovide logistical support for a spill response; and the OSRO'sability to use response techniques other than mechanical recoverymethods.Changes from the draft process: Based on the comments received onthe draft guidelines, USCG made several revisions to the finalOSRO classification process. The final guidelines give each OSROthe option to apply for classifications in a particular COTP zonebased on its resources in a city in the zone other than the cityin which the COTP office is located. In contrast, the draftguidelines would have counted only the resources in the COTPcity. In the draft guidelines, USCG specifically stated that thetemporary storage capacity used to calculate an OSRO's EDRC would"not include fixed, shore-based storage capacity." However, inthe final guidelines, USCG revised this policy. "An OSRO thatoperates in an area where fixed storage is a realistic asset mayclaim fixed storage as meeting part of its temporary storagerequirement," according to USCG. When determining whether tocount fixed storage, "the key factor that USCG will evaluate iswhether the temporary storage that an OSRO has identified willallow the OSRO to sustain its classified EDRC throughout spillresponse operations," the agency noted.Under the draft guidelines, USCG would have evaluated an OSRO'sability to dispose of recovered oil as part of the classificationprocess, but this criterion has been omitted from the finalguidelines. In addition, in the draft guidelines, USCG did notaddress whether OSROs could receive credit for response resourcesdesignated to meet state resident-equipment requirements.However, in the final guidelines, USCG noted that "OSROs thathave designated equipment to meet state resident-equipmentrequirements must indicate this on their OSRO application."According to USCG, "for classification purposes, designatedresident equipment is not cascadable outside of the area forwhich it is designated." As under the draft guidelines, OSROsclassified under the final guidelines will be reevaluated everythree years to verify that their classifications are accurate.The final guidelines also specify that USCG will conduct "randomspot checks" between each regularly scheduled reinspection visit"to confirm resource availability and equipment operability."Reaction from NRC and MSRC: In separate interviews with OPB aboutthe final OSRO classification process, NRC and MSRC bothcommented on the importance of dedicated resources to thenation's overall spill response capability. To illustrate MSRC'sperspective, Rixon compared USCG's response planning regulationsto a high-jump competition. "Congress and USCG initially set thebar at a certain height," according to Rixon. "USCG thendiscovered that only one company--MSRC--could clear the bar,"Rixon claimed. "Rather than say to everyone else, you must trainharder to compete in this event, USCG decided to lower the bar,"according to Rixon. "We are not the only organization withdedicated resources, but we did acquire a higher percentage ofdedicated resources than any other organization, and we did thatat great cost to our clients," Rixon explained. "When NRC andother companies wanted to get into the game, they decided not tospend the kind of money that we spent," according to Rixon. "Infact, these companies realized that they could gain a competitiveedge by not acquiring as many dedicated resources," Rixon said.By failing to fully recognize the limitations of nondedicatedresources in the OSRO classification system, USCG "has placed thewhole concept of dedicated resources in grave jeopardy," Rixonclaimed. "The end of dedicated resources will not come like athunderclap," according to Rixon. "Tomorrow, we will not wake upand find that all of this country's dedicated response resourcesare gone, but they will erode slowly, and eventually no OSROswill have them," Rixon said. "Then, at some time in the future,USCG will try to execute the response plans that are in place,and they will discover that the dedicated assets that they wererelying on are not there any more," Rixon said. "We believe thatUSCG must take steps to ensure that dedicated assets remain inplace or that nondedicated resources are maintained in sufficientnumbers so that there is some degree of certainty that enoughequipment and personnel will be available when a major spilloccurs," Rixon said. In addition, "USCG must improve its effortsto test and evaluate the capability of OSROs on a true no-noticebasis, especially those OSROs that rely on nondedicatedresources," according to Rixon.According to NRC's Miller, "there is no proof that dedicatedequipment is more reliable than nondedicated equipment during aspill response." Miller pointed out that "NRC has respondedsuccessfully to 85 oil spills," whereas "MSRC does not have thatkind of track record." Therefore, MSRC "can only guess that theirdedicated resources might be better in a spill response," Millersaid. He noted that, "at a time when most of MSRC's customers aredoing away with their owned and dedicated tanker fleets andregularly chartering ships on the spot market, it seems curiousto me that MSRC does not recognize the hypocrisy of advocatingdedicated resources for spill response." According to Miller,"MSRC went out and spent a lot of money on dedicated equipment,and as a result, they have saddled their customers with atremendous expense and an ungainly organization." In contrast,"NRC looked at the marketplace, purchased equipment as needed,saw that nondedicated resources were available, and developed abetter program for our customers," Miller said. For a copy of thefinal OSRO classification guidelines, at no cost, contact: TerryHoover, Commandant (G-MEP-2), USCG Headquarters, 2100 SecondStreet, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-267-0448;Fax: 202-267-4085.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULEOn 5 January, the U.S. National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration (NOAA) issued its long-awaited final rulespecifying the methods that federal, state, and tribal trusteesare authorized to use when conducting natural resource damageassessments (NRDAs) under OPA 90. The NRDA process described inthe final rule is essentially the same as the "restoration-based"approach outlined in NOAA's "reproposed" NRDA rule, which theagency issued during August 1995 (OPB, 11 Aug. 1995, p.1). Underthe final rule, which will take effect on 5 February, the NRDAprocess will focus on determining the appropriate scale of therestoration projects required to "make the environment and thepublic whole" following a spill. The trustees for the naturalresources injured by an oil spill will evaluate the injuriescaused by the spill and develop a detailed plan for returning theinjured resources to their baseline condition and compensatingthe public for the lost use of those resources while they arebeing restored. The responsible parties (RPs) will then eitherfund or implement the restoration plan.The restoration-based NRDA approach contained in the final ruleand in NOAA's August 1995 proposal differs significantly from theprocess that the agency outlined in its first proposed NRDA ruleduring January 1994 (OPB, 15 Jan. 1994, p.1). Under that originalproposed rule, the NRDA process would have focused on assessingthe monetary value of the natural resources injured by an oilspill. The RPs would then have been required to pay thecalculated sum to the trustees, who would have used it to restoreor replace the injured natural resources. The January 1994proposal was sharply criticized by representatives of the marineinsurance and oil transportation industries, who argued that themethods it proposed for calculating natural resource values werearbitrary and therefore might lead to grossly inflated damageclaims under OPA 90. The critics of the January 1994 proposedrule were particularly concerned about its inclusion of thecontroversial contingent-valuation method, which involves the useof surveys to determine the "passive use" values of naturalresources. Passive use values are the values that people attachto resources that they do not use but that they neverthelessregard as important to preserve.Like NOAA's August 1995 proposal, the final NRDA rule defines amore limited role for contingent valuation and other valuationmethods than the role outlined in NOAA's January 1994 proposal.The final rule limits the use of valuation techniques to specificcircumstances and states that these techniques may be used onlyto determine the appropriate scale of natural resourcerestoration projects. The use of contingent valuation and othervaluation methods for this purpose "avoids many problemsidentified by commenters regarding the use of continent valuationto calculate a dollar value" for natural resource damages, asspecified in the January 1994 proposed rule, NOAA stated in thefinal rule. According to NOAA, under the final rule, RPs areliable for the cost of implementing restoration actions thatgenerate value equivalent to the lost value of the injurednatural resources, not for reimbursing the trustees for thecalculated lost value of the resources.NOAA's decision to limit the role of valuation methods in theAugust 1995 proposed rule alarmed environmental groups, whoclaimed that, by switching from the original valuation-basedapproach to a restoration-based approach, the proposal would failto fully compensate the public for the inherent value of naturalresources. These groups argued that, by giving RPs the option toundertake restoration projects instead of paying economic damagesfollowing a spill, the proposal would ultimately lead to lowerrecoveries for the public. Insurance companies and shippingorganizations also criticized the August 1995 proposed rule.These groups claimed that, although the proposal focused the NRDAprocess on determining the scale of restoration actions, itprovided only general guidance on NRDAs and would therefore givetrustees the option to use a wider variety of assessment methods.In the preamble to the final rule, NOAA defended the restoration-based NRDA approach. According to NOAA, by requiring trustees toassess natural resource injuries for the purpose of determiningthe required scale of restoration activities, the final NRDAprocess will "validate trustee determinations regarding thoseactions that will make the environment and public whole." Inaddition, NOAA noted that, while the final rule "provides for theuse of a range of appropriate and cost-effective assessmentprocedures," the rule also includes a set of standards that anyassessment procedure must meet. For example, the rule specifiesthat assessment procedures must be "capable of providinginformation of use in determining the type and scale ofrestoration appropriate for a particular injury" and must be"reliable and valid for the particular incident." NOAA also saidthat, because the final rule gives RPs and the publicopportunities to participate in the restoration planning process,"restoration will be achieved more quickly, transaction costswill decrease, and litigation will be avoided."NRDA rulemaking history: The publication of the final NRDA rulecame more than five years after NOAA first issued an advancenotice of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register to solicitcomments on approaches for conducting NRDAs under OPA 90 (OPB,18 Jan. 1991, p.1). Since that time, NOAA has published elevenFederal Register notices related to the NRDA process, includingits first proposed NRDA rule during January 1994, the August 1995reproposed rule, and the final NRDA rule. In addition, NOAA hasheld numerous public workshops and regional meetings during thepast five years to solicit input on the various methods that havebeen developed to assess natural resource damages. According toNOAA, the final rule draws on the comments received and provides"a NRDA process intended to meet OPA 90's goal of expeditious,cost-effective, and feasible restoration of natural resources andservices injured by incidents involving oil."Although the final rule was published in the Federal Register on5 January, NOAA submitted the rule to the Federal Register officeon 28 December 1995, thereby meeting the deadline specified in aconsent decree that the agency reached last year with the NaturalResources Defense Council (NRDC). The consent decree resolved asuit filed during 1994 by NRDC and eight other environmentalgroups against NOAA for failing to promulgate a final NRDA ruleby 18 August 1992, as required under OPA 90 (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994,p.2). Under the consent decree, NOAA agreed to file itsreproposed NRDA rule with the Federal Register by 31 July 1995,and to file the final rule on approaches for conducting NRDAs by31 December 1995. The agency met both deadlines.Final NRDA rule: Like the August 1995 proposed rule, the finalrule divides the NRDA process following an oil spill into threephases: preassessment, restoration planning, and restorationimplementation. In the first phase--preassessment--the trusteesmust determine whether the spill warrants a complete NRDA. Basedon the information available, the trustees must determine whetherthe incident may have resulted in any injuries or any risk ofinjuries to natural resources under their trusteeship andtherefore whether the incident qualifies for a natural resourcedamage claim under OPA 90. In addition, the trustees mustevaluate whether the emergency spill response operations willeliminate the threat of ongoing injuries to natural resources."If injuries are expected to continue, and feasible restorationalternatives exist to address such injuries, the trustees mayproceed with the assessment," NOAA explained in the rule.The second phase of the NRDA process--restoration planning--hastwo components: injury assessment and restoration selection.According to NOAA, "the goal of the injury assessment is todetermine the nature and extent of the injuries to naturalresources and services, thus providing a technical basis forevaluating the need for, type of, and scale of restorationactions." Under the final rule, natural resource injuries aredefined as any "observable or measurable change in a naturalresource" or any "impairment of a natural resource service." Aspart of the injury assessment, the trustees must determine firstthat natural resources have been exposed to the spilled oil, andsecond that this exposure has caused an injury. By comparing thecondition of the injured resources to their baseline condition,the trustees must quantify the degree and spatial extent of theinjuries and estimate their temporal extent.After the injury assessment is completed, the trustees begin therestoration selection process, which involves the identification,evaluation, and selection of various restoration alternatives.Under the final rule, the trustees must identify a "reasonablerange" of restoration alternatives, including both "primaryrestoration actions," which are designed to help restore theinjured natural resources to their baseline condition, and"compensatory restoration actions," which are intended tocompensate the public for the lost use of natural resourcesduring the restoration period. The final rule specifically statesthat trustees must consider "natural recovery" as a primaryrestoration option. In addition, the trustees may consideractions intended to prevent interference with natural recovery ormore intensive actions that they believe would return injuredresources to their baseline condition more rapidly or withgreater certainty than natural recovery. When identifyingpossible compensatory restoration actions, trustees are requiredfirst to consider those actions that provide services of the sametype and quality as those lost as a result of the spill. If thetrustees cannot identify a reasonable range of this type ofcompensatory actions, they may consider other compensatoryactions, provided that these actions make available services ofcomparable type and quality to those lost.To ensure that the restoration actions identified by the trusteesappropriately address the injuries arising from the incident, thetrustees must "scale" the actions. The final rule specifies twoapproaches for determining the appropriate scale of a restorationaction: the "resource-to-resource" or "service-to-service"approach, and the "valuation" approach. In the resource-to-resource or service-to-service approach, the trustees determinethe quantity of resources or services that have been lost andidentify actions that provide at least an equal quantity ofreplacement resources or services of the same type and quality asthose lost. In the valuation approach, the trustees use valuationmethods, such as contingent valuation, to calculate the value ofthe resources or services lost as a result of the spill and todetermine the value expected to be gained from the variousrestoration actions under consideration. The trustees then scalethe restoration actions so that they provide resources orservices of equal value to those lost. The final rule states thattrustees may use the valuation approach only if they areconsidering actions that provide resources or services of adifferent type and quality from those lost, or if the resource-to-resource or service-to-service approach is inappropriate.Once the trustees have identified a reasonable range ofrestoration alternatives, they must select the "preferred"alternatives. When selecting the preferred alternatives, thetrustees are required under the rule to consider the followingfactors: 1) the cost of each alternative; 2) the extent to whicheach alternative is expected to return the injured naturalresources and services to their baseline condition or tocompensate the public for the loss of resources and servicesduring the interim period; 3) the likelihood that eachalternative will be successful; 4) the extent to which eachalternative will prevent further natural resource injuries fromthe spill and avoid collateral injuries during implementation;5) the extent to which each alternative benefits more than onenatural resource or service; and 6) the effect of eachalternative on public health and safety. Under the final rule,the trustees must select the most cost-effective of two or moreequally preferable alternatives. The trustees then develop adraft restoration plan presenting the preferred alternatives andmake the draft plan available for public review and comment.After reviewing the comments, the trustees develop a finalrestoration plan.In the third phase of the NRDA process--restorationimplementation--the trustees present the final plan to the RPs,who must either implement the plan themselves or provide thefunding for the trustees to implement it. According to NOAA, therestoration implementation phase provides an opportunity in theNRDA process for the settlement of natural resource damage claimswithout litigation, because the trustees and the RPs cannegotiate the best way to proceed with the restoration plan. Ifthe RPs refuse to fund or implement the final restoration plan,the trustees are authorized under OPA 90 to file a civil suitagainst the RPs in federal court to recover the cost ofimplementing the plan. If the response costs and natural resourcedamages arising from a spill exceed the RP's liability limitunder OPA 90, or if no RP has been identified, the trustees mayseek funding for the restoration from the Oil Spill LiabilityTrust Fund.Under OPA 90, NRDAs performed by federal, state, or tribaltrustees in accordance with the procedures contained in the finalrule "have the force and effect of a rebuttable presumption onbehalf of the trustees in any judicial or administrativeproceedings." In the final rule, NOAA interpreted thispresumption to mean that "the RP has the burden of presentingalternative evidence on damages and of persuading the fact finderthat the damages presented by the trustees are not an appropriatemeasure" of the natural resource injuries caused by a spill. If,in any portion of an assessment, the trustees use procedures thatare determined not to be in accordance with the final rule, thetrustees will not receive the rebuttable presumption for thatportion of the assessment. In addition, NRDAs performed byforeign trustees in accordance with the final rule are notentitled to the rebuttable presumption.NOAA's response to comments on earlier NRDA proposals: In thefinal rule, NOAA noted that it "has made every effort toconsider" all of the comments that it received on the NRDAproposals issued in January 1994 and August 1995, as well as thecomments submitted at the agency's public workshops and meetingson NRDA issues. Of the 71 Federal Register pages in the finalrule, 37 pages are devoted to addressing comments. "Manycommenters supported the shift in focus from monetization ofdamages to scaling of restoration actions" under the August 1995proposal, NOAA said. "These commenters stated that the reproposedrule properly placed the focus of the NRDA process on theultimate goal of OPA 90--to restore injured natural resources andservices," the agency said. However, according to NOAA, "manyother commenters raised concerns that the restoration approachwould lead to delays and increased assessment costs, sincetrustees would have to undertake studies of both lost servicesand replacement services." In addition, "several commentersargued that the August 1995 proposal was significantly weakerthan the January 1994 proposal, with no justification exceptindustry pressure for an untested restoration-based approachinstead of the well-tested and supported economic valuationprocedures," according to NOAA. Other commenters characterizedthe restoration-based NRDA approach as "an untried theory" that"might be better or worse" than the valuation-based approachoriginally proposed, NOAA said.In defense of the restoration-based NRDA process, NOAA notedthat, under OPA 90, "all damages recovered must be spent on somerestoration activity." Therefore, the NRDA process should focuson evaluating potential restoration actions, NOAA said. "It doesnot benefit the natural resources or the public if monies arecollected without a view toward how they will be spent, norwhether sufficient funds have been collected to implement anymeaningful restoration actions," according to NOAA. The agencyclaimed that, "contrary to some comments, the restorationapproach will generally speed restoration and avoid litigation,by alleviating distrust that claims for monetary damages arespeculative and punitive." According to NOAA, "practicalexperience in implementing the restoration scaling approach inpast cooperative assessments suggests that this approach iseffective in significantly expediting the restoration of injurednatural resources and services." The agency added that "thesebenefits to the environment and public do not come at the expenseof increased assessment costs." Although, under the final rule,"trustees now must assess replacement services in addition tolost services in most incidents," NOAA claimed that, "in general,a net increase in assessment costs will not result, due to boththe cooperative provisions set forth within this rule and theremoval of the requirement that trustees estimate the monetaryvalue of damages."According to NOAA, "the sole intent of the rule is to ensure therestoration of natural resources and services that have beeninjured, destroyed, or lost as a result of an incident." Suchrestoration should occur "where there is a need to do so, andwhere feasible and cost-effective means to accomplish restorationare available," the agency said. The rule's focus on restorationwill "eliminate unneeded assessment studies and preventunnecessary adversarial conflicts over misunderstood goals oftrustees," according to NOAA. The agency claimed that the rule"invites RPs to act cooperatively and responsibly to seekexpeditious and cost-effective restoration" and that itconstrains trustees' actions "to those necessary to achieve OPA'srestoration goals." As a result, according to NOAA, "costs anddamages will not be excessive or unpredictable." For furtherinformation, see pages 439 to 510 of Vol. 61, No. 4 of theFederal Register, or contact: Linda Burlington, Office of GeneralCounsel Natural Resources, NOAA, 1315 East-West Highway,Room 15132, Silver Spring, MD 20910; Tel: 301-713-1217; Fax: 301-713-1229.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'SSOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS.A large but undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from anunderwater pipeline into the Belaya River near the town of Ufa inRussia's Ural mountains on 26 December, when the line ruptured asa result of corrosion, according to Russia's EmergenciesMinistry. Uralsibnefteprovod, the regional oil transport companythat operates the pipeline, shut down the 28-inch-diameter lineafter detecting a drop in its operating pressure. The companyinitially estimated that 100 metric tons of crude oil had leakedfrom the ruptured pipeline, but recent reports from Russia'sITAR-TASS news agency indicate that the spillage may have beenmuch higher. The spilled oil from the pipeline has floweddownstream beneath the frozen surface of the Belaya River and,according to some reports, has reached as far as the Tatarstanregion, which is about 100 miles from Ufa. According to aspokesman for Russia's Emergencies Ministry, response crews haveset fire to the oil in open areas of the river to prevent it fromspreading. In addition, the crews have deployed boom to containthe oil and have used skimming equipment to recover the oilcontained within the boomed areas. As of 7 January, the crews hadrecovered 664 metric tons of an oil-water mixture from the river,including up to 100 metric tons of crude oil. Severe cold andadverse weather conditions have reportedly hampered the cleanupefforts. Although the Belaya River provides drinking water forUfa, the Emergencies Ministry spokesman noted that the spill willprobably not impact Ufa's water supplies, because the pipelinerupture occurred downstream from the town's water intakes on theriver. In a separate incident during 1989, a total of 765 peoplewere killed as a result of a massive explosion in a natural gasliquids pipeline near Ufa (OPB, 17 July 1991, p.8). The incidentoccurred when vapor leaking from the pipeline was ignited by twotrains passing through the vapor cloud.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGINGTANKERS AND BULKERS.Aging oil tankers and bulk carriers will be subjected to morerigorous surveys under major amendments to the InternationalMaritime Organization's (IMO's) 1974 International Convention forthe Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS). The amendments, which tookeffect on 1 January, were adopted during May 1994 by a specialdiplomatic conference of the parties to SOLAS (OPB, 3 June 1994,p.1). At the conference, delegates adopted the amendments as partof three new chapters to SOLAS--Chapters IX, X, and XI.Chapter XI contains the new vessel survey requirements.Chapter X, which contains a code of safety requirements for high-speed vessels, also took effect on 1 January. Chapter IX, whichmakes mandatory IMO's International Safety Management Code, willenter into force on 1 January 1998. "The enhanced program ofinspections was developed by IMO as a result of increasingconcern about the aging of the world merchant shipping fleet,"according to IMO spokesman Roger Kohn. "This is particularly trueof tankers and bulk carriers, the majority of which are nowbetween 15 and 20 years of age," Kohn said. He noted that theenhanced inspections "pay special attention to corrosion." Duringthe inspections, "coatings and tank-corrosion prevention systemsmust be thoroughly checked, and measurements must be carried outto check the thickness of plates," according to Kohn. In additionto mandating new survey requirements, Chapter XI contains threeother regulations intended to improve ship safety. One regulationrequires that all cargo vessels of 300 GT or more and mostpassenger ships obtain a valid IMO ship identification number.Another regulation requires classification societies that performvessel surveys on behalf of flag-state administrations to followguidelines adopted during 1993 by the IMO Assembly. The thirdregulation gives port-state control officers the authority toevaluate the operators of a foreign-flag ship "when there areclear grounds for believing that the master or crew are notfamiliar with essential shipboard procedures relating to thesafety of ships." The port-state officers may detain that vesselif their evaluation shows that the crew has inadequate knowledgeof the vessel's operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSESEDIMENTS.Although oil penetrates to greater depths on beaches with coarsesediments than it does on beaches with fine sediments, oil isless likely to form lasting deposits in coarse sediments than itis in fine sediments, according to a draft report by EnvironmentCanada's Emergencies Science Division. The report, entitledStranded Oil in Coarse Sediment Experiments, presents thepreliminary results of research sponsored by Environment Canadato examine the relationship between sediment particle size andthe penetration and retention of oil in beach sediments.According to the report, "in all test series, oil penetrated togreater depths in coarser sediments." In addition, the reportnoted that, for most types of oil, retention "generally decreasedin coarser sediments." However, the report also said that therelationship between oil retention and sediment particle sizes"differed markedly for the various crude oils tested." In theexperiments, Alaskan North Slope crude oil exhibited "one of themost unusual sediment retention relationships, with moderateretention in finer sediments and very low retention in coarsesediments," the report said. It noted that the oil retention ofAlaskan North Slope crude oil in the experiments was consistentwith the behavior of that type of oil after it spilled from theExxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska, during 1989.According to the report, "of all the oils tested, Alaskan NorthSlope crude oil would be the most likely to freely percolatethrough coarse surface sediments and to be retained in highconcentrations in the underlying fine sediments," the reportsaid. In fact, following the Exxon Valdez spill, "most of thecleanup effort that occurred during 1990, 1991, and 1992 wasdirected towards the cleaning of subsurface oil on coarsesediment beaches with fine underlying sediments, even though thiscoastal type represented a relatively small proportion of thetotal coastline oiled," the report said. For a copy of the draftreport (EE-155), at no cost, contact: Environment Canada,Emergencies Science Division, 3439 River Road, Ottawa,Ontario K1A 0H3; Tel: 613-991-1114; Fax: 613-991-9485.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WORLD SPILL BRIEFS.An undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from a pipelineoutside the city of Araquita in northeastern Colombia on8 January, after rebel troops sabotaged the pipeline withexplosives, according to a spokesman for Ecopetrol, the state-owned company that operates the line. Although Ecopetrol shutdown the pipeline after the attack, the company has been unableto begin repairing the damaged segment due to continuingskirmishes between Colombian government soldiers and rebel forcesfrom the National Liberation Army. According to the Ecopetrolspokesman, the National Liberation Army, which has carried outnumerous acts of sabotage in recent years against the company'soil pipelines, claimed responsibility for the recent pipelineattack.A 32-inch-diameter pipeline ruptured due to corrosion and spilledan undetermined amount of crude oil on 24 December about 60 mileswest of Ukhta in the Russia's northern Komi Republic, accordingto Russia's ITAR-TASS news agency. Crews from Transneft, thestate-owned company that operates the pipeline, have reportedlyreplaced a 165-foot-long section of the damaged line. Althoughnews reports initially indicated that the spilled oil from thepipeline had contaminated the Ropcha River, Transneft officialshave since said that the oil did not enter the river. Transnefthas also estimated that it will take at least three weeks toclean up the spill. One of the largest pipeline spills in worldhistory occurred during the fall of 1994 near Usinsk in the KomiRepublic, about 200 miles northeast of the recent pipelinerupture (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994, p.1). In April 1995, a natural gaspipeline exploded in a wooded area about 8 miles outside ofUkhta, sending flames hundreds of feet into the air and burningseveral acres of forest (OPB, 5 May 1995, p.6).The 97,689-DWT Bahamian tanker Alandia Wave spilled an estimated500 to 1,000 gallons of crude oil on 21 December while loadingoil at the British Petroleum terminal on the Sullom Voe inShetland, U.K., according to a spokesman for the Shetland IslandsCouncil. The oil apparently leaked from a crack in the tanker'sNo. 1 port cargo tank, but surveyors have not yet determined whatcaused the crack. After determining the source of the spill, theAlandia Wave's crew was able to minimize the spillage bytransferring oil from the No. 1 tank to other tanks aboard thevessel. Although response crews from the Shetland Islands Counciland British Petroleum deployed boom to contain the spill, a smallamount of the spilled oil came ashore on a beach at Sella Ness.The government of Singapore recently ordered Singapore RefiningCo. to pay a fine of $150,000 Singapore ($1.00 Singapore =$0.70 U.S.) in connection with an oil spill that occurred on25 August 1995 from a pipeline at the company's refinery in PalauMerlimau, off Singapore's southwestern coast, according to newsreports (OPB, 8 Sept. 1995, p.7). About 300 metric tons of heavyfuel oil leaked from the pipeline through a valve that wasaccidentally left open during an oil transfer operation. Thespilled oil formed a 60-square-kilometer slick and came ashore atbeaches on the tourist resort island of Sentosa, about12 kilometers east of the refinery. An estimated $1.7 millionSingapore was spent to clean up the spill.Back to Headline List CopyrightGOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE.NRC and Edison Chouest Offshore Inc. of Galliano, Louisiana, havereached an agreement in principle to integrate Chouest's staffand fleet of offshore vessels into NRC's network of oil spillresponse resources. According to NRC, Chouest currently employs astaff of about 600 people and operates a fleet of 57 vessels inthe Gulf of Mexico, as well as on the U.S. Atlantic and Pacificcoasts. With the addition of the Chouest fleet, NRC's MarineResource Network now consists of more than 800 crew boats, supplyvessels, utility vessels, barges, and tugboats throughout theUnited States. "We are pleased to be working with Chouest, whichis represented by a highly professional group of employees,"commented NRC President Mark Miller. "NRC believes that the keyto rapid response to an oil spill is access to people,specialized equipment, and marine resources," Miller said. Forfurther information, contact: Mark Miller, NRC, 460 EdwardsAvenue, P.O. Box 609, Calverton, NY 11933; Tel: 516-369-8644;Fax: 516-369-4908.In the first application of its "direct final rule" process, USCGrecently issued a final rule to remove the text of theInternational Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea(COLREGS) from the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).According to USCG, the COLREGS text, which is found in 33 CFRPart 81, duplicates text also found in the United States Code andis therefore unnecessary. Under the direct final rule process,USCG may issue a final rule without first publishing it as aproposed rule, provided that the agency does not expect toreceive any adverse comments on the final rule. If USCG receivesno adverse comments on the final rule within a specified timeperiod, the rule takes effect. If adverse comments are receivedduring that period, USCG must publish a notice in the FederalRegister retracting or modifying the rule. The recent final ruleremoving the COLREGS text from the CFR will take effect on1 April, unless adverse comments are received. For furtherinformation, see pages 8 and 9 of Vol. 61, No. 1 of the FederalRegister, or contact: Diane Schneider Appleby, USCG Headquarters,2100 Second Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-267-0352.The U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT's) Research andSpecial Programs Administration (RSPA) plans to hold a publicworkshop on 18 January in Washington, D.C., to solicit commentson the agency's recently proposed criteria for identifying"unusually sensitive" environmental areas in close proximity togas and hazardous liquid pipelines (OPB, 16 June 1995, p.8).According to RSPA, many federal, state, and local regulations,including RSPA's current rules on pipelines that carry oil andother hazardous liquids, refer to "environmentally sensitive"areas without clearly defining what constitutes such areas.Persons who are unable to attend the workshop may submit writtencomments; these comments are due by 5 February. For furtherinformation, see pages 342 to 344 of Vol. 61, No. 3 of theFederal Register, or contact: Christina Sames, RSPA, DOT,400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590-0001; Tel: 202-366-4561.On 28 December, USCG issued a supplemental notice of proposedrulemaking (SNPRM) on structural measures designed to reduce theamount of oil spilled from non-double-hull tankers until theirmandatory retirement from service in U.S. waters under USCG'sdouble-hull regulations (OPB, 29 Dec. 1995, p.5). Although OPBhad expected to provide full coverage of the SNPRM in this issue,the release of USCG's final guidelines on the OSRO classificationprocess and NOAA's final NRDA rule has delayed OPB's coverage ofthe SNPRM until next issue.For further information on any article in this issue, call theOPB Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-15IA086-000616-B017-188http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003002 text/html 43005HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:28:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:13 GMTContent-length: 42818Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev21.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH (1059 words) OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP (1228 words) BRIEFS PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER. (378 words) M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY. (296 words) MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS. (1395 words) HMIR HOTLINE. (464 words) CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES (1075 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGHAs the second federal government shutdown of FY 1996 entered itsthird week, EPA Administrator Carol Browner announced on 2 Januarythat the Superfund monies for FY 1995 have been depleted, and thatabout 2,400 EPA employees working under the Superfund programnationwide will join 14,500 EPA workers who are already onfurlough. According to EPA, the furlough of the 2,400 Superfundworkers will result in the shutdown of operations at 450 to650 hazardous waste sites nationwide--National Priorities List(NPL) sites and non-NPL sites--and will leave a total of about80 EPA employees to oversee any remaining operations. According toEPA's initial estimates, the shutdown of operations at Superfundsites also threatens the jobs of 10,000 private-sector workers, whocould be laid off because the government is not able to make timelypayments to their employers. The 10,000 private-sector workersconsist of 5,000 employees of cleanup companies working directlyunder contract with EPA and another 5,000 employees working oncleanups that, while led by potentially responsible parties (PRPs),still require EPA oversight."If the program is dormant for long, private companies will beforced to make permanent staff changes, which will seriouslyundermine our work in restoring the environment," according toJonathan Curtis, president and chief executive officer of CDMFederal Programs Corp. in Fairfax, Virginia. By the end of the weekof 1 January, "private companies will begin making these staffingassessments if the shutdown is not concluded," said Curtis, who ischairman of the Hazardous Waste Action Coalition's (HWAC's)Government Affairs Committee. "Just as Superfund is beginning toproduce results, the plug is pulled," he added. William Epstein,director of government affairs at Roy F. Weston, Inc. in WestChester, Pennsylvania, lamented that the current governmentshutdown will actually increase the overall costs of the Superfundprogram. "We have been told by EPA officials that the mobilizationand demobilization by federal contractors will cost more than if wecontinued work," Epstein noted. "This shutdown will achieve nosavings." According to an EPA source, implementing the shutdown ofthe Superfund program--an operation that began on 2 January--isexpected to take at least five days.In connection with the government shutdown, HWAC's legal counsel,the law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius in Washington, D.C., has issueda white paper alerting cleanup contractors of the legal issues andrisks that they face, and their options for response, "in the eventof a lapse in the annual appropriations that fund their federalagency customers." Contractors that do not receive payment fortheir services "have the right to suspend their performance," thewhite paper said, and depending on the clauses in their contractswith EPA and other federal agencies, "they may or may not beentitled to an equitable adjustment for the suspension period ifand when more funds are allotted to their contracts." Othercontractors that do not lose funding altogether but otherwise facedelays and disruptions because of the shutdown may not be entitledto compensation "because the lapse in appropriations could bedeemed a sovereign, as opposed to a contractual, act of thegovernment," the white paper said. For a copy of the white paper,contact: HWAC, No. 802, 1015 15th Street, N.W., Washington,DC 20005; Tel: 202-347-7474.The troubles of federal contractors will not end even if anothercontinuing resolution is approved soon. During FY 1996, which beganon 1 October 1995, two continuing resolutions have been required tomaintain operations at those federal agencies and departments,including EPA and the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State,whose FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved. Thosecontinuing resolutions have funded operations at levels belowFY 1995 appropriations, thereby preventing agency and departmentmanagers--many of whom are expecting dramatic cuts when theirFY 1996 appropriations are finally approved--from making reliablespending plans for the current fiscal year. According to an HMIRsource, developing final FY 1996 budgets for as-yet-unfundedagencies and departments could take up to two more months--approaching the halfway point in the current fiscal year--leavingonly six or seven months for the agencies to spend their monies."Getting everything going again in an efficient way will be verydifficult" under those circumstances, the source told HMIR. "It'snot a good way to run a government."The impact of the federal government shutdown on the environmentalindustry is not limited to suspended EPA contracts. Key departmentsinvolved in the promotion of environmental exports--including theDepartment of Commerce (DOC), the Department of State, and theAgency for International Development (AID)--remain unfunded, andexport-promotion projects involving those entities and private-sector organizations are imperiled. The Environmental ExportCouncil (EEC) in Washington, D.C., currently has cooperativeagreements with AID and DOC to develop environmental exportprograms, but without the federal funding for the programs, "we'regoing to have to quit working on these projects reasonably soon,"said John Mizroch, EEC's executive director. In addition, EEC mayhave to lay off people who are working on a project with the U.S.-Asia Environmental Partnership (USAEP) that would have involvedbringing officials of Asian nations to the United States to reviewU.S. environmental technologies and products. "The governmentshutdown comes at a very unfortunate time," Mizroch told HMIR,"because it holds up these important initiatives that will helpU.S. business."Congressional Republicans have linked the approval of any newcontinuing resolution with the White House's concession on keyelements of a balanced-budget plan--notably on Congress's proposedMedicare cuts and tax relief. On 2 January, however, SenateMajority Leader Robert Dole (Republican-Kansas) expressed hisfrustration with the impasse and, departing from other Republicanleaders, engineered passage of a continuing resolution in theSenate. On 3 January, the House rejected the measure. At presstime, however, the House had softened its stance slightly andindicated that it was prepared to approve a plan to put about280,000 federal employees in several programs back to work, until26 January in some cases and until 15 March in others. The affectedprograms include Meals on Wheels, the administration ofunemployment insurance, visitor services at national parks, and Aidto Families with Dependent Children. The House plan would notprovide money to run those federal agencies and departments whoseFY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved, including EPA,DOC, the Department of Interior, and the Securities and ExchangeCommission.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUPThe story of the hazardous waste site that was largely responsiblefor giving birth to the federal Superfund program neared conclusionlast month as the federal government and Occidental Chemical Corp.reached an agreement resolving Occidental's cleanup liabilities atthe Love Canal site near Niagara Falls, New York. Under the termsof a settlement that was filed on 21 December in the U.S. DistrictCourt in Buffalo, New York, Occidental will pay the federalgovernment a total of $129 million, consisting of $101 million thatthe government has spent on cleanup and $28 million in interestaccrued during 16 years of litigation. The settlement "should senda message of federal persistence and tenacity," said AttorneyGeneral Janet Reno in announcing the settlement. EPA AdministratorCarol Browner noted that "the Love Canal settlement underscoresthis Administration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters--not the American people--pick up the tab for cleaning up toxicwaste dumps."The settlement must still be approved by U.S. District Court JudgeJohn Curtin, who has presided over the 16-year-old case since thefederal government filed its initial lawsuit against Occidental inDecember 1979. The lawsuit sought cleanup and related damages,including punitive damages, under the Resource Conservation andRecovery Act (RCRA), the River and Harbors Act, and otherenvironmental laws. The state of New York subsequently filed itsown lawsuit against Occidental. Both complaints were later joinedand amended to include cost-recovery claims under the ComprehensiveEnvironmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),which was enacted in December 1980 under the shadow of the LoveCanal incident and the increasingly controversial problem ofabandoned toxic waste sites. In a settlement approved by JudgeCurtin in July 1994, Occidental agreed to pay New York a total ofnearly $100 million and to perform long-term operation andmaintenance of the remediation systems at the Love Canal site.Occidental Chemical became involved in the Love Canal saga as aresult of its acquisition of Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corp. Inthe early 1940s, Hooker leased and then acquired an uncompletedcanal in the Niagara Falls area--the so-called Love Canal. Until1953, the company dumped about 25,000 tons of chemical waste intothe canal and nearby pits. Hooker subsequently buried the wastesand sold the property to the Niagara Falls School Board for $1,with the stipulation that the board would not hold Hooker legallyresponsible for any subsequent problems that the buried wastesmight cause. From the 1960s through the mid-1970s, complaints bylocal residents about foul odors in the area evolved intocomplaints about chemicals leaking into the basements of nearbyhomes and surfacing in yards, and ultimately into complaints abouthealth problems. Responding to the complaints, the FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA) undertook the relocation of239 families in the Love Canal area in 1978; President Jimmy Carterordered the evacuation of another 800 Love Canal families inDecember 1980. FEMA--and later EPA--also took response actions atthe site, consisting of constructing a clay cap over the canal toprevent air emissions and installing a leachate collection systemto prevent the migration of chemical wastes from the canal.A local school and several homes were subsequently demolished, andcontaminated sewer systems and nearby creek sediments were removedor cleaned up; the leachate collection system is still operating.In June 1990, the Love Canal Revitalization Agency adopted a planfor resettling homes in the area, and the first homes went up forsale later that year. In 1992, the Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment (HUD) agreed to provide mortgage insurance for the LoveCanal properties, thereby increasing the pace of home sales in thearea. To date, all but 32 of the 233 homes that were available havebeen sold or are under contract for sale, according to theDepartment of Justice (DOJ).Under the settlement between Occidental and the federal government,the company will pay EPA a total of $102 million covering theagency's response costs plus interest, while the rest of the$129 million will go to FEMA for its role in the response action.The settlement also resolves Occidental's claims that, in additionto Hooker, the U.S. Army dumped chemical wastes into Love Canal andtherefore should be held partially responsible for the cleanupcosts. Without admitting any guilt on behalf of the Army, thefederal government agreed to assume $8 million of the Love Canalresponse costs.In announcing the settlement, federal officials took specific aimat Congressional proposals to provide liability relief topotentially responsible parties (PRPs) through reimbursements ortax credits amounting to as much as 50 percent of PRP costsassociated with the cleanup of wastes disposed of before 1980(Senate proposal) or 1987 (House proposal). According to LoisSchiffer, assistant attorney general for DOJ's Environment andNatural Resources Division, such proposals could give Occidental atax credit for as much as $64.5 million in connection with thecompany's Love Canal liabilities under CERCLA. A reimbursementsystem of the type proposed by Congress "would destroy thefundamental principle that a polluter should pay to clean up itsown mess," Schiffer noted. EPA's Browner declared that "eliminationof the retroactive liability provisions in the Superfund law--assome have proposed--would have let this polluter off the hook."Lois Gibbs, executive director of the Citizens Clearinghouse forHazardous Waste in Falls Church, Virginia, said that she was happywith the settlement. "It has got to send a chill up the spine ofmany others who pollute and pretend it is not a problem," saidGibbs, the former Love Canal housewife whose organizing effortshelped draw national attention to the area's contamination. Astrong proponent of the polluter-pays principal, Gibbs sharplycriticized Congressional attempts to reimburse PRPs for portions oftheir cleanup liabilities. "The only way Occidental and others willchange their way of behaving will be if it costs them more topollute--to do harm than to do good," she told HMIR. "Instead ofcutting the costs for those who have not complied with theSuperfund law, Congress should reward those who did comply, andthose who have improved their environmental practices," shesuggested.Beyond addressing the polluter-pays issue, the Love Canal case doesnot provide much direction for efforts to reform the Superfundprogram, according to Occidental attorney Steven Yablonsky, apartner at Piper & Marbury in Baltimore, Maryland. Love Canal "isnot one of those sites that had hundreds of responsible parties,"said Yablonsky, who noted that multi-PRP sites have presented themost vexing liability problems under CERCLA. Yablonsky added thata key development in the case was Judge Curtin's ruling in March1994 that Hooker's waste disposal practices were consistent withindustry's practices at the time, and that Occidental thereforeshould not be held liable for punitive damages in the Love Canalcase. "There couldn't have been a settlement without that ruling,"Yablonsky told HMIR.While Occidental has now settled the major CERCLA claims of thefederal government and the state of New York, the company is stillnegotiating with the city of Niagara Falls and the Niagara FallsSchool Board to determine the cleanup liabilities of those twomunicipal entities. In addition, Occidental is still engaged inpersonal-injury litigation with numerous Niagara County residents,and it is seeking coverage of its cleanup liabilities at Love Canalfrom its insurers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENTALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.Far from fulfilling proponents' assurances that the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement (NAFTA) would result in an improvedenvironment along the U.S.-Mexico border, trade between the U.S.and Mexico under NAFTA has exacerbated border-area problems throughan increase in industrial activity, according to a recent report byPublic Citizen in Washington, D.C. The report concluded thatNAFTA's advocates--notably the Clinton Administration--inaccuratelypredicted that NAFTA would lead to increased investment throughoutMexico and, as a result, less concentration of "maquiladora"facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border. Maquiladoras are Mexico-based manufacturing facilities that are owned by foreign firms. ThePublic Citizen report found that, largely as a result of thedevaluation of the Mexican peso one year ago, nationwide investmentin Mexico's infrastructure and industrial base has failed tomaterialize. At the same time, the number of maquiladora facilitiesin the border area has increased by 20 percent from more than546,000 to nearly 690,000 facilities since NAFTA took effect inJanuary 1994, despite an economic crisis that has resulted in a netloss of 1.6 million jobs throughout Mexico. The report noted thatthe increased maquiladora activity along the U.S. Mexico border,coupled with a lack of investment in pollution-controlinfrastructure and the Mexican government's lack of support forenvironmental enforcement, has resulted in increased illegaldumping of hazardous wastes, increased air and water pollution, andworsening health problems, including increased incidences ofhepatitis, cholera, and certain birth defects. According to thereport, the Commission on Environmental Cooperation--the panelestablished under NAFTA to rule on any complaints that the NAFTAnations are not meeting their environmental obligations--has notyet heard a single case involving Mexico's failure to enforce itsenvironmental laws in the border area. "NAFTA begins its third yearsinking in a sea of broken promises relating to the environment,public health, jobs, and wages," said Public Citizen President JoanClaybrook in announcing the report on 2 January. "Not only is NAFTAnot meeting these promises, it has actually made conditions worsethan before it took effect two years ago," she said. For a copy ofthe 110-page Public Citizen report, entitled NAFTA's BrokenPromises: The Border Betrayed, at a cost of $15, contact: CustomerService Department, Public Citizen, 1600 20th Street, N.W.,Washington, DC 20009; Tel: 202-588-1000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALEQUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.M4 Environmental L.P., a joint venture between Lockheed Martin andMolten Metal Technology, Inc. (MMT) in Waltham, Massachusetts, hasbegun operations at the first commercial-scale facility to useMMT's Catalytic Extraction Process (CEP) for recycling hazardouswastes. The M4 facility, which is located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee,will use a variant of the CEP technology, known as Quantum-CEP,that is designed to handle radioactive and mixed wastes. TheQuantum-CEP process uses a molten metal bath to break downradioactive and mixed wastes into their constituents, recoversvarious useful materials, such as metals and gases, and stabilizesthe radioactive materials for final disposal. Subsequent to thestart-up of operations at the M4 facility, MMT announced that ithas expanded its original technology license to M4 by allowing thejoint venture to process mixed wastes from commercial generators.Previously, M4 held a license to process only mixed wastesgenerated by the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department ofDefense (DOD), and U.S. Enrichment Corp. In a separateannouncement, MMT said that another commercial-scale Quantum-CEPfacility in Oak Ridge--this one jointly operated by MMT andWestinghouse subsidiary Scientific Ecology Group, Inc. (SEG)--hasreceived all of its required regulatory permits and is ready tobegin operations. The MMT-SEG facility is expected to process itsfirst wastes this month and will handle up to 130,000 cubic feet oflow-level ion exchange resins per year. "I am happy to announcethat this facility is available on schedule, and we expecttremendous success with volume reduction and recycling of thisdifficult waste," said SEG President Bud Arrowsmith in a statementon 19 December. William Haney III, MMT's president and chiefexecutive officer, noted that the MMT-SEG facility "is the largestand most sophisticated system in the world for handling thisdifficult radioactive material."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.Allstate GeoTek, a privately held environmental services firm basedin Linden, New Jersey, has acquired Zecco, Inc. from Metcalf & EddyTechnologies, Inc. in Wakefield, Massachusetts, for an undisclosedamount of cash. Privately held Allstate GeoTek is a $22-millioncompany that provides a variety of environmental services,including remediation and sewer inspection and cleaning, inDelaware, New Jersey, and southeastern Pennsylvania. Zecco, whichis operating at a run rate of about $6.5 million, providesremediation and emergency response services and operates ahazardous waste storage and transfer facility in Northborough,Massachusetts.Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group, a subsidiary of McDermottInternational, Inc. in New Orleans, Louisiana, has acquired theassets of Joy Environmental Technologies, Inc. from HarnischefegerIndustries, Inc. in Brookfield, Wisconsin. The terms of thetransaction were not disclosed. Houston-based Joy Environmentalmanufactures air-pollution-control equipment--such as baghouses,ash-handling systems, electrostatic precipitators, and flue-gasdesulfurization systems--for electric utilities and industrialcompanies. According to Babcock & Wilcox, Joy Environmental's lineof ash-handling systems will be transferred to Diamond PowerSpecialty Co., a Babcock & Wilcox unit that specializes inmanufacturing boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment.Barringer Laboratories, Inc. in Golden, Colorado, announced that ithas purchased 647,238 shares of its common stock from its sistercorporation Barringer Technologies, Inc. According to BarringerLaboratories, the stock was acquired in exchange for $509,048 in"intercompany obligations" and another $300,000 in cash. Inaddition, 88,260 shares of Barringer Laboratories' common stockwere placed in an escrow account and will be returned to BarringerTechnologies if Barringer Laboratories achieves certain earningsgoals for 1996. "This transaction is the first step in a long-termplan to grow and increase the stockholders' value in thelaboratory," said Robert Walker, chairman and chief executiveofficer of Barringer Laboratories. As a result of the transaction,"each current shareholder realizes an increase of 39.1 percent intheir stock ownership of the company," Walker noted.Black & Veatch in Kansas City, Missouri, announced that it hasincreased its revolving credit facility with a consortium ofinternational banks from $150 million to $175 million. According toP.J. Adam, Black & Veatch's chairman and chief executive officer,the expanding credit facility will allow the company to borrowshort-term funds and issue longer-term letters of credit to financeits worldwide engineering and construction projects. "Our continuedsuccess in obtaining international work depends on having thenecessary credit support," Adam noted. Black & Veatch'sinternational projects accounted for more than 50 percent of thecompany's estimated $1.1 billion in revenues during 1995.Brownfield Development Corp. (BDC) in Chicago, Illinois, andLandBank in Denver, Colorado, have established a strategic allianceto provide services related to the cleanup and redevelopment of so-called "brownfields" sites--abandoned industrial properties thatface difficulties in redevelopment because of actual or perceivedcontamination at the sites. Under the alliance, the two companieswill jointly identify and assess brownfields properties and makethe financing, insurance, and legal arrangements to remediate thosesites and return them to economic usefulness. BDC currentlyprovides those types of services in the Midwest, while LandBankprovides similar services from its offices in New York City,Denver, and San Francisco. In addition to increasing BDC'sgeographic coverage, the alliance with LandBank will "expand ourdevelopment capabilities, increase our capital reserves, and focuson the acquisition of larger sites," according to BDC ManagerRobert Colangelo. LandBank President Bill Lynott noted that "we arevery excited about the opportunity to apply our environmentalunderwriting and proprietary insurance products to BDC's focusedprogram in the metropolitan Chicago area," where the brownfieldsredevelopment market is especially active.Envirometrics, Inc. in Charleston, South Carolina, and ZellwegerAnalytics, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Zellweger LuwaOrganization of Switzerland, have reached an agreement wherebyZellweger Analytics will have the exclusive worldwide rights tomarket Envirometrics' ACT Monitoring Card System. The ACT systemuses an electronic reader and "passive monitoring cards" to detectthe presence of hazardous chemicals in industrial environments andto conduct analyses of air samples in real time. ZellwegerAnalytics "is an international leader in safety, health, andenvironmental products, and we look forward to new technology-partnership developments and synergistic opportunities for the twocompanies," said Richard Bennett, Envirometrics' president andchief executive officer.Environmental Technologies Corp., a provider of refrigerantrecovery and recycling services and equipment in Lakewood, NewJersey, has acquired all of the outstanding stock of FulCircleRecyclers, Inc. in New York, New York, a recycler of ballasts fromfluorescent lights, in exchange for 1.15-million shares of newlyissued Environmental Technologies common stock. As part of thetransaction, Brin McCagg and Mitchell Dong, two of FulCircle'sprincipals, have been appointed as chief executive officer andpresident, respectively, of Environmental Technologies. The two mentake over those positions from George Cannan, who will remainchairman of the company. FulCircle expects to report revenuestotaling $6 million during 1995, while Environmental Technologieshad revenues of $28.6 million during the fiscal year ending on30 September 1995.EnviroSource, Inc. in Stamford, Connecticut, has entered into anew, $100-million credit agreement with NationsBank and CreditLyonnaise. According to EnviroSource, the new, five-year agreementreplaces an existing $60-million agreement with the two banks andprovides EnviroSource with the financing to redeem all of itsClass G, $7.25 Cumulative Preferred Stock. The Class G stock is due15 July 1996. As a result of the new credit agreement,"EnviroSource will have minimal debt maturities over the next sixyears, which will allow us to reinvest our cash flows fromoperations into the business," according to George Fuehrer,EnviroSource's senior vice president of planning. The company plansto focus that reinvestment on internal growth rather than on growththrough mergers and acquisitions, "although we are not ruling thatavenue out," Fuehrer told HMIR.Heidemij NV in Arnhem, the Netherland, and Eptisa, a consulting andengineering firm in Madrid, Spain, have agreed to merge in atransaction under which Heidemij and Eptisa's management will eachacquire 50 percent of Eptisa's stock from the company's singleshareholder, Banco Central Hispano. As part of the transaction,Eptisa will sell its non-core activities in the engineering andmaintenance of power stations. Eptisa, which specializes in water,environmental, and infrastructure engineering, derived revenuestotaling $80 million from these core businesses during 1994. "Wehave been working with Eptisa since 1992 in a joint venture,Ecogest, aimed at providing environmental services to industry,"said Heidemij chairman Frans Luttmer. "This successful venture isnow the starting point for a much larger cooperation between thetwo companies." In a separate action, Heidemij's subsidiaryGeraghty & Miller has acquired Environmental Strategies Ltd., anenvironmental consulting and engineering firm with offices in Leedsand Chester, England, and has merged Environmental Standards withG&M International, Inc. in Cambridge. According to G&MInternational Manager Brian Cook, "by merging with EnvironmentalStrategies' staff, we will be able to expand our auditing and due-diligence work and have a strong presence in the Northwest regionof the United Kingdom."Philip Environmental, Inc. in Hamilton, Ontario, and ZenonEnvironmental, Inc. in Burlington, Ontario, have reached anagreement whereby Philip Environmental will acquire Zenon'slaboratory business. The terms of the transaction were notdisclosed. Zenon's laboratory operations generated an estimated$12 million in revenues during 1995 and consist of facilities inBurlington and in Montreal, Quebec, and Vancouver, BritishColumbia. According to Philip Environmental, the addition of thethree Zenon laboratories to Philip's existing laboratory operationin Mississauga, Ontario, will give Philip the largest network ofenvironmental laboratories in Canada. The acquisition of the Zenonlaboratory facilities is expected to be completed by 15 January.Philip Environmental is currently engaged in an aggressiveacquisition campaign and recently acquired CyanoKEM and ThermalKEMfrom REP Environmental Processes, which is the former AmericanNuKEM (HMIR, 8 Dec. 1995, p.2).UTILX Corp., a drilling firm based in Kent, Washington, hasannounced that FlowMole Environmental Services Corp., a jointventure between UTILX and Unocal subsidiary CERT EnvironmentalCorp., has begun to "wind down" its remediation operations.According to UTILX President Craig Davies, the decision to ceasethe operations of FlowMole is based on Unocal's decision toterminate all joint-venture relationships connected toenvironmental work and exit the environmental business. FlowMolewas established in 1994 to market innovative remediation approachesusing CERT Environmental's remediation technologies and UTILX'shorizontal guided drilling technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HMIR HOTLINE.Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO), DOE'sEnvironmental Restoration Management Contractor at the former FeedMaterials Production Center near Fernald, Ohio, is requesting firmsto submit expressions of interest in supplying a vitrificationfurnace to process radioactive wastes that are currently stored atthe Fernald facility. According to FERMCO, the furnace must becapable of producing 20 to 30 tons of vitrified waste per day.While FERMCO does not expect to issue the request for proposals(RFP) for the vitrification project until April, it is requestingthat parties indicate by 15 January their interest in supplying thevitrification furnace. For further information, contact: Bob May,FERMCO, Mail Stop 52-4, P.O. Box 538704, Cincinnati, OH 45253-8704;Tel: 513-648-4322; Fax: 513-648-4900.VECTRA Technologies, Inc., a San Ramon, California-based providerof radioactive waste management and other engineering services tothe energy industry, announced on 28 December that it istemporarily suspending all construction and start-up activitiesrelated to its EnviroGlass vitrification program. According to RayFortney, VECTRA's president and chief executive officer, theinterruption in the company's progress towards developing theEnviroGlass technology "was necessary because delays in placing ourTransportable Vitrification Unit at our lead client's site made itimpossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-level waste that we are contracted to process." Fortney noted thatVECTRA is negotiating with the client to remove the low-levelwastes and dispose of them through a subcontractor, "but if we arenot successful in these negotiations, we may be forced to acceptcontract cancellation." Fortney said that the company will continueto pursue new projects involving the EnviroGlass technology.CompuChem Environmental Corp. in Research Triangle Park, NorthCarolina, has announced that it is seeking to acquire an analyticallaboratory to merge into its facility at Research Triangle Park(RTP). CompuChem said that it plans to transfer the laboratoryequipment and technical personnel of the acquired laboratory to itsRTP facility while maintaining any existing sales offices that theacquired company may operate. "Our philosophy is to keep it allunder one roof, so you can have all your certifications,sophisticated equipment, and experienced staff in one place, andthereby better serve your customers," according to CompuChemPresident Kees Verkerk. He said that the primary purpose of theacquisition is to expand the company's business, which is currentlyconcentrated in the federal sector, into the industrial market.According to Verkerk, the 55,000-square-foot RTP facility is one ofthe largest laboratories in the United States, employing up to200 people during its peak seasons. For further information,contact: CompuChem Environmental Corp., 3306 Chapel Hill/NelsonHighway, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709; Tel: 919-406-1601.For further information on these brief hotline items or any articlein this issue, call the HMIR Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIESKey: * = Small business set-aside.Sols. N47408-96-R-6305 and N47408-96-R-6309 to submit proposals tothe Navy for innovative assessment, cleanup, and pollution-controltechnologies. For further information, call Rosalie Hammonds atTel: 805-982-5097, or contact: Commanding Officer, NAVFACContracts, Naval Construction Battalion Center, Building 41, 100023rd Avenue, Port Hueneme, CA 93043-4301; Attn: Code 2711.(Deadline: 2/2/96.)Sol. DACA87-96-R-0008 to locate, identify, and dispose of ordnanceand explosives at current and former military installationsthroughout the United States. For further information, call AnitaPrince at Tel: 205-895-1156, or contact: Army Engineering andSupport Center, 4820 University Square, Huntsville, AL 35816-1822;Attn: CEHNC-CT-D. (Deadline: 2/23/96.)Sol. F08650 to study the degradation of chemicals that the Armymust destroy under the Chemical Weapons Convention. For furtherinformation, call John Hammerling at Tel: 407-494-7092, or contact:45th Contracting Squadron/LGCXA, 1201 Minuteman Street, Patrick AirForce Base, FL 32925-3237. (Deadline: 1/26/96.)Sol. HCET009 to evaluate concrete-surface decontaminationtechnologies for the Hemispheric Center for EnvironmentalTechnology at Florida International University in Miami, FL. Forfurther information, call M.A. Ebadian at Tel: 305-348-2569, orcontact: Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology, FloridaInternational University, Room 458, ECS Building, UniversityCampus, Miami, FL 33199. (Deadline: 1/30/96.)Sol. DAAL01-96-Q-3001 to provide environmental and safetyengineering services at the Army Research Laboratory located atFort Monmouth, NJ. For further information, call Mike Watershied atTel: 908-427-4936, or contact: Fort Monmouth Site Contracts Branch,Operations Directorate, Army Research Laboratory, Fort Monmouth, NJ07703-5601; Attn: AMSRL-OP-FM-PR(KAS). (Deadline: 1/17/96.)*Sol. SP4400-96-R-0005 to remove hazardous materials from theDefense Reutilization and Marketing Service (DRMS) offices inRichmond, VA, and surrounding locations and dispose of thematerials. For further information, call Evon Boyer at Tel: 616-961-4406, or contact: DRMS, 74 North Washington Avenue, BattleCreek, MI 49017-3092; Attn: DRMS-PHS. (Deadline: 2/15/96.)*Two solicitations to provide environmental services at U.S. PostalService facilities in Georgia, Tennessee, and other southeasternstates. Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For furtherinformation, call Quincie Naylor at Tel: 770-454-0632, or contact:Facilities Service Office, U.S. Postal Service, Suite 300, 4000DeKalb Technology Parkway, Atlanta, GA 30340-2799. (Deadline:1/22/96.)RFP 509-67-96 to pick up medical wastes at the Department ofVeterans Affairs Medical Center in Augusta, GA, and dispose of thewastes. For further information, call Sylvia Henry at Tel: 706-731-7175, or contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service(90C), Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, One FreedomWay, Augusta, GA 30904-6285. (Deadline: 2/9/96.)Solicitation to provide environmental services at various locationswithin the Louisville District of the Army Corps of Engineers.Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For furtherinformation, call Sharon Evans at Tel: 502-582-6208, or contact:Army Corps of Engineers, Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr.Martin Luther King Jr. Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline:1/19/96.)Sol. DE-RP65-96WA13322 to provide architectural and engineeringservices, including environmental engineering services, at WesternArea Power Administration facilities in AZ, CA, CO, IA, KS, MN, MT,ND, NE, NM, NV, SD, UT, and WY. Interested firms should submit SF254 and 255. For further information, Dorothy Paquet at Tel: 303-275-1529, or contact: Western Area Power Administration, P.O. Box3402, Golden, CO 80401; Attn: A1520. (Deadline: 1/10/96.)Sol. 554-27-96 to provide emergency response services to theDepartment of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Denver, CO. Forfurther information, call Jack Gregorio at Tel: 303-393-4690, orcontact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service (90C),Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1055 ClermontStreet, Denver, CO 80220. (Deadline: 2/7/96.)Sol. F05611-96-R-0211 to provide environmental engineering servicesat the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado. Interested firms shouldsubmit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call Shirley McCoyat Tel: 719-472-2734, or contact: Operational Contracting Office,Lobby Area, 8110 Industrial Drive, U.S. Air Force Academy, CO80840-2315. (Deadline: 2/1/96.)Sol. N68711-96-C-2079 to prepare an environmental impact statementin connection with base-closure activities at the Naval ShipyardComplex in Long Beach, CA. Interested firms should submit SF 254and 255. For further information, call Kathy Luhmann at Tel: 619-532-2721, or contact: Naval Facilities Engineering Command,Southwest Division, 1220 Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187;Attn: Code 0211. (Deadline: 1/22/96.)Solicitations to prepare environmental impact statements forvarious military preparedness activities at the Naval Air WeaponsStation in China Lake, CA (N68711-96-C-2089), and at the Naval AirWarfare Center in Point Mugu, CA (N68711-96-C-20-90). For furtherinformation, call Nancy Trent at Tel: 619-532-2853, or contact:Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Southwest Division, 1220Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187; Attn: Code 0211.(Deadlines: N68711-96-C-2089, 1/30/96; N68711-96-C-2090, 1/25/96.)Sol. F04700-96-B-0014 to perform laboratory analyses of wastewaterat Edwards Air Force Base, CA. For further information, call TamiaTrue at Tel: 805-277-3900, or contact: Directorate of Contracting,Air Force Flight Test Center/PKAB, 5 South Wolfe Avenue, EdwardsAir Force Base, CA 93524-1185. (Deadline: Not specified; analyticallaboratory must be located within 100 miles of Edwards Air ForceBase.)Sol. DTCG88-96-B-6AL262 to install and operate a bioventing systemat a Coast Guard facility in San Diego, CA. For furtherinformation, call William Obershaw at Tel: 510-535-7236, orcontact: Contracting Officer, Civil Engineering Unit, U.S. CoastGuard, Suite 200, 2000 Embarcadero Road, Oakland, CA 94606-5337.(Deadline: 2/8/96.)Solicitation to provide environmental well drilling services atDOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, CA. Forfurther information, call Robert Baker at Tel: 510-422-8449, orcontact: Procurement Department, Lawrence Livermore NationalLaboratory, L-626, P.O. Box 5012, Livermore, CA 94551. (Deadline:1/12/96.)*Sol. N44255-96-D-0056 to provide environmental compliance servicesat various Navy locations in the Pacific Northwest. Interestedfirms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, callPatricia Talbot at Tel: 360-396-0249, or contact: Engineering FieldActivity-Northwest, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 19917Seventh Avenue, N.E., Poulsbo, WA 98370. (Deadline: 1/25/96.)Sol. DACW21-96-B-0014 to remove PCB-contaminated oil and equipmentfrom the J. Strom Thurmond Power Plant near Augusta, GA, anddispose of the materials. For further information, call SharonGodbee at Tel: 912-652-5400, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,Savannah District, P.O. Box 899, Savannah, GA 31402-0889.(Deadline: 2/1/96.)Sol. DACA27-96-B-0015 to remove PCB-contaminated transformers froma location in Columbus, OH, and dispose of the transformers for theArmy Corps of Engineers. For further information, call Diana Lewisat Tel: 502-582-5706, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline: 1/18/96.)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-16IA086-000616-B017-221http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev35.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003020 text/html 33223HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:28:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:09 GMTContent-length: 33036Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev35.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *NEWS & ANALYSIS* UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKS (204 words) CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILL (287 words) RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYED (217 words) PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERS (150 words) TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOES (247 words) PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTS (142 words) AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADA (163 words) ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996 (136 words) *DOT INTERPRETATIONS* A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2 (157 words) Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federal (290 words) Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than in (275 words) A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drum (130 words) Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked in (206 words) A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would be (252 words) There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outer (173 words) A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeat (131 words) Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tank (201 words) *BRIEFS* Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23% (30 words) RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing (29 words) DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergency (18 words) New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docket (33 words) Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from (34 words) RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexible (35 words) DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous (35 words) Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tank (29 words) DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materials (21 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKSThe Teamsters Union is seeking a court order banning Mexican trucks fromentering the U.S. unless drivers show evidence that DOT safety rules are met.A ruling favoring the union would require Mexican truckers to show customofficials proof of insurance and other documents demonstrating compliancewith hazardous materials and rules.Under North American Free Trade Agreement provisions effective in Decem-ber,Mexican trucks gained access to U.S. roads in Arizona, California, New Mexicoand Texas.  While the treaty requires them to comply with DOT rules when inthe U.S., the Teamsters allege drivers are being waved through after signingcompliance check-off forms rather than undergoing safety inspections.  OnDec. 15, the union asked the D.C. circuit appeals court for an emergency stayhalting Mexican cross-border trucking.The Teamsters allege DOT knows Mexican truckers often fail to maintainadequate insurance, are not licensed or properly qualified, operate unsafevehicles and fail to assure safety when carrying dangerous materials.  Itnoted a one-day inspection in October by the Texas Railroad Commission foundevidence of fraudulent insurance coverage by trucks entering the state.  Theunion asked that trucks be barred until DOT sets up a centralized enforcementsystem.  A court ruling is expected by February.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILLState transportation agencies will receive $5.4 billion in federal fundsduring 1996 with significant increases in aid to administer the nationalcommercial driver's license (CDL) program.  The money, authorized by NationalHighway System (NHS) legislation enacted in December, includes a nearly 15%boost in federal funds to enforce CDL rules for trucks carrying hazardousmaterials.  The measure also calls for additional increases of up to 10% in1997 and 1998 to assist states in CDL compliance.To qualify, states must show DOT they will use funding to meet CDLinspections and enforcement program standards.  Aid will go only to statesthat maintain record-keeping systems and participate in a national DOT database program to track records on drivers, truck and equipment inspections andtraffic accidents involving commercial vehicles.  An intended benefit of theplan is to help DOT gather data on number of licensed hazardous materialsdrivers and quantities of hazardous materials transported.Some 1.1 million roadside inspections now are done annually and higherallocations will allow those to increase, DOT said.  The program alsoincludes funding for drug and alcohol enforcement.  DOT noted that in 1992,federal aid helped several states set up drug-free zones within 1,000 feet oftruck stops, doubling penalties for selling of drugs there.In addition to hailing increased CDL funding, DOT Secretary Federico Penacalled the National Highway System the "backbone of America's transportationnetwork."  The 165,000-mile road system includes the current Interstatesystem as well as other major state and federal highways.  Although itcomprises only 4% of the nation's roads, NHS carries about 40% of all trafficand some 75% of truck traffic.  NHS roads also represent over 90% of theapproved hazardous materials routing network.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYEDThe new incident reporting rules have been delayed at least until April tolet the Federal Railroad Administration consider questions from railroads oncompany-managed control programs.  FRA is considering industry proposals toomit a provision that railroads maintain in-house controls to ensure thatreports are filed for each incident.Arguing that in-house programs would be burdensome, railroads urged FRA toadopt a "99% performance standard."  By dividing the number of reportedaccidents by the number of actual accidents, companies say they could comparereporting rates against a 99% standard to determine whether reportingperformance is satisfactory.While agreeing that a 99% performance rate would be acceptable, FRA said thatbefore adopting such an approach it would consider adding penalties forcompanies falling short of the standard.  It asked for industry input on aplan where fines increased for each percentage point below 99%.  The agencysuggested $1,000 for 98%; $3,000 for 97%; $9,000 for 96%, and so on.FRA noted that changes in accident reporting standards would not altercorrective action reporting required when non-compliance citations involveassessment of civil penalties.  Such reporting is limited to physical defectsin rail equipment, such as cracks in hazardous material cargo tanks;insufficient record keeping, such as tracking engineer time-on-duty; andfailure to file safety violation reports.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERSLiquefied gas transfer operators at shipping ports have been granted relieffrom section 127.131(a) "prior notification" rules.  Despite overall CoastGuard tightening of gas unloading standards, beginning Jan. 1 liquefied gasfacilities may give port authorities only four hours notice before cargotransfers.Facility operators had argued against the 24-hour notice saying frequentchanges in weather or tides made arrival schedules uncertain.  The CoastGuard agreed after company logs showed facilities often cannot know 24 hoursin advance when ships will arrive.Though willing to relax notification time, the Coast Guard said other rulestightening liquefied hazardous gas transfers would go forward in 1996.  Theseinclude more rigid procedures for monitoring unloading operations andrequirements that automatic transfer shutdown equipment be installed.  Datacollected since 1985 on deaths and property damage resulting from accidentsduring liquefied gas transfers indicate current rules are "unjustifiablylax," the Coast Guard said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOESU.S. and Mexican transportation officials will meet in January to try to ironout differences regarding size of trucks allowed into Mexico under the NorthAmerican Free Trade Agreement.  While U.S. truckers are protesting entranceof Mexican trucks into border states [see story p. 1], Mexico is attemptingto ban on its roads 53-foot-long trailers, the dominant size used by U.S.companies.Three days before the Dec. 18 border opening, Mexican custom officials saidthe trailers would not be let into the country for equipment "safety rea-sons" related to truck length and hazardous cargoes that could be hauled.After strong protests from U.S. transportation and trade representatives,Mexico agreed to permit the trailers as long as the entire vehicle did notexceed 68 feet.  Carriers claim this would effectively halt U.S. trailerentry into Mexico because few 53-foot trailer rigs are less than 68 feetlong.The issue appears to have stemmed from internal conflicts between Mexicantransportation officials and border-area custom houses, private businessesthat enforce rules at crossings.  According to Dave Berry, VP at SwiftTransportation of Phoenix, the Mexican transportation agency would likedifferences resolved so transborder shipments can proceed, but customhousesare being responsive to Mexican domestic trucking problems.U.S. Trade representative Mickey Cantor expressed hope that the January talkswould resolve the problem.  In the interim, certain trailers may cross onlyif interline arrangements are made so that U.S. trailers are towed intoMexico by Mexican drivers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTSShippers have until Oct. 1 to line up new packaging to replace non-specification portable tanks now used to transport certain hydrogenperoxides.  Under HM-181E provisions effective on that date, portable tanksno longer will be approved packaging.  Instead, shippers will be subject tointermediate bulk container (IBC) rules which ban non-specification packagingfor bulk peroxide shipments.Final rule HM-181E, which specifies intermediate bulk containers as the DOT-approved packaging for bulk peroxide shipments, defines IBCs as "packagingother than a portable tank" used for hazardous cargo shipments.However, the rule allows hazardous materials, except for those poisonous byinhala-tion, to be packaged until Oct. 1, 1996, according to rules in effecton Sept. 30, 1991.  Because the HMR in 1991 allowed hydrogen peroxide to betransported in non-specification portable tanks, IBCs are not mandatory untilOct. 1, DOT explained.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADADeregulation of air cargo between the U.S. and Canada could be implemented byMarch under an agreement expected to spur more than $1 billion in economicactivity between the two countries.  A bilateral plan to lift restrictions onshipments of hazardous and other cargoes was proposed in 1995 andnegotiations are scheduled for completion by March.  U.S.-Canada arrangementsnow limit aircraft size, package weight and size and force some aircraft tomake return trips empty.The new agreement would ease these constraints, unify certain hazardous cargorules and allow competitive pricing, Transportation Secretary Federico Penasaid.  Air transportation analysts estimate the air cargo market in bothcountries could expand by close to 50% in two years under a more open treaty.Air shippers say restrictions are an aberration of freer hemispheric trade inthe 1988 U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American FreeTrade Agreement.  Deregulation talks began in 1991, but had been stalleduntil this plan was announced.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996Tanker escort rule expansion is ahead for single-hulled ships carryinghazardous cargoes in U.S. waters, the Coast Guard said in December.  Severalports and waterways are slated for inclusion on a February list designatingareas where tug and tow boat assistance will be required.  The action follows1995 implementation of a rule requiring at least two escort vessels toaccompany hazardous cargo-carrying, single-hulled tankers in Prince WilliamSound, Alaska, and Puget Sound, Wash.Tug boat rules apply to single-hulled tankers over 5,000 gross tons.Companion vessels could reduce the possibility of grounding or collision whena tanker loses propulsion or steering, Coast Guard project manager Tom Jordanexplained.  Escort rules are mandated by the 1990 Oil Pollution Act, and areto be in force until single-hulled ships carrying hazardous cargoes arephased out in 2015.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2 paperbag for hazardous materials use, DOT told Southern Bag, Yazoo City, Miss.The package maker said its bags are made using four plies: the two innermostare kraft paper, the third is a 3-mil linear low-density plastic laminated topaper, the outermost is paper.  Plant manager Jimmy Druey explained that theplastic side of the third ply faces in toward the packaged material and askedif the construction meets UN 5M2 standards.DOT cited 178.521(b)(2) requiring that bags be waterproof by the use of awater-resistant ply as one of the two outermost plies or a water-resistantbarrier of a "suitable protective material" between the two outermost plies.It said bags of four plies or more that meet all requirements of 178.521 andtested per subpart M of Part 178 may be marked as a UN 5M2 paper bag.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federalInitial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federalemployees were spelled out by DOT in response to inquiries from variousgovernment agencies.  Questioners asked if it is acceptable, under initialtraining rules, for a new hire to take an exam without receiving some type ofinstruction from the hiring agency.  Noting that a major purpose of trainingrules is to ensure that employers provide training for each hazmat employee,DOT said the rules specify that workers whose jobs involve the transportationof hazardous materials receive familiarization training covering the HMR.For initial training, section 172.704(c) specifies training must occur within90 days of hire and that each new employee must be trained before beingtested.Questioners also asked if, under recurrent training rules, an employee withinitial training can take a recurrent exam without additional instructionprior to the exam.  DOT replied that recurrent training must be completed anddocumented at least once every two years, and that employees should receiverecurrent hazmat training before being tested .Regarding questions about use of computer-based training to meet trainingrequirements, DOT said each agency must determine the most suitable source oftraining for its employees.  Computer-based training is acceptable and may beused provided the general awareness, function specific, safety training, andtesting requirements are fulfilled.DOT added that a record of each hazmat employee's training over the precedingtwo years must be maintained by the employer for the duration of employmentin each hazardous material job and for 90 days thereafter.  A current recordof relevant training is not required to be received from a previous employer,but may be used to eliminate the need for the new employer to retrain asrequired in 172.704 (c)(1)(iii).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than inSome asphalts in international transport are described differently than indomestic shipment, DOT informed Seneca Petroleum, Crestwood, Ill.  Thecompany asked about "cutback asphalts," which it said can be subdivided intorapid curing, medium curing and slow curing.  It noted that the faster thecuring rate, the more volatile the material.Seneca said its rapid curing asphalt has a flash point of 70 to 90 degreesFahrenheit.  Because it is transported at 150 degrees Fahrenheit, it believedthe product does not meet the definition of an elevated temperature material.The company said it understood that elevated temperature materials aredefined in the HMR as liquids shipped above 212 degrees Fahrenheit ormaterials shipped in a liquid phase with a flash point at or above 100degrees Fahrenheit.However, company safety director Jim Sniegowski said Illinois transportationofficials interpret the definition to mean any material transported at orabove its flash point.  Thus the state requires Seneca to prepare rapidcuring asphalt for shipment with elevated temperature shipping paper, markingand placarding rules.  The firm asked for clarification of the elevatedtemperature rule and for a proper shipping name.DOT replied that a material with a flash point below 37.8 degrees Celsius(100 degrees Fahrenheit) and offered for transportation or transported below100 degrees Celsius (212 degrees Fahrenheit) does not meet the section 171.8definition of an elevated temperature material.Therefore, the shipping description for rapid curing asphalt would be"Asphalt, cut-back, 3, UN1999, PG III," and elevated temperature rules wouldnot apply.  However, the agency added, for international transportation thematerial must be described as "Elevated temperature liquid, flammable, n.o.s.(Asphalt)."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drumA cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drumclosure in place, DOT advised Kelly Air Force Base, Texas.  The agencycovered sections 173.226 and 173.227 rules concerning closures on packagingsused to ship materials poisonous by inhalation.  The Air Force asked whattesting must be done to determine if a cap seal meets the internal pressurerequirements of the HMR.DOT said no specific test (for example, hydrostatic testing) is required.Whatever test is used, it must apply the pressure for enough time todetermine if the cap seal can withstand 100 kPa.  That period depends on thetest method used, the agency said.  It added that if a hydrostatic test isused, for example, a five-minute application of the test pressure isappropriate.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked inAdhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked inaccordance with HMR part 172 may be transported as a consumer commodity, DOTtold Grand Circuit, Freehold, N.J.  It sells an adhesive called Grand CircuitHoof Repair to blacksmiths for gluing on horseshoes and repairing damagedhoof walls.The product is sold "as is," ready for use off the shelf, explained generalmanager Rita Newell.  Grand Circuit describes the material for shipping as aflammable liquid, UN1133, class 3 in packing group III.  The adhesive is soldin 1-, 2- and 3-ounce bot-tles, as well as in 40- and 380-mL plastic tubes.The veterinary supply company asked for clarification of the ORM-D ratingwhen transporting its product.DOT responded an "Adhesive, 3, UN1133, PG II," may be renamed and reclassedas "Consumer commodity, ORM-D" if it meets criteria in 173.150.  That sectionrequires the materials not meet the definition of any other hazard class andnot be a hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or marine pollutant.The agency advised that the inner packagings must be placed in a strong outerpackaging, the completed package must weigh no more than 66 pounds, and theouter packaging must be marked in accordance with 172.316.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would beA material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would bedescribed as an "environmentally hazardous substance," DOT advised a DownersGrove, Ill., firm.  Castrol Industrial described its product as a petroleumoil, with a flash point of 400 degrees Fahrenheit and containing less than 5%barium salt.  This material is packaged in 55-gallon (non-bulk) drums or 330-gallon intermediate bulk containers.The petroleum product maker noted that the material does not meet thedefinition of a marine pollutant, but when tested as a waste, it does meetEPA's definition of a toxic hazardous waste.  Company regulatory specialistMarcia Montgomery asked whether a class 9 hazard warning label is appropriatefor shipping.DOT replied that if the product is not a Division 6.1 poisonous material, amarine pollutant, or a hazardous substance, then it does not meet the criter-ia of any hazard class contained in 49 CFR Part 173 and, therefore, is notsubject to regulation.However, if it is transported as a waste subject to EPA uniform hazardouswaste manifest rules, it would be described as "Waste, environmentallyhazardous substances, liquid, n.o.s., 9, UN 3082, PG III."  Packagings of 119gallons or less (non-bulk) au-thorized for this material are in 173.203, DOTsaid.  Packagings of greater than 119 gallons (bulk) are in 173.241.  Inaddition, each bulk and non-bulk packaging must be marked in accordance withsections 172.301 or 172.302, as applicable, and must be labeled with a Class9 label as prescribed in section 172.400.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outerThere are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outerpackaging as long as the complete package passes the prescribed tests and iscertified, DOT told Mallinckrodt Chemical, Paris, Ky.  Packaging engineerGreg Smart asked the agency to clarify 173.158 pertaining to the number ofinner receptacles per outer package to ship nitric acid.  Subparagraph (b)(2)limits the number of inner receptacles to four.  However, subparagraph (f)(2)does not place a limit on the number of inner receptacles.DOT advised that 173.158(f)(2) applies to nitric acid of 70% or less con-centration.  When packaged in 4H1 expanded plastic boxes, the HMR does notlimit the number of inner glass packagings, only that each not exceed 2.5 L.Paragraph (b)(2), which specifies a limit of four inner receptacles per outerpackaging applies to nitric acid in higher concentrations as long as it doesnot contain sulfuric or hydrochloric acid as impurities.  In both cases, DOTnoted, outer packagings constructed of plastic also must conform tocompatibility requirements in 173.24(e).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeatA commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeathazardous materials information on the ocean bill of lading, DOT told LuskShipping, Baltimore.  The firm explained its commercial invoice includes adescription of goods, address of the shipper and seller and payment terms.Lusk asked if emergency response information and phone numbers, as requiredby the Hazardous Materials Regulations, needed to be included on the invoiceor material packing list.DOT replied no.  The HMR specifies the shipping paper is the document thatcontains the hazardous materials data required by sections 172.203 and 204and emergency phone number required by 172.604(a)(3).  The agency added thatcompliance with shipping paper data was met by the ocean bill of ladingcontaining all data required by sections 172.203, 172.204 and 172.604(a)(3).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tankRules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tankmanufacture, not vehicle manufacture, DOT said responding to carrierinquiries on section 178.337-6, manhole closure requirements.  Severalcompanies noted manholes or inspection openings were mandated on cargo tanksmade after April 21, 1994, and that tanks made before that date but laterinstalled on trucks were not required to comply with the manhole rule.DOT said the April 21 date applies to manufacture of the cargo tank, not itsinstallation on a motor vehicle.  It added that a cargo tank refers to thetank fitted with all appurtenances, reinforcements, fittings and closures af-fecting lading retention installed by the cargo tank manufacturer.DOT said under the definition of cargo tank in 178.320, appurtenances,fittings, closures and valves added by truck and tank assemblers or ownersare not part of a cargo tank.  Therefore, a tank marked with an original testdate on or before April 21, 1994, is not required to be fitted with manholeor inspection openings.  The certificate stating the completed cargo tankmotor vehicle conforms to all DOT specifications and the American Society ofMechanical Engineers code may be dated after April 21, 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23%Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23% hazardousmaterials air waybill tax, DOT said.  Agency is targeting Oct. 1, 1997, tobegin non-government air traffic control corporation.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filingRSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing 1996carrier federal registration statement.  RSPA looking at possible rulemakingto allow state registration to satisfy federal rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergencyDOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergencyresponse activities at plants handling gas, hazardous liquids, carbondioxide.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docketNew consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docketfacilities into one central office, announced by DOT.  New office replacespaper-based system with electronic imaging system.  Access informationavailable from Lorie Dankers, 202/366-5565.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure fromCoast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from 1.5to 1.1 times maximum allowable working pressure.  Also will permit captain ofthe port to authorize alternatives to hydrostatic testing, includingpneumatic tests.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexibleRSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexibleintermediate bulk containers.  Also denied shipper petitions for continueduse of intermediate bulk containers now holding DOT exemptions.  Packagingmust meet standards in HM-181E.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardousDOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous gastransfer sites maintain security guards, or apply rule only during transfers.Agency said explosion risk from vandalism/sabotage exists even when transfersnot in progress.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tankCertain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tankcar unloading rules.  Exemption authorizes chlorine-filled rail cars toremain attached to connectors without physical presence of unloader.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materialsDOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materialstraining schedule available for 1996.  Contact Virginia Litres, 202/366-4488.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-17IA086-000616-B017-241http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev54.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003114 text/html 44353HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:28:39 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:07 GMTContent-length: 44166Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev54.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLE JURISDICTION IS LIMITED, RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY (763 words) VERTAC RECEIVER LOSES BID TO SUE THIRD PARTIES FOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS (468 words) 6TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINE AFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICER LIABILITY FINDING APPEALED (670 words) OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129M TO CLOSE A CHAPTER ON LOVE CANAL (541 words) WD KY WON'T RECONSIDER ORDER ALLOWING RP SECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY (289 words) ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDS TO STATE CLAIMS (656 words) 3RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS, VISITORS TO WASTE SITE ARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS (894 words) IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS CARRRIER WIN ON LATE NOTICE GROUNDS (345 words) AZ APP. CT. REVERSES INSURER WIN ON TCE COVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT (601 words) SD NY DENIES CARRIERS JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF COVERAGE, LOST POLICY (951 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLEJURISDICTION IS LIMITED,RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY     The Resource Conservation Recovery Act citizen suitdefendants who are seeking reversal of the Ninth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals' determination of their liability forrestitutionary damages, on Dec. 28 submitted their reply to theplaintiffs' arguments to the U.S. Supreme Court.  Meghrig et al.v. KFC Western Inc., No. 95-83 (U.S.); see Hazardous WasteLitigation Reporter, Dec. 20, 1995.     Alan and Margaret Meghrig rejoined that KFC Western Inc.'sposition "is seriously flawed because it proceeds from a seriesof false assumptions," including a "misapprehension of thelimited jurisdiction of federal courts to render equitable reliefin the face of a statute such as [RCRA]."     KFC Western's response, the petitioners contended, "largelyignores the thorough statutory construction analysis advanced byPetitioners in favor of a more generalized series of assumptionstied to Respondent's view of fairness."  RCRA's jurisdictionalstatement, argued the Meghrigs, "do[es] not authorize thedistrict courts to broadly 'take such action as may benecessary,' but authorize[s] those courts to restrain a person orto order a person to take other necessary action, or both, andnothing more."     The Meghrigs noted the panoply of federal environmentalstatutes that contain citizen suit provisions, and stated thattheir respective legislative histories, "beginning with the 1970Clean Air Act and flowing through subsequently enacted federalenvironmental statutes, [confirm] congressional intent to limitthe remedies available to citizen plaintiffs by excludingjurisdiction to award damages."     The petitioners argued that to accept the respondents'contention that recognition of restitution under RCRA would notunduly interfere with CERCLA "would be to accept the propositionthat the massive legislative effort and epic compromise necessaryto enact CERCLA [was] simply swept away by Congress four yearslater" with the passage of the 1984 RCRA amendments.               The Meghrigs challenged KFC Western's assertion that thetrial court possessed jurisdiction to grant equitable relief."RCRA's citizen suit provision contains no grant of authority tothe district courts to formulate general federal common law,"they contended, "and the claims of Respondent KFC, as a privateparty, do not fall within any of the four narrow areas in whichfederal courts have general common law jurisdiction."     The petitioners asserted that the Supreme Court's 1992opinion in Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, upon whichKFC Western relied extensively in arguing for a federal court'sjurisdiction to fashion relief, "has no bearing on the RCRAstatute.  In Franklin, the statute was absolutely silent on thesubject of remedies available to an aggrieved plaintiff....  Bycontrast, RCRA provides particularized citizen remedies, and itslegislative history and that of related statutes reaffirm thelimitations on those remedies."     The Meghrigs averred that the relief sought by KFC Westerndoes not constitute equitable restitution.  "What Respondentseeks here is compensation for an injury to its property," theyargued, "and that certainly is distinguished from an equitableaction for specific relief such as restitutionary awards of back-pay, or return of specific property".     In 1963, the petitioners inherited a commercial parcel inLos Angeles from their father.  Gasoline stations had beenpreviously operated on the site for decades; all undergroundstorage tanks had been removed well before the Meghrigs tooktitle.     In 1975, the petitioners sold the land to the respondent,who established a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise on the site.In the course of renovations in 1988, petroleum contamination wasdiscovered, and KFC Western spent some $211,000 in complying witha cleanup order from the Los Angeles Department of Health.     When the Meghrigs refused KFC Western's reimbursementdemands, the respondent started the present litigation in theU.S. District Court for the Central District of California.  Thetrial court granted the Meghrigs' dismissal motion in March 1992,holding that no "imminent and substantial endangerment" existedto support a RCRA claim, and stating that RCRA's citizen suitprovision solely made injunctive relief available.     In March 1995, the Ninth Circuit reversed by a 2-1 margin.The appellate court concluded that RCRA's "imminent andsubstantial endangerment" language did not act as a time-bar, anda RCRA citizen suit plaintiff could make demand for moneydamages.  The Meghrigs lodged their certiorari petition thefollowing July, and the Supreme Court agreed to review the matterlast October.  Oral argument in the matter is scheduled forJan. 10, at 10:00 a.m.               John P. Zaimes and Clifton J. McFarland of McClintock,Weston, Benshoof, Rochefort, Rubalcava & MacCuish, Los Angeles,represent Alan and Margaret Meghrig.     Daniel Romano and Sharon Corda of the Law Office of DanielRomano, Santa Monica, CA, represent KFC Western Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996VERTAC RECEIVER LOSESBID TO SUE THIRD PARTIESFOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS     A federal judge in Little Rock on Dec. 11 denied a motion bythe court-appointed receiver for the bankrupt Vertac ChemicalCorp. to sue other parties to recover cleanup costs that could beused to pay Vertac's environmental debts to the federal and stategovernments for the cleanup of a bayou polluted by runoff fromthe plant.  United States v. Vertac Chemical Corp., No. LR-C-80-109 (ED AR).     U.S. District Judge George Howard Jr. of the EasternDistrict of Arkansas noted that the State of Arkansas is alreadyseeking to remedy environmental damage to the bayou and he saidhe was not persuaded that the receiver's limited resources shouldbe used to fund an action that the state intends to pursue.     Vertac's Jacksonville, AR, plant was acquired by HerculesInc. in 1961.  Hercules had manufactured the defoliant AgentOrange at the plant from 1964 to 1968, pursuant to a governmentcontract.  Thousands of barrels of dioxin, one of the byproductsof Agent Orange, and other hazardous wastes contaminated the soilat the plant site and polluted Rocky Branch Creek, which runsthrough the site and empties into Bayou Meto.  The government hadcommenced a CERCLA action in 1987 to recoup the costs ofremediating the site.     Court-appointed bankruptcy receiver Lee S. Thalheimer of theLittle Rock firm of Arnold, Grobmyer & Haley, had asked thecourt's permission to file a citizen's suit under the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act against others who may be liablefor polluting Bayou Meto.     Judge Howard observed that Furrer v. Brown, a recent EighthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals case, held that plaintiffs may onlyseek injunctive relief, not a monetary judgment, under RCRA and,therefore, the receiver would not be able to recover any moniesfrom an RCRA suit.  (Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3d 1092 (8th Cir.1995).     He took note of the fact that the Ninth Circuit has decidedthe same issue differently in KFC Western v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518(9th Cir. 1995) and that the U.S. Supreme Court has granted apetition for writ of certiorari in that case to decide the issueof whether recovery of cleanup costs is available in a privateaction under RCRA.     Judge Howard also denied Thalheimer's request to be grantedthe authority to place restrictions on the future use of theVertac plant.  The receiver wanted to authorize Hercules toclean, salvage and sell plant equipment to help pay offcreditors.  Hercules had supported the request but the governmentopposed it.     Judge Howard agreed with the United States that thereceiver's request was overly broad and vague.  However, toencourage the parties to work together, the judge dismissed therequest without prejudice to renew to give the parties a chanceto work out their differences.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 19966TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINEAFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICERLIABILITY FINDING APPEALED     The Michigan RCRA defendants whose $1.5 million penalty fornoncompliance with closure deadlines was upheld by the SixthCircuit last July, on Dec. 1 petitioned the U.S. Supreme Courtfor writ of certiorari.  Production Plated Plastics Inc. et al.v. United States et al., Nos. 95-878 (U.S.); see Hazardous WasteLitigation Reporter, Sept. 6, 1995.     In addition to challenging the fine as unconstitutionallyexcessive, the petitioners exhorted the High Court to "determine,once and for all, whether Congress intended corporate officerliability under RCRA and CERCLA, and if so, under what standard."     The litigation stems from the operation of a chrome platingfacility in Richland, MI, which opened in 1966 and was acquiredthree years later by petitioner Production Plated Plastics Inc.("PPP").  PPP, as did the prior owner, stored sludge and processwater in on-site surface inpoundments.     In 1977, Michigan sued PPP under the state Water ResourcesConservation Act after hexavelent chrome was discovered in thegroundwater in the plant's vicinity.  PPP closed the impoundmentsin the course of the remediation plan it had agreed to with theMichigan Department of Natural Resources.     PPP applied for RCRA interim status for its impoundments in1980.  PPP was unable thereafter to obtain insurance or a closurebond, and it lost its interim status in 1985.  The federal andstate governments brought the present litigation in 1987,alleging failure to submit a closure plan within 15 days oflosing RCRA interim status, and failure to complete closureactivities within 180 days of the state's approval of closureplan.  Also named to the suit were the affiliated Michigan CityPlastics Co. Inc. (MCP) and Michael Ladney, the controllingofficer of both entities.               The U.S. District Court for the Western District of Michigandetermined in 1990 that Ladney may be held jointly and severallyliable.  The trial court granted the government's demand forpermanent, mandatory injunctive mandatory relief in 1991, and theSixth Circuit affirmed the following year.     After a trial on penalties, Judge Benjamin F. Gibson in 1992imposed a $1.5 million penalty on the defendants, and ordered theimplementation of a $2.4 million trust fund to pay forgroundwater monitoring over 30 years.  The trial court alsoappointed a third-party trustee to marshall the defendants'assets to comply with the injunction.     The Sixth Circuit affirmed in an unpublished per curiamopinion last July 19.  The panel found no violation of thedefendants' due process rights in that Ladney operated hisbusinesses without regard for corporate form, and concluded thatthe fine imposed was well below the $90 million potentialmaximum.     In their petition, the defendants assert that while "courtshave found joint and several liability for RCRA compliance,penalties should be assessed separately and not jointly andseverally... [B]y clear implication, cases explaining therequirements of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments (Due ProcessAnalysis) and Eighth Amendment (Excessive Punishment Analysis)require that a court analyze behavior individually when assessinga penalty sought by the government that amounts to punishment."     The petitioners asserted that "[s]ince fines under RCRA areexclusively punitive, they are fully subject to the EighthAmendment's prohibition against excessive fines.... [N]either theDistrict Court nor Sixth Circuit gave anything but cursoryconsideration to the possibility that the $1.5 million fine, thelargest penalty in the Western District of Michigan's history,could be excessive."     As to the issue of owner/operator liability under bothCERCLA and RCRA, the petitioners argued that those federal courtsthat have extended such liability to corporate officers haveignored Supreme Court precedent concerning statutoryconstruction.  "RCRA does not define 'owner' or 'operator' toinclude corporate officers, employees or shareholders," thedefendants contended.  "Likewise, nothing in RCRA's legislativehistory suggests that Congress intended the joint and severalliability of corporate officers for the violations of acorporation."     Douglas W. Van Essen of Law, Weathers & Richardson, GrandRapids, MI, submitted the petition on behalf of Production PlatedPlastics Inc., Michigan City Plastics Co. Inc. and MichaelLadney.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129MTO CLOSE A CHAPTERON LOVE CANAL     Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed to pay the U.S.government $129 million in cleanup costs and interest to settle a16-year-old lawsuit resulting from decades of pollution at LoveCanal, the case that spurred Congress to enact the Superfund Lawof 1980.  United States et al. v. Hooker Chemical Corp. et al.,No. 79-CV-990C (WD NY); see Hazardous Waste Litigation Reporter,June 3, 1991.     Under the proposed consent decree, announced Dec. 21,Occidental Chemical Corp. (Oxychem) will pay $102 million to theEnvironmental Protection Agency and $28 million to the FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA).  FEMA handled the initialcleanup and relocation of Love Canal residents.     From 1942 to 1953, Oxychem's corporate predecessor, HookerChemical, dumped an estimated 22,000 tons of toxic chemicals andhazardous wastes at Love Canal from its Niagara Fallsmanufacturing plant.  The site was eventually covered over anddeeded to the City of Niagara Falls.  Homes and a school werelater built on and near Love Canal.  Chemicals began seeping intothe houses in the 1970s sickening residents; one resident, LoisGibbs, led a crusade to expose Hooker's actions and clean up thesite.     In 1979, the federal government and New York State broughtsuit against Hooker.  The federal government initially soughtcompensation of more than $200 million in cleanup costs underCERCLA and the state sought $250 million in punitive damages.Oxychem was held liable in the liability phase of the trial, butthe state's claims for punitive damages were denied.     In June 1994, Oxychem agreed to pay the state $98 million tosettle the remaining state claims.  The U.S. Army has also agreedto pay the government $8 million for its share of the costs forcleaning up hazardous waste that it dumped at the site duringWorld War II.     The consent decree, which is expected to receive finalapproval in 30 days, eliminates the need for a second trial ondamages.  Under its terms, Oxychem will pay the $129 million infour installments over three years, beginning three months afterthe court grants final approval.     While the proposed settlement closes out the federal andstate cleanup claims, it does not end the litigation over LoveCanal.  The City of Niagara Falls is seeking $4 million in costsand interest and 900 former residents have personal injurylawsuits still pending.  In the wake of the federal and statesettlements, Niagara Falls expects that it will soon reach asettlement with the company to end its suit as well.               In announcing the settlement, U.S. Attorney General JanetReno called it "the transformation of an environmental disastercalled Love Canal into a success story.  It stands for theprinciple that when people make a mess, they should clean it up."     A spokesman for Oxychem said that the company has neverdenied liability, but that the settlement represents a compromiseamong the parties on the amount of compensation, rather thanfines or penalties.  The agreement, he said avoids having to gothrough a protracted trial on damages.     Oxychem is represented by Steven K. Yablonski of Piper &Marbury, Washington, DC.  The federal government is representedby Steven Novick and Steven R. Baer of the U.S. JusticeDepartment, Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996WD KY WON'T RECONSIDERORDER ALLOWING RPSECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY     U.S. District Judge Joseph H. McKinley Jr. of the WesternDistrict of Kentucky on Dec. 27 refused a defense bid toreconsider his November ruling finding a responsible party CERCLAplaintiff capable of suing for cost recovery under Section107(a).  Barmet Aluminum Corp. v. Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. etal., No. 4:95-CV-93-M (WD KY); see Hazardous Waste LitigationReporter, Dec. 6, 1995.     The judge also refused the defendants request forcertification for interlocutory appeal to the Sixth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals.     In March 1995, plaintiff Barmet Aluminum Corp. entered intoa consent order with the EPA to clean up the Brantley Landfillsite; Barmet was first named as a potentially responsible partyregarding the site in 1989.     Barmet thereafter lodged a CERCLA Section Section 107/113complaint against excavator Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. and itscorporate principals.  The defendants argued for the dismissal ofthe allegations under Section 107, contending that Barmet'sstatus as a responsible party limited it to seeking Section113(f) contribution.     Judge McKinley held last Nov. 22 that Section 107(a)(4)(B)imposes liability for "any other necessary costs of responseincurred by any other person consistent with the nationalliability plan," and refuse to exclude responsible parties fromthe defined "any other person."   He stated that the onlydistrict court within the circuit to have addressed the issue hastwice allowed responsible parties and potentially responsibleparties to sue for Section 107 cost recovery.               Kim K. Burke, Robert A. Bilott and Charles H. Pangburn IIIof Taft, Stettinius & Hollister, Cincinnati, represent theplaintiff.     J. Anthony Goebel, Joseph J. Zaluski, George L. Seay Jr. andClinton J. Elliot of Wyatt, Tarrant & Combs, Louisville, KY,represent the defendants.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGNIMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDSTO STATE CLAIMS     U.S. District Judge Justin B. Quackenbush of the EasternDistrict of Washington on Dec. 11 clarified his October order inan environmental cost recovery action against the U.S. Army Corpsof Engineers.  Crowley Marine Services Inc. et al. v. Fednav Ltd.et al., No. CS-94-178-JLQ; see Hazardous Waste LitigationReporter, Nov. 1, 1995.     The judge stated that CERCLA's waiver of sovereign immunity,which he had previously held to override the Corps' assertion ofimmunity under the Flood Control Act of 1928, applied to theplaintiffs' state statutory claims as well.     Plaintiffs Crowley Marine Services Inc. and others, alongwith the Corps, were sued in 1991-1992 by the WashingtonDepartment of Ecology over soil and groundwater contamination inthe vicinity of a levee and drainage system owned and operated bythe Corps.  The levee and drainage system, situated on the bankof the Columbia River, is part of a federal flood controlproject.  The plaintiffs performed remediation in satisfaction ofthe state suit, and brought the present action against some 20parties who refused to participate in the cleanup.     In his Oct. 10 order addressing the Corps' dismissal motion,Judge Quackenbush agreed that the Flood Act barred theplaintiffs' count under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA).  Herefused to find the Corps immunized on the CERCLA claims, findingthat the defendant asserted none of the enumerated defenses tothe sovereign immunity waiver, and determining that CERCLAcontains no express exception regarding Flood Act immunity.     The Corps sought clarification of the order, seeking adetermination that the FTCA ruling carried over to theplaintiffs' common-law tort claims, and that CERCLA's sovereignimmunity did not apply to the claims under Washington's hazardousmaterials statutes.  The plaintiffs responded that CERCLA'ssovereign immunity unequivocally applies to state environmentalstatutes.     Judge Quackenbush primarily agreed that the plaintiffs'claims for negligence/negligence per se, strict liability,trespass, and nuisance "were applicable to the Corps only throughthe FTCA," and thus were dismissed.     In considering the claims under Washington's state Superfundlaw, the Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA), the court wrote thatCERCLA Section 9620(a)(4) "provides, in pertinent part, that'State laws concerning removal and remedial action, includingState laws regarding enforcement, shall apply' to facilities ofthe United States...     "The MTCA is similar in language to CERCLA," the judgecontinued.  "The court finds that CERCLA's waiver of immunity, inconjunction with the form and substance of the MTCA, require theconclusion that the MTCA is applicable to the site owned andoperated by the Corps."  The court agreed with the Corps that thewaiver solely extends to sites currently owned or operated by theUnited States.     Judge Quackenbush then addressed the plaintiffs' claimsunder the Washington Hazardous Waste Management Act (HWMA), thestate RCRA equivalent.  The court looked to the 1992 amendment toRCRA Section 6961, which restated and emphasized the waiver ofsovereign immunity in the statute.  "The 1992 amendment was aclear effort on behalf of Congress to equally apply environmentalstandards to private citizens and the federal government," thejudge wrote.     The judge rejected the Corps' assertion that the claim forrelief under the Declaratory Judgment Act should be dismissed forlack of an independent basis of federal jurisdiction."Plaintiffs' CERCLA claims were not dismissed, and these claimsprovide an independent jurisdictional basis, the court stated.     Judge Quackenbush lastly rejected the Corps' bid to dismissthe claim for the reasonable costs of negotiation with theWashington state authorities, including attorneys' fees.  TheCorps asserted that such recovery was barred under the U.S.Supreme Court's 1994 ruling in Key Tronic v. U.S.; the courtrejoined that the plaintiffs "seek recovery of attorneys' feesunder several statutes, including CERCLA, the RCRA, the MTCA, andthe HWMA.  Each of those statutes provides for potential recoveryof attorneys' fees."     Gillis E. Reavis of Morrison & Foerster, Seattle, representsCrowley Marine Services Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 19963RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS,VISITORS TO WASTE SITEARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS     Neighbors of a dump site contaminated by low-level radiationwere not known creditors and, therefore, the corporate owner ofthe sites had no obligation to provide them with actual noticewhen it went into bankruptcy, the Third Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals ruled on Dec. 18.  Chemetron Corp. v. Jones et al.,No. 94-3371 (3rd Cir.).     From 1965 to 1975, Chemetron Corp. owned and operated amanufacturing facility that made an antimony oxide catalystutilizing depleted plutonium and a nearby landfill where itdumped waste products from that manufacturing process in CuyahogaHeights, OH.  Chemetron sold the sites in 1975, but becameinvolved in cleanup efforts between 1980 and 1988 after it wasdiscovered that the sites were contaminated with radioactivewaste.     In 1988, Chemetron filed for Chapter 11 reorganization inthe U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western District ofPennsylvania.  The court issued a claims bar date order fixingthe last day for creditors to file claims as May 31, 1988.Chemetron sent the required actual notice to all of its knowncreditors and also voluntarily placed advertisements in the NewYork Times and Wall Street Journal in an effort to reach anyunknown creditors.     In 1992, 15 individuals filed suit against Chemetron and itssuccessors in interest in the Cuyahoga County Court of CommonPleas claiming to have been injured from exposure to radioactiveand toxic chemicals at the dump site.  Eventually the list ofplaintiffs grew to 21.  Two of the plaintiffs had lived in housesnear the site and the rest were periodic visitors to the houses.     Chemetron moved to dismiss the suit, arguing that any suchclaim had been discharged in the bankruptcy proceedings which hadended in 1990.  The plaintiffs then petitioned the bankruptcycourt to be allowed to file late claims.   In August 1993, thebankruptcy court granted the petition, finding that theplaintiffs were known creditors who had been entitled to actualnotice of the proceedings and the claims bar date.  Thebankruptcy court then reserved ruling on the issue of whether theplaintiffs' claims were dischargeable.     Chemetron appealed the bankruptcy court ruling to U.S.District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania, whichreversed the bankruptcy court's grant of the motion to file lateclaims.  The district court held that the plaintiffs were notknown creditors and that the notice published in the two nationalnewspapers were sufficient to alert them to the bankruptcyproceedings.  The district court also ruled, without explanation,that the plaintiffs' claims were dischargeable as a result of thebankruptcy action.     The plaintiffs appealed to the Third Circuit, which affirmedthe district court finding that the plaintiffs are unknowncreditors.  In Tulsa Professional Collection Service Inc. v.Roper, 485 U.S. 478, 490 (1988), the U.S. Supreme Courtcharacterized a known creditor as one whose identity is eitherknown or "reasonably ascertainable by the debtor" Circuit JudgeJane R. Roth wrote.  Generally, debtors are expected to identifyknown creditors through a careful search of their own books andrecords and further efforts are not required, she explained.     In this case, she said, the bankruptcy court replaced the"reasonably ascertainable" standard with a "reasonablyforeseeable" standard.  Under that test, the bankruptcy courtsaid Chemetron knew or should have known that it was reasonablyforeseeable that it would suffer claims from individuals livingnear the sites making them known creditors.     This "reasonably foreseeable" standard is an incorrect ruleof law that imposes an impossible burden on debtors, the ThirdCircuit found.  None of the claimants currently live near thesite and some have moved as far away as Texas.  "We are hardpressed to conceive of any way the debtor could identify, locate,and provide actual notice to these claimants," Judge Roth said.     Having affirmed the district court's ruling that theplaintiffs were unknown claimants in the bankruptcy action andthat the newspaper notices, therefore, were sufficient to informthem of the proceedings, the circuit court found that thedistrict court erred in failing to consider whether theplaintiffs' failure to file their claims in a timely manner wasdue to "excusable neglect."  The appellate panel remanded thatissue to the district court with instructions to consider thetotality of the circumstances and the potential impact onChemetron.     The Third Circuit also vacated the district court's rulingthat the plaintiffs' claims were discharged by the bankruptcyaction and remanded that issue to the bankruptcy court.  Becausethe bankruptcy court had postponed ruling on the issue ofdischarge, it was not an appealable order and, therefore, was notproperly before the district court, the Third Circuit said.     Circuit Judge H. Lee Sarokin concurred in the judgment butsaid that the Third Circuit went to far in discarding the"reasonably ascertainable" test entirely.  "These tests are notmutually exclusive, or even at odds.  They address separateissues," Judge Sarokin wrote.  One has to do with whether adebtor knew or should have known a claim would be brought whilethe other has to do with the debtor's ability to identify apotential claimant, he said.     The Jones plaintiffs were represented by William Mitchelland Deborah J. Papushak of Armstrong, Mitchell & Damiani,Cleveland.  Chemetron was represented Dennis G. Terez of Squire,Sanders & Dempsey, Cleveland and George L. Cass of Buchanan,Ingersoll, Pittsburgh.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IL APP. CT. AFFIRMSCARRRIER WIN ON LATENOTICE GROUNDS     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers thatit might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste sitecannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists InsuranceCo. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 thatit faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination ata site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sentused machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellatepanel wrote that the policyholder should have notified itscarriers at that time.     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. had sent dirtysolvent to the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.In operating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemicalburied more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials atthe site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while otherhazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.     After testing by the EPA, the American Chemical site wasdesignated as a Superfund site.  Industrial Coatings' insurancepolicies provided that in the event of an occurrence, writtennotice to the insurers giving the particulars was required "assoon as practicable."  The insured, however, did not give writtennotice to the insurers until more than 14 months after it hadreceived the EPA's letter requesting voluntary participation inthe site cleanup.     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatingsgave its insurance companies late notice, that it therebybreached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurancepolicies and that the company, therefore, had no right to obtaincoverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted againstit.     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delayin notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay ofeven a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as amatter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry ofsummary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996AZ APP. CT. REVERSESINSURER WIN ON TCECOVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT     The Arizona Court of Appeals on Nov. 30 overturned a trialcourt's dismissal of a bad faith claim lodged by an environmentaltort defendant against its insurers.  Tucson Airport Authority v.Certain Underwriters at Lloyd's, London et al., No. CV-95-0052(AZ Ct. App.).     The panel found that the policyholder adequately pleaded aclaim for the carriers' threat to drop a defense of a relatedaction in order to ensure the insured's cooperation in anothersuit, and then withdrawing coverage because of the policyholder'scooperation.     The Tucson Airport Authority (TAA) had been named to twoclass actions in the 1980s stemming from the disposal of TCE onairport property.  The TAA settled with the class claimants for$35 million in the understanding that recovery would be soughtonly from the TAA's insurers.  Those class plaintiffs, in turn,intervened in the declaratory judgment action brought against TAAby its carriers.  The insurers contended that coverage wasunavailable to the intervenors, as the TAA was not liable for TCEdisposal by TAA's lessees.     TAA was subsequently named to a third class suit (the Bahrssuit); it tendered the Bahrs suit to its carriers, who agreed todefend under a reservation of rights.  At this juncture, TAAcontended, the insurers threatened to drop the defense of theBahrs suit if TAA did anything to impede the insurers' attemptsto contest coverage in the declaratory judgment action.     TAA complied, and the insurers obtained summary judgmentsagainst the intervenors in the declaratory judgment action.  Thecarriers then sought to have these judgments declared resjudicata in TAA's pending cross-action for declaratory judgment.When TAA contested the insurers' res judicata motion, TAA wasallegedly informed that such response action cost TAA "alldefense coverage and indemnity coverage for any and allthird-party tort liability claims arising from groundwatercontamination, including insurance coverage for the third-partyliability claims presented against TAA in the Bahrs (putative)class action."     TAA then amended its declaratory judgment suit to include abad faith count, arguing that the carriers breached their duty toreasonably balance their interests against the interests of thepolicyholder.  The Pima County Circuit Court dismissed the badfaith count.     In its reversal, the state appellate panel cited to ArizonaSupreme Court precedent stating that "one of the benefits thatflow[s] from the insurance contract is the insured's expectationthat his insurance company will not wrongfully deprive him of thevery security for which he bargained or expose him to thecatastrophe from which he sought protection....  Conduct by theinsurer which does destroy the security or impair the protectionpurchased breaches the implied covenant of good faith and fairdealing implied in the contract."     After finding the bad faith allegations adequately plead,the court considered the insurers' contention that the claim wasbased on privileged communications made during pending coverageactions by the insurers' counsel.  The panel was persuaded by theCalifornia Supreme Court's 1985 ruling in White v. Western Title,which drew a distinction between a bad faith claim "basedsquarely on a privileged communication, such as an action fordefamation, and one based upon an underlying course of conductevidenced by the communication."     The court found that the "gravamen of TAA's bad faith claimis not a communication, but a course of 'wrongful and tortious'conduct evidenced by the insurers' actions and communicationsduring the coverage actions. Furthermore, TAA's claim does notassail a pleading but instead alleges that its insurers followeda course of conduct in which they failed to perform their dutiesfairly and in good faith."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996SD NY DENIES CARRIERSJUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OFCOVERAGE, LOST POLICY     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the SouthernDistrict of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment toLumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmentalliabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD) (SDNY).     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that NorthCarolina law should be construed so as to find that nooccurrences triggering coverage happened during their policyperiods.     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for itssubsidiary, JFD Electronics Corp., a television antennaproduction facility located in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the siteand operated the facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979,JFD sublet the site to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp.,which also assumed the facility's operations.  The followingyear, JFD purchased the remaining interest from Unimax andconveyed the site to Ventura.     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in thesite's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup thefollowing year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought a CERCLAcost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  The EPA notifiedthe insureds that they were regarded as potentially responsibleparties with respect to the site in the fall of 1989; thepolicyholders asserted they first learned of the contamination inAugust 1988.     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to bothLumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensivecatastrophe liability coverage from 1969 through 1971; theinsureds asserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primarypolicies covering 1968 through 1972.  Liberty Mutual issued thepolicyholders primary CGL coverage from 1975 through 1979.     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summaryjudgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, anoccurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, andthat an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existedbetween the laws of the interested states.  "This case," thejudge wrote, "is centered on insurance policies " i.e. contracts" and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State'scontract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rulesfor contract interpretation."     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injuryresults during the policy period."  The judge further noted thatunder either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to bephysical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual'scontention that the insureds never responded to its summaryjudgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurredwithin the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motionwas that contamination was not considered under the law to beproperty damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffystated.     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motionfor summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty todefend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, findingthe insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law wereapplicable to the dispute.     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "anendorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollutionexclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement wasmisleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must beconstrued in favor of the insured."     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment againstLiberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine ofmaterial fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,Liberty Mutual had argued and, therefore, its notice wasuntimely.               The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived itslate notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it hadinsufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discoveryhad commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgmenton the waiver issue.     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment withrespect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  Withrespect to the 1968 through 1971 policy ("1ZL policy"), the courtnoted that the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZLnumber that was turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "Theonly pages known to be missing are two endorsements and thepolicy jacket," the court wrote.  "I find it incredible thatLumbermens would retain this file, which imposes liability, butlose the documents that may have relieved Lumbermens ofliability."  Judge Duffy stated that liability would be measuredaccording to the terms of the policy as discovered in theinsurer's files.     As to the 1971 through 1972 policy ("8ZL policy"), the judgefound that the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due toa reference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The courtdenied  the insureds summary judgment, however, finding thatmaterial issues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy'scontent.     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,New York, and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warrenand Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  RobertL. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,represent Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-18IA086-000616-B017-267http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003129 text/html 38346HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:29:35 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:13 GMTContent-length: 38159Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev17.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WASHINGTON UPDATE CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health (224 words) LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House of (86 words) NEWS BRIEFS BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway. A federal (104 words) DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of Representatives (106 words) INDUSTRY TALK WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses the (92 words) TOXICOLOGY REPORT LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed. Recent evidence is (56 words) CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal (94 words) REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles. (75 words) ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated. Chemistry, toxicity, (35 words) INTERNATIONAL FORUM DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused by (91 words) CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish (89 words) ENVIRONMENTAL REPORT AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects of (129 words) TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting from (57 words) RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach to (79 words) ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupt (152 words) INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles on (66 words) INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human (89 words) METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish (65 words) OCCUPATIONAL ALERT RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration (61 words) FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent of (110 words) DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational health (148 words) LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposed (56 words) OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of such (40 words) COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. (48 words) COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for (125 words) MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other news (91 words) CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutch (85 words) PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTH (53 words) ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection are (54 words) CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the (90 words) MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a (96 words) ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry. In a (140 words) COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton (86 words) HAZCHEM REFERENCE SHELF EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp., (44 words) BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P. (79 words) 1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00; (57 words) HAZCHEM ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS AND SERVICES HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulations (61 words) MEETING NEWS OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will (67 words) FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will (39 words) INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23, (53 words) CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace healthCONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health andsafety areas is reviewed.  1996 begins with uncertainty over the future ofmany bills, among them Superfund, clean water, regulatory reform, RCRA reform;the 104th Congress is seen as extremely anti-environment by many environmentalleaders.  Many predict that there will be continued attacks on environmentallegislation by use of indirect methods, such as riders on appropriationsbills.  Superfund sites will cost $2.5 billion annually for cleanup; somemethod must be used to raise more money, because Superfund itself onlyprovides $1 billion a year.  Environmental groups want groundwater cleanupseparate from industry cleanup responsibilities.  Tax authority for Superfundexpired on Dec. 31, 1995; the corporate environmental income tax and chemicaland petroleum excise taxes that raised Superfund monies must be reauthorized.      A number of bills have bipartisan support:  H.R. 2036 would reformland-disposal restrictions under RCRA; safe drinking water (S. 1316) requiresrisk assessment and cost-benefit analyses to set standards, but exemptsby-products of chlorination (trihalomethanes).      Legislation to reform OSHA failed to move in 1995, and prospects are dimfor 1996.  Bills under consideration would move OSHA away from strictenforcement and more toward technical support and assistance to firms.  Thesechanges are not well supported by industry and are vigorously opposed bylabor.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 14-20, Jan. 8, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House ofLEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House ofRepresentatives and the Senate in the environmental, occupational health, andtransportation areas, is listed below; bill number(s), committee(s) to whichbills were referred, floor action, and conference action are as follows:      H.R. 2601, S. 1316: Overhauls procedures used to set drinking watercontaminant standards, and give states more flexibility to protect drinkingwater sources.  Senate Environment & Public Works committee reported, amended11-7-95; Senate amended, passed 11-29-95.(Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 18-19, Jan. 22, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federalBREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federal districtcourt judge ordered the printing and mailing of a revised offer to siliconegel breast implant recipients, which promises to speed payments to them fromthree major manufacturers--Bristol-Myers Squibb, Baxter Health Care, and3M--but excludes Dow Corning.  Overwhelming costs of litigation forced DowCorning, the maker of about half of the implants, into bankruptcy.  Therevised settlement seeks to avoid thousands of court cases that wouldotherwise clog the judicial system for years.  The total value of the revisedsettlement is nearly impossible to assess.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.15-16, Jan. 22, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of RepresentativesDIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of RepresentativesSubcommittee on Energy & Environment in an attempt to see how science is usedby EPA.  Several hearings looked into EPA's long-running reassessment of thehealth effects of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds.  The goal of the hearingswas not to determine if EPA were right or wrong but to find out if the agencyis making appropriate use of the resources available.  The implication is thatEPA has used these resources selectively to support public policy objectivesthat may not stand up to more rigorous scientific scrutiny.  (Chemical &Engineering News, p. 22, Jan. 1, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses theWHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses theimpact of the anti-regulatory era in Washington, with budget, staff, andspending plans for the coming year.  The White Paper helps safety, industrialhygiene, and environmental professionals plan for 1996.  Data generated forthis report comes from questionnaires.  Subjects include the outlook for 1996,industry benchmarks, plant-size benchmarks, and the regulatory outlook.  The36-page report was prepared by Industrial Safety & Hygiene News and was issuedas a supplement to the December 1995 issue of American Industrial HygieneAssociation Journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence isLEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence ispresented on the following issues: lead is a human teratogen, impact ofpregnancy and lactation on lead toxicokinetics, and the contribution ofpaternal lead exposure to adverse reproductive outcome.  Human studies dataare the primary focus.  (Teratology 50(5), 367-373 (1994); Chemical Abstracts122:98868z, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animalCARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal bioassayspublished in the general literature, 1989-1990, and by the National ToxicologyProgram from 1990-1993, is presented in this volume.  A companion publicationin the same volume is the PRESIDENT'S CANCER PANEL CONFERENCE ON AVOIDABLECAUSES OF CANCER, which contains papers on tobacco use; alcohol; diet andnutrition; hormones and medication; occupational exposures; generalenvironmental exposures; radiation; infectious agents; gender, ethnicity, andenvironment; genetic susceptibility and environmental interactions; and aprogram summary and recommendations.  (Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol.103, Supplement 8, 320 pp., 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.  REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.   Effectsof occupational chemicals on reproductive functions (scientific reviews ofSoviet literature on toxicity and hazards of chemicals); adverse effects ofenvironmental chemicals on the outcome of human pregnancy, includingtransplacental poisoning, spontaneous abortions, and birth defects; andreproductive risks of heavy metals and pesticides in women are discussed.(Reprod Toxicol, ed. by Mervyn Richardson, pp. 45-62, 73-97, 167-83 (1993);Chemical Abstracts 122:98847s, 98849u, 98853r, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,environmental pollution, and pollutants of such materials are discussed;drinking water health advisories are offered.  (Drug Metab Review 26(4),649-662 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:98834k, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused byDEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused byenvironmental problems.  Environmental health problems are particularly acutein Ghana, where there is heavy metal pollution and aflatoxins, naturalcarcinogens, in the diet.  LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) exposure is prevalent amongartisans who smelt metal retrieved from old batteries, and effluents fromheavy industry bring MERCURY (CAS RN 7439-97-6), ARSENIC (CAS RN 7440-38-2),ALUMINUM (CAS RN 7429-90-5), and lead into the environment.  These issues andmany others are discussed in the article.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.27-28, Jan. 1, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to PolishCARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish researchersare discussed.  These sources include the series "IARC Monographs on theEvaluation of Carcinogenic Risk to Humans"; official lists of carcinogens fromindividual countries; a periodical that surveys compounds tested forcarcinogenic activity; the Annual Report on Carcinogens, a series on chemicalsin the workplace; a guide on carcinogens; and computer databases, includingthe INCAR, IRIS, IRPTC, RTECS CHEMINFO factual databases and the CANCER-CD,MEDLINE, TOXLINE, NIOSHTIC and MEDIP bibliographic databases.  In Polish.(Med Pr 46(3), 289-300 (1995); Medline 96-045331)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects ofAIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects ofparticulates is summarized.  Acute exposure to elevated levels of particulateshas been associated with increased cardiopulmonary mortality, hospitalizationfor respiratory disease, and increased incidence and duration of respiratorysymptoms, as well as exacerbation of asthma, declines in lung function, andrestricted activity.  Small deficits in lung function, higher risk of chronicrespiratory disease and symptoms, and increased mortality have also beenassociated with chronic exposure to respirable particulates.  Health effectshave been observed at levels below current U.S. National Ambient Air QualityStandards.  Although the biological mechanisms involved are poorly understood,recent evidence supports the hypothesis that such air pollutants are a riskfactor for respiratory disease and cardiopulmonary mortality.  (InhalationToxicol 7(1), 1-18 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:98861s, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting fromTRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting fromchlorinated pesticides, could not be removed efficiently by traditionaltreatments.  Reuse of agricultural drainage increases the level oftrihalomethane precursors; chloramination is the recommended drinking waterdisinfectant to minimize the level of exposure to these potentialcarcinogens.  (Water Treat 9(3), 209-214 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:114100a, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach toRADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach tohealth protection criteria.  A WHO/EURO working group met in Israel early in1993 to assess the significance of health risks from indoor radon, to developa unified approach to the control of radon exposure, and to advise on thecommunication of associated health risks.  This article summarizes thedeliberations of this working group and its conclusions and recommendations.(Indoor Air 4(3), 197-201 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1410079, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disruptENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupthuman fertility and possibly the ability to reproduce.  Both male and femalereproductive health are being disturbed by environmentally occurring chemicalsthat change fertility by causing, among numerous effects, low sperm counts,testicular abnormalities, and altered sexual development of both male andfemale fetuses, as well as cancers and other diseases of both sexes.  Amongthe chemicals cited as endocrine disruptors are PHTHALATES, ingredients invarious plastics, paints, inks, and varnishes; ALKYL PHENOLS, produced bymicrobial degradation of detergent, paint, herbicide, and cosmetic chemicals;and ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, including DDT (CAS RN 50-29-3), ALDRIN CAS RN309-00-2), and DIELDRIN (CAS RN 60-57-1).  Studies on these chemicals beganbecause certain wildlife, exposed to these substances, had suffered changes inreproductive ability.  The implications for human reproduction are discussedand reviewed.  (The Sciences, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 12-15, Jan.-Feb. 1996;Health, pp. 52-56, Oct. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles onINDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles onpublic awareness of air quality as federal funding declines; ASTM-developedcarbon dioxide indoor standard; environmental tobacco smoke issues lessimportant; radon standards; indoor air quality training; building management;and the year's review in Congress, NIOSH, EPA, OSHA, and other organizations;and filtration news.  (Indoor Air Review, Vol. 5, No. 10, 24 pp., Dec. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing humanINDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human exposures.There are different policy approaches available for reducing human exposuresto indoor pollutants, an exceptionally complex task.  Options range fromwaiting for more definitive information to enacting regulatory standards, withmany variations in between.  This article presents some of the factorspolicy-makers must consider in establishing indoor air quality policies andthe role researchers should play in ensuring that such policies are based onthe best, available scientific information.  (Indoor Air 4(3), 202-211 (1994);Chemical Abstracts 122:140873z, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fishMETAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish tissueresponses to stress differently, according to recent studies.  Tissues of fishliving in metal-contaminated waters show signs of chronic stress; the fishresponded poorly to additional pollution and to stresses of confinement.  Thestudy expands the range at which pollutants exert deleterious effects onorganisms.  (Science News, Vol. 149, p. 21, Jan. 13, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administrationRESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration arereviewed in a multi-part article.  Administering a program and OSHArequirements are discussed, and tabulations of self-contained breathingapparatus, supplied-air respirators, air-purifying respirators, and poweredair-purifying respirators are presented.  For each type of respirator,company, brand, model, mask material, and other features are noted.(Environmental Protection, pp. 15-18, 20-22, 24-26, Nov. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent ofFOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent ofoccupational health monitoring for dust and pneumoconiosis and to assess dustlevels and the prevalence of pneumoconiosis.  In only 13 (16%) of the 82foundries responding were regular periodic full-sized chest radiographs done.Dust levels were measured every 3 years or more frequently in 20 foundries(24%).  Uncontrolled dust hazard was evident in nine foundries surveyedbetween 1983 and 1992.  The prevalence of silicosis ranged from 0% to 10.3%and increased with duration of service.  The study provided convincingevidence of neglect of occupational health by the foundry industry.  (S AfrMed J 84(12), 851-855, 1994; Medline 96-012992)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational healthDOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational healthproblems.  The last decade has seen a growing interest in recycling  domesticwastes, and action plans to increase such recycling have been adopted by manygovernments.  In 1975, an excess risk for chronic bronchitis was reported forwaste collectors in Switzerland and data from the Danish Registry ofOccupational Accidents and Diseases also indicate an excess risk for pulmonaryproblems among waste collectors compared with the total work force.  Highincidence rates of gastrointestinal problems, irritation of the eye and skin,and symptoms of organic dust toxic syndrome (influenza-like symptoms, cough,muscle pains, fever, fatigue, headache) have been reported among workerscollecting the biodegradable fraction of domestic waste.  They may be exposedto multiple agents such as dust-containing bacteria, endotoxins, mold spores,glucans, volatile organic compounds, and diesel exhaust. (Sci Total Environ170(1-2), 1-19, 1995; Medline 96-007153)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposedLEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposedworkers.  Workers so exposed had significantly poorer postural stability thandid the control group.  Lead may affect certain parts of the whole sensoryneural axis resulting in postural instability when visual input is cut off.(Occup Environ Med 51(11), 768-771 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1113559v,1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of suchOCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of suchdiseases are discussed.  Occupational exposures and diagnosis include thecausal agent toxic effects and exposure criteria.  (Report of the Comm EurCommunities EUR 14768, 212 pp. (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1136702, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling.  Occupationalskin diseases in the metalworking industry are attributed to coolinglubricants in 30-40% of all cases.  Medical and technical protection measuresand the diagnosis of diseases are discussed.  In German.  (TribolSchmierungstech 41(1), 30-33 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141154c, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications forCOAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for coalworkers'pneumoconiosis (CWP) are reviewed and discussed.  Occupationalexposure to coal mine dust causes CWP and other pulmonary diseases bymechanisms that remain unclear.  Because the hydroxyl radicals (-OH) may playan important role in the pathogenesis of CWP, the potential role of bituminouscoal mine dust samples for catalyzing the generation of -OH from hydrogenperoxide were studied.  Based on the results, it was proposed that higherconcentrations of surface iron in coal mine dust may be involved in thegeneration of increased levels of -OH radicals and may play an important rolein the development of CWP in different coal mining areas.  (Free Radical BiolMed 18(1), 11-20 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:141142x, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other newsMANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other newsitems are featured in the December 1995 issue of ACTS Facts (Arts, Crafts andTheater Safety).  MULTIPLE CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY, RESINS AND GLUES ANDPARKINSONISM, YELLOW DYE AND CANCER, MOLYBDENUM TRIOXIDE CANCER STUDY, CERAMICFIBERS AND PLEURAL PLAQUE, and MANGANESE PARKINSONISM LAW SUIT and other itemsare featured in the January 1996 issue of ACTS Facts.  ACTS cites materialfrom various sources important to occupational health in the fine arts.  ACTSFacts, 181 Thompson St., #23, New York, NY 10012-2586; telephone 212-777-0062.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of DutchCARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutchworkers is reviewed and discussed.  Epidemiological studies carried out inGreat Britain, Scandinavia, and the United States indicate that workersexposed to carbon disulfide are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease(CVD) mortality, and in particular for ischemic heart disease mortality.  Theresults of the Dutch study show that exposure to relatively low levels ofcarbon disulfide increases the risk of CVD mortality.  (Int Arch Occup EnvironHealth 66(2), 103-110 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1135655u, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTHPROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTHEFFECTS: CURRENT STATE OF THE ART contains papers on exposure assessment,epidemiology, in vivo toxicology, in vitro toxicology, and public policy.  Theproceedings are in a single issue of the journal Applied Occupational andEnvironmental Hygiene, Vol. 10, No. 12, pp. 977-1156 (Dec. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection areELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection arereviewed and discussed.  German legislation, technical regulations, theprocess of toxics monitoring, definition and classification of hazardousmaterials (threshold limit values), methods of detection, and measurement ofoccupational exposure to hazardous compounds are presented.  In German.(Metalloberflaeche 48(2), 72-74, 76-78 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:113281y,1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by theCENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the NewYork Foundation for the Arts.  CSA lost funding due to governmental fundingcutbacks, but the newsletter, Art Hazards News, will be continued under theauspices of NYFA.  This issue's main article is devoted to pyrotechnics,fire, and explosion effects.  Other articles and abstracts from the literaturecover potentially hazardous chemicals used in the arts and the healthimplications of these materials for artists and performers.  (Art HazardsNews, Vol. 18, No. 5,  8 pp., 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in aMANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a pamphlet,Potter's Manganese Toxicity", a reprint of an article published in the journalContact. The pamphlet discussed the experiences of a raku potter who developedParkinson-like symptoms of manganese poisoning and metal fume fever.Manganese fumes emitted during raku firing are more dangerous than breathingor ingesting the dusts; symptoms are flu-like, and range from fatigue,insomnia, confusion, forgetfulness, blackouts, vision changes, loss ofthree-dimensional perception, slow reflexes, and headaches, to loss of bladdercontrol, motor skills, and more.  (The Crafts Report, p. 4, Jan. 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In aALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In agroup of 226 bakers and pastry makers and in 88 students of a training schoolfor bakers, skin sensitivity to the common allergens wheat and alpha amylasewere evaluated.  Findings confirm that bakers are at risk of sensitization notonly to wheat allergen but also to amylase from Aspergillus oryzae.  Theenzyme should be included in the list of substances to be tested among bakersin whom an occupational allergy is suspected, but particular care should betaken in evaluating the cutaneous response.  Further investigations are alsoneeded to identify the source of risk and to better define the characteristicsof the enzyme and the relationship between skin reaction to amylase,sensitization to wheat, and atopy.  In Italian.  (Med Lav 85(2), 142-148(1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141148d, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cottonCOTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton andsynthetic fiber mills was studied.  A cross-sectional study of 1048 cottonworkers and 404 synthetic fiber workers showed that work-related ocular andnasal irritation are the most common symptoms experienced by cotton textileworkers.  There was no relation between these symptoms and atopy, byssinosis,or dust concentration.  It is likely that they relate to as yet unidentifiedagents unrelated to concentration of cotton dust.  (Occup Environ Med 51(11),744-748 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122: 113657t, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp.,EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp., $125)includes more than 350 tables of data on standard factors needed to calculatehuman exposure to toxic chemicals.  Available from Government Institutes,Inc., 4 Research place, Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20850; telephone301-921-2355.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P.BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P. Urben(1995, 2 vol., ISBN 0-7506-1557-5, $225), also available in CD-ROM andcomputer software ($595 each), provides a single source of logically arranged,readily accessible data on chemical hazards arranged by specific chemical byformula; fire-related data; indexes to chemical names and Chemical AbstractsService Registry Numbers; and by class, group, and topic.  Available fromButterworth-Heinemann, 225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801; telephone800-366-2665; 617-928-2613; FAX 800-446-6520; 617-933-6333.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 19961996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00;1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00; CD-ROM,$149; both, $248) contains information on products and services.  More than15,000 firms are listed in 13 major sections.  Geographic, product andservices, and alphabetic firm listing indexes are available.  For informationcontact Stevens Publishing Corp., Directory Division, P.O. Box 2573, Waco, TX76702-2573; telephone 800-727-7573.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulationsHEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulationstracking, ergonomics and human factors, and safety training administration andsafety training electronic products.  For each product, as appropriate, arelisted company, product name, platform, operating system, hardware, database,format, type of product, updates, local support, management tasks, personnel,training, and other factors.  (Occupational Health & Safety, pp. 67-98, Oct.1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting willOSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will bepresented according to the following schedule:  8-HOUR REFRESHER, Feb. 8,1996, in North Haven, CT; 24-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-7, 1996, in NorthHaven, CT; and 40-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-9, 1996, in North Haven, CT.For information contact Field Safety Consulting, Inc., 28 Magee Avenue,Stamford, CT 06902; telephone 203-964-9199; FAX 203-969-1325.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course willFUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will beheld in New Orleans, LA, on Feb. 26-Mar. 1, 1996.  For information contactAmerican Industrial Hygiene Association, 2700 Prosperity Avenue, Suite 250,Fairfax, VA 22031; telephone 703-849-888; FAX 703-207-3561.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,1996, in Chicago, IL.  Fee is $250.  For information contact Great LakesCenter for Occupational and Environmental Safety and Health (M/C 922), Schoolof Public Health, University of Illinois at Chicago, 2121 West Taylor St.,Chicago, IL 60612-7260; telephone 312-996-8842; FAX 312-413-7369.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-19IA086-000616-B017-288http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev38.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003202 text/html 21964HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:29:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:09 GMTContent-length: 21777Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev38.html Sample Issue Copyright INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRY (309 words) MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLAND FOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANY (269 words) INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OIL (171 words) PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATION OF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGY (215 words) GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEW BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURE (306 words) EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTON (218 words) CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS (366 words) CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERS (217 words) APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASES (570 words) CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRYThe Public Service Commission of Wisconsin (PSC) has preparedan Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) as part of itsinvestigation into changing the structure and regulation ofthe electric utility industry in Wisconsin(PSC Docket 05-EI-114). This EIS is now available for publicreview. A separate report by a special Advisory Committee tothe Commission lists recommendations for changes in electricgeneration, transmission and distribution.The PSC held public information meetings and hearings onthe future of Wisconsin's electric industry in six cities,November 27 through December 5. The hearings were required inorder to obtain public comment on the EIS, but comments andtestimony were also encouraged on the investigation itself,including the upcoming Commission Advisory Committee Report.The Commission decisions (based on the comments andtestimony, EIS, and Advisory Committee Report) may affectcustomer electricity costs, customer electric services, andthe choices available for each.The EIS has been prepared because this investigation couldresult in the adoption of principles and policies thatsignificantly alter the regulatory responsibilities of theCommission. Changes in how the Commission regulates electricutilities could, in turn, have environmental and economicconsequences. The EIS explores the economic, environmental andsocial costsThe PSC encourages members of the public and organizations toattend the hearings or write and send comments on the EIS.Comments and testimony on the EIS must be submitted to thePublic Service Commission offices in Madison by 4:30 p.m. onWednesday, December 6, 1995. Comments and testimony will beconsidered by the three-member Commission as it determineswhat recommendations it will make to the Legislature onDecember 12.For more information, or to request a copy of theEnvironmental Impact Statement or the Advisory CommitteeReport, please write to the Public Service Commission ofWisconsin, Electric Division, P.O. Box 7854, Madison, WI,53707-7854, or call 608/267-2896.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLANDFOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANYDeltic Farm & Timber Co., Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary ofMurphy oil Corporation (NYSE:MUR), and Temple-Inland ForestProducts Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Temple-Inland, Inc. (NYSE:TIN), have formed Del-Tin Fiber, L.L.C.and plan for the entity to construct and operate a mediumdensity fiberboard plant at a site near El Dorado, Arkansas.The plant will cost an estimated $90 million, will have anannual production capacity of 150 million square feet and willhave more than 100 employees when it begins production in late1997. The site selection and project design are subject toregulatory approvals, completion of final engineering andresolution of other site-related issues. Construction isscheduled to commence in the summer of 1996.Del-Tin's Chairman, Ron Pearce, stated, "We are pleased toannounce our selection of the El Dorado/Union County area forthis exciting new venture. We deeply appreciate the efforts ofthe El Dorado chamber of Commerce and its local team, city andcounty officials, the Arkansas Highway & TransportationDepartment and the Arkansas Industrial Development Commission,all of whom worked together to provide us with a site havingthe necessary infrastructure for a project of this magnitude.Del-Tin looks forward to a long and prosperous future in UnionCounty."Medium density fiberboard (MDF) is used as a substitute forlumber in the furniture, flooring and molding industriesthroughout the world. MDF is an engineered wood productcomposed of wood residuals (chips, shavings and sawdust) heldtogether by an adhesive bond. unlike most other lumbersubstitutes, MDF possesses many of the same machining andstrength characteristics of solid wood.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OILIndonesia's giant Duri oil field, currently producing at arecord 300,000 barrels daily (b/d), yielded its billionthbarrel in September, Chevron and Texaco reported.Duri is operated by PT Caltex Pacific Indonesia (CPI), a 50/50Chevron/Texaco affiliate working under a long-term productionsharing agreement with Pertamina, Indonesia's state oilcompany.Located in Sumatra, Duri was discovered in 1941 and beganproducing in 1958. Output peaked at 65,000 b/d in 1963, andthen declined steadily until 1984. At that time, CPI engineersdetermined that Duri's large reserves, shallow depth, thickoil and tight reservoir rocks made it an ideal prospect for"steamflood" technology, which injects steam to heat the oilso that more of it flows to the production wells.In 1985, CPI began a major steamflood at Duri, launching anew era of production growth. Plans call for continuedexpansion of the steamflood, already the world's largest.Meanwhile, advanced seismic imaging is helping to maximize oilrecovery. Duri currently represents about 40 percent of CPI'stotal oil output.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATIONOF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGYParacelsian, Inc. (NASDAQ: PRLN), of Ithaca, NY, has filed aU.S. patent application that describes improvements in its Ah-Immunoassay technology.  Paracelsian anticipates thatenhancements over its currently licensed technology willprovide markets for the assay in Asia and Eastern Europe."The simplicity and speed of the new formats are ideal forcountries with enormous environmental problems and littlefinancial support for high-cost instrumental analysis," saidinventor Geoffrey Wheelock, Ph. D., Director of AnalyticalResearch at Paracelsian. "Much of Asia and Eastern Europe arerebounding from decades of environmental neglect."Ah-Immunoassay technology is a biologically-based diagnostictest designed to detect and determine the level of dioxin-likecompounds found in the environment. The disclosure filed atthe U.S. Patent and Trademarks Office in Washington, D.C.describes methods for increasing sensitivity, reducingbackground interference, increasing sample throughput,reducing the time required to perform the assay, and reducingreagent use.Paracelsian is a biotechnology company engaged in thediscovery of pharmaceuticals and the development and marketingof assays for Unproved cancer diagnosis. The Company'stechnologies are based on a biochemical process known assignal transduction -- a form of information processing withinthe cell. The Company has in effect several licensing deals,including an agreement with Dow Chemical for Paracelsian'sAh-Immunoassay signed in January 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEWBUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURESales of genetically engineered products to the agricultureand food industries will rise from a few hundred milliondollars in 1995 to $3 billion by 2000 and nearly $10 billionby 2005.  The growing role of these products will providesubstantial productivity gain in agriculture, contribute toongoing changes in industry structure, provide novel productswith consumer benefits, and create new business opportunitiesin agricultural inputs, agricultural processing, and chemicalproduction.Decision Resources, one of the industry leaders inbiotechnology market analysis, has published "Biotechnology inAgriculture: Impacts on Products and Markets."This study predicts that over the next decade, thebiotechnological impacts in several industry sectors will bedramatic, with major shifts in market share and sales of newproducts. These sections include herbicides, insecticides,animal health, seeds, downstream processes and products,diagnostic and detection technology, and production of high-value compounds in animals and plants."Biotechnology in Agriculture: Impacts on Products andMarkets" is derived from interviews with industry participantsand a combination of proprietary and publicly availableinformation. It analyzes the global regulatory environment andintellectual property issues relevant to the commercializationof agricultural biotechnology, profiles the 20 majoragricultural biotech companies, and tracks the activities ofthe numerous players in the market.The report is available for $2,600 for the first copy and $350for each additional copy. For more detailed information or toplace an order, contact Jean Carbone, Decision Resources, BayColony Corporate Center, 1100 Winter Street, Waltham, MA02154.  Phone: 617.487.3737 Fax: 617.487.5750Decision Resources is an international consulting andpublishing firm that evaluates world markets, emergingtechnologies and competitive forces in growth industriesworldwide. DR Reports are research publications providingcost-effective, timely business intelligence to help decisionmakers in the life sciences stay abreast of today'sinnovations and remain successful in volatile climates.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTONThe EPA has granted regulatory approval for Monsanto'sBollgard(TM) gene, which provides cotton plants with season-long,in-plant protection from such major lepidopteran insect pests asthe cotton bollworm, tobacco budworm and pink bollworm. EPA'sregistration of the Bollgard gene, the first insect-protectiongene to be approved for cotton and only the third for any crop,follows the successful completion earlier this year of regulatoryreviews by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and U.S.Department of Agriculture (USDA). The notification marksMonsanto's fourth allowing full commercialization of agenetically engineered crop in the past six months.The insect control protein introduced into cotton plants wasoriginally isolated from a specific strain of a natural soilbacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis. The genetically-engineeredseeds containing the Bollgard gene are covered by Monsantopatents, some of which have been issued, while others arepending.According to James Tobin, Monsanto Cotton Business Director, theBollgard gene will be widely available to America's cottonfarmers for the 1996 planting season. The gene has already beenincorporated into a number of popular cotton varieties.The technology will be commercially introduced by Delta andPine Land Company, the leading U.S. cotton seed company.Additional programs to commercialize Bollgard cotton areunderway at the Jacob Hartz Seed Company and StonevillePedigreed Seed Company, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGENFOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMSSepragen Corporation (NASDAQ: SPGNU, SPGNZ, SPGNA, SPGNW), ofSan Leandro, CA, has signed a contract to build multipleQuantaSep LS (large-scale) systems for Chiron Corporation. Thecontract, valued at approximately $400,000, includes hardware,software, documentation and validation. The systems have beendesigned to meet the specific needs of Chiron's drugmanufacturing efforts.  Delivery is scheduled for January1996."The interactive team efforts between Sepragen and Chironengineers resulted in the custom design of the processpurification systems. These will enable the rapid purificationof large quantities of two new potential Chiron drugs fortheir clinical trial needs," said Vinit Saxena, president andchairman."This is part of our overall strategic plan to providestate-of-the-art, large-scale purification systems tobiopharmaceutical companies to enhance and optimize theirmanufacturing processes."We selected Sepragen for this purchase based on theexceptional service that they have provided to us in thepast," said Mark Pemberton, director of Bulk PharmaceuticalManufacturing at Chiron Corporation.The QuantaSep LS is a large-scale, computer-controlledchromatography workstation consisting of hardware,electronics, software, sensors and detectors."Sepragen's advanced technologies have added significanteconomic value to the manufacturing processes of many FDAapproved pharmaceutical drugs worldwide," Saxena said.Sepragen Corporation is a pioneer in the field of large-scalechromatography - the next generation technology in theseparations field. The company markets a patented radial flowchromatography (RFC) technology that utilizes a novelhydrodynamic column design in which the flow is directedradially from the outside to the center of the column. Thesurface areas are larger and the radial flow path (bed depth)is shorter. The combination of these features results inhigher flow rates, lower back pressures, and increasedvolumetric productivity over traditional axial columns. Thisis further magnified in large-volume chromatographyapplications.Sepragen also markets computer-controlled processchromatography workstations and process technology to thebiotechnology, food and environmental industries. Thecompany's products are being used by leading biotechcompanies to reduce manufacturing costs and commercialproduction time to market, as well as by food andenvironmental companies to produce new value-added productsand processes. Based in San Leandro, California, the companymarkets its proprietary RFC technology and services worldwide.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERSThe California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) todayordered cellular utilities to identify and address publicconcerns- potential health problems from electromagnetic field(ENF) and radio-frequency (RF) exposure in siting and buildingnew cellular towers. It urged cellular companies to sitefacilities away from schools and hospitals, and to restrictaccess to sites with warning signs and barriers.The Commission's jurisdiction is limited to cellular towersand related facilities - it does not regulate cellular phones.The federal Food and Drug Administration regulates RFemissions from consumer/industrial devices and is looking intoRF emissions from hand-held cellular phones.Due to public concern and scientific uncertainty regarding thepotential health effects of EMF exposure, the Commissionexamined what steps should be taken to mitigate the-healtheffects, if any, of RF and EMFs from the 1,000 cellularfacilities in California. It found no scientific link betweenEMFs and adverse health effects on humans from cellularfacilities.A steering committee composed of one representative each fromthe CPUC Commission Advisory and Compliance Division, CPUCDivision of Ratepayer Advocates, state Department of HealthServices, Cellular Carriers Association of California, andcitizens concerned About Telecommunications EMF held an EMFinformational workshop on July 21, 1993 for interestedindividuals and organizations. The workshop was videotaped forthose who could not attend.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASESNow that the first application to field test a geneticallyengineered insect has been submitted to USDA/APHIS, aTransgenic Arthropod Team has been formed in the BiotechnologyPermits Unit of Biotechnology, Biologics, and EnvironmentalProtection (BBEP), the agency that oversees introductions oftransgenic organisms and products for USDA. The Team will beresponsible for the development of guidance for the release ofgenetically modified arthropods into the environment, and thepreparation of environmental documents associated with thosereleases.APHIS/BBEP already provides this sort of guidance toprospective applicants seeking to field test geneticallyengineered plants and microorganisms under permit ornotification. The agency distributes USDA-APHIS TechnicalBulletin 1783, "User's Guide for Introducing GeneticallyEngineered Plants and Microorganisms" to help investigatorsidentify potential risks to the environment, and advisesapplicants concerning the data that must be available foragency review.With more insect release proposals expected, the TransgenicArthropod Team is compiling a Bibliography Associated With theIntroduction of Transgenic Arthropods, which is publiclyavailable in database format. It currently contains 32 generalcitations and reviews, 32 references on field evaluations,and 58 titles on laboratory methods. The Team will continueadding relevant publications and expand the database, andencourages others to suggest additional publications thatshould be included. In addition to the bibliography, thefollowing information on how proposed releases will bereviewed is available on the BBEP homepage(http://www.aphis.usda.gov/bbep/bp).The evaluation process first considers what the risks wouldbe if the introduced organism was not transgenic. The analysisat this point would be the same as for the introduction of aclassical biological control organism and would require suchinformation as: (1) phylogenetic position of the organism andcharacteristics of near relatives, (2) geographic origin andrange, to include temperature and relative humidity tolerancesand diapause attributes, (3) host and habitat preferences, (4)dispersal characteristics, (5) life table attributes, (6)interactions with other species, and (7) the relationshipbetween the organism and currently employed pest managementstrategies.The evaluation process would next consider whether the geneticalterations have altered the risks associated with theunmodified organism. The fundamental risk assessment issue tobe addressed is: Will the genetic alteration modifyecologically or environmentally relevant properties of theorganism? To properly address this issue, APHIS would need toconsider such information as: (1) how the recipient organismwas transformed through recombinant DNA technology, to includecharacteristics of the donor, vector, and recipient organismsand a description of the methods employed, (2) thecharacteristics of the modified organism, to include thestability of the new genotype and the probability of genetransfer to other organisms, (3) potential impact of thetransgenic arthropod on native populations, communities, andecosystems, and (4) methods for evaluation of the safety ofthe transgenic organism in field trials before unrestrictedrelease.In summary, the APHIS evaluation process would basicallyconsider the attributes of the unmodified organism, theattributes of the genetic alteration, the phenotype of themodified organism compared to the unmodified organism, and theattributes of the accessible environment. Only aftersufficient information is provided in these four areas ofconcern will APHIS be able to determine the appropriateness ofa release into the environment.APHIS welcomes comments at any time concerning the present andfuture regulation of transgenic arthropods. These commentscan be directed to Dr. Orrey P. Young at oyoung@aphis.usda.govor at 301-734-8565 (voice) or 301-734-5992 (fax)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-20IA086-000616-B017-314http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev40.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003227 text/html 40060HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:30:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:09 GMTContent-length: 39873Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev40.html Sample Issue Copyright INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet September 18, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM (518 words) EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS (617 words) BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION (519 words) DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT (596 words) MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION (992 words) MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT (219 words) EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING (623 words) DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE (132 words) WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS (432 words) KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES in (161 words) SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM (199 words) MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH (387 words) CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM   At the latest round of Senate hearings over Resource Conservation andRecovery Act reauthorization, representatives of industry and localgovernment officials strongly opposed a proposal by the environmental groupClean Water Action that there be a moratorium on the construction of newwaste-to-energy plants until the year 2000, and that incinerator ash bemanaged as a hazardous waste.   The moratorium and incinerator ash proposals have been endorsed by abroad coalition of national environmental groups, and legislation toachieve those goals introduced by Rep. Peter Kostmayer (D-Pa.) has won theendorsement of 24 House co-sponsors. However, the main Senate RCRA bill,S. 976, sponsored by Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.) contains no such provisions,and Baucus' skeptical questioning last week of the Clean Water Actionrepresentative suggested that it is unlikely to be amended to do so.   Dr. Henry Cole, director of science and policy for Clean Water Action,argued that the moratorium was needed in part to confront the ''mercurycrisis in this country.'' As well, he said, waste-to-energy competesdirectly with recycling for materials, and for scarce capital.   Asked Baucus: ''Why would a moratorium be necessary if the Clean AirAct (mercury emissions) reduction provisions'' were implemented andenforced as called for under that law? Cole replied that he did not haveconfidence EPA would effectively implement the provisions, and that,anyway, this was not his sole reason for supporting a moratorium.   Under questioning from Baucus, Randall Franke, representing the NationalAssociation of Counties, the National League of Cities, and the Solid WasteAssociation of North America, stated this his groups ''are equally adamantand opposed'' to a moratorium on waste-to-energy, and the designation ofincinerator ash as hazardous. Said Franke: ''We need more options (forsolid waste management), not less.''   AllenMoore, president of the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, said that while there had been ''temporary disruptions'' at afew waste-to-energy facilities due to materials diversion caused byrecycling, in general there was no conflict between resource recovery andrecycling. ''You can accommodate any level of recycling,'' said Moore, aslong as waste-to-energy plants are built at the outset as part of anintegrated waste management solution.   In his testimony, Paul Varello, deputy chair of NSWMA's Institute ofResource Recovery, said that several recent field tests ''make clear thatmunicipal waste combustor ash is not a 'hazardous waste.' '' Based onfindings that incinerator ash disposed in a landfill meeting the relevanttechnical standards ''presents no significant risk to human health and theenvironment,'' Varello said that several provisions in S. 976 ''could beimproved.''   Added Varello: ''Specifically, several provisions in S. 976 wouldimpose more stringent requirements on landfills where ash and municipalsolid waste is disposed than for landfills where only municipal solid wasteis disposed. These provisions reflect the old view that the disposal ofcombined ash (bottom and fly ash) from waste combustors presents a greaterthreat to human health and the environment than the disposal of municipalsolid waste. A series of recent studies suggest otherwise.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's issuance September 11 of thefirst comprehensive federal Subtitle-D municipal landfill standards should''bolster confidence in landfilling'' and ''help level the playing field,''EPA Administrator William K. Reilly said last week.   The regs were generally applauded by industry for providingenvironmental safeguards that will facilitate the construction of needednew landfills. At the same time, the regs drew fire for their''loopholes'' from environmentalists, whose recent lawsuit finally forcedEPA to issue the long-delayed regs when it did.   The EPA regs, issued under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,include location, facility design and operation, groundwater monitoring,financial responsibility, and closure requirements, in addition to cleanuprequirements for existing contamination. They are generally to take effect24 months from publication in the Federal Register, with the exception thatground-water monitoring and corrective action requirements are phased-in,allowing up to five years for compliance.   Under law, states will be required to incorporate the EPA standards intotheir current state permitting programs. EPA approval of the state programis then required, with the Agency retaining the authority to enforce itsstandards in cases where a state program is not approved.   In states with EPA-approved permitting programs, landfills must bedesigned to ensure drinking water standards are not exceeded ingroundwater. States without EPA-approved programs are required to havelandfills designed with a composite liner made of synthetic materialcovering a two-foot clay liner.   At the same time, the regs provide states with approved programflexibility to alter landfill requirements ''to accommodate the widevariety of local conditions that exist around landfills,'' said EPA. Undercertain conditions, states with EPA-approved programs can approvealternative landfill designs, allow use of alternative daily covermaterials, or modify the rule's 30-year post-closure care period.   While this approach was cited by Reilly as an example of the Agencyhaving ''worked hard'' to reduce burdens that the rules might place oncommunities, this flexibility was criticized by the Sierra Club forenabling states to enact ''potentially weaker'' landfill and groundwatermonitoring standards. This, said the Sierra Club's Daniel Weiss, wouldallow ''some landfills to evade strict groundwater protection requirementswhich perpetuates the threat of drinking water contamination across thenation."   The Sierra Club also faulted the regs for not requiring leak detectionsystems which would detect leaks before they contaminated groundwater, andcalled on Congress to plug this and other loopholes.   Allen Moore, president of the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, noted that the waste services industry ''has anxiouslyawaited'' the EPA regs ''because they enumerate the measures being taken byour industry to protect the environment and to assure public health andsafety in the land disposal of our nation's wastes.''   Added Moore: ''Hopefully, these new regulations will be a catalyst foreliminating the backlog that exists in some states where permitting andsiting of new disposal facilities have been halted due to a lack of federalenvironmental protection standards. Now, using these new rules as abuilding block, these stalled projects can proceed and we can begin sitingand developing the capacity to meet our future waste disposal needs.''   Among other standards included in the EPA regs:   -- Location requirements restrict the siting of new landfills nearairports and in ecologically valuable wetlands or areas subject to naturaldisasters such as floodplains, fault areas and seismic zones.   -- Operation standards include daily cover, methane gas monitoring,stormwater controls, and programs to keep regulated hazardous waste out oflandfills.   -- Closure and post-closure care include placing a final cover over thelandfill, final cover maintennace, groundwater and methane gas monitoring,and leachate management for 30 years.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION   Not even the publication of RCRA Subtitle-D regulations by theEnvironmental Protection Agency helped stop the fall of Browning-FerrisIndustries stock, which fell nearly six points in the 10 days following thecompany's prediction of lower fourth-quarter earnings.   BFI filed an 8-K with the Securities and Exchange Commission Sept. 3,estimating that its fourth-quarter earnings would be 15%-25% less than itsthird-quarter earnings. Earlier the company had predicted a 10%-15% dropover the previous quarter. Net income of 28-32 cents per share is expectedfor the fourth quarter, which ends Sept. 30, down from 38 cents for thethird quarter. The company also estimates income from operations for fiscal1991 will be 12%-15% lower than the $257 million reported for 1990.   BFI stock dropped four points to 21-3/4 after the 8-K was filed, and hadfallen another 1-7/8 by Sept. 12, the day after Subtitle D was published.   In the 8-K report, BFI blamed lower revenues both in the third andfourth quarters on lower commercial waste volumes as a result of therecession, as well as state waste minimization requirements and thediversion of a portion of the waste stream from the company's higher margincollections and landfill operations to the lower margin recyclingbusiness.   Fletcher Thorne-Thomsen, BFI's vice president for investor relations,said the company is disappointed with the results, but he would not predictwhen the company would come out of the slump, nor would he name thenumber-one cause of the company's economic troubles.   A former BFI official said that in addition to the recession a majorcause of the firm's economic problems is poor management. ''The company isjust in turmoil right now,'' he said. ''Sure business is down, but it'sstill solid; and saying recycling has hurt is crazy because it saves airspace, and that air space will be worth more next year than it is today.''   Other industry observersagree that the company has a management problem.One analyst pointed out that, while other waste management firms arehaving some financial troubles because of the recession, they are notnearly as bad as BFI has experienced.   However, at least one Wall Street firm--Smith Barney--has some positivewords. Analyst Ken Leung is advising his clients to buy because, ''Thestock is cheap and we think it has bottomed out.''   Leung says BFI will clearly benefit in the long run from the newSubtitle-D regulations, which he predicts will reduce the 6,000 existingsolid waste landfills to 2,000. He adds, however, that in the near term thenew rules may put downward pressure on disposal prices, as small landfillowners scurry to fill existing facilities that can not meet the newrequirements.   In other BFI news, on Sept. 4 the company declared a regular quarterlycash dividend of 17 cents per common share of stock, payable Oct. 4. At thesame time, it announced that Frank W. Montfort would fill the newly createdoffice of vice president, chief quality officer. Montfort had beendivisional vice president, operations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT   The Delaware Solid Waste Authority Board has selected ABB (Asea BrownBoveri) Resource Recovery Systems to start negotiations for the design,construction and operation of a 500-ton/day waste-to-energy plant.   The mass-burn facility will allow the authority to manage solid wastegenerated as the result of future increased growth in Sussex County, saidthe authority. The amount of the contract was not made public.   ABB and two other companies, Foster Wheeler Power Systems andWestinghouse Electric Corporation submitted ''excellent proposals for theproject,'' said an authority spokesman. The authority's staff, consultantsand board members conducted exhaustive evaluations of the three proposals,he said.   The general view was that any one of the three companies would do a goodjob, he continued. Cleanliness of operations, technical capability,operating experience, guarantees, economic, and financial strengths wereconsiderations in the selection process, said the official.   ''ABB is a multi-national company with revenues of $27-billion and about215,000 employees. ABB brings together the best of American, Swedish,Swiss and German technology in a worldwide high technology company,'' saidthe authority official. ABB acquired the U.S. firm ofCombustion-Engineering, Inc., a Delaware corporation. The authoritybelieves that ABB can provide Delaware with a state-of-the-art andenvironmentally sound waste-to-energy facility, he said.   The plant will be located at the authority's Southern Solid WasteManagement Center at Jones Crossroads, Sussex County, Delaware. Front-endseparation of materials will be accomplished through the ''RecycleDelaware'' program, said the official. In addition, space will beallocated for additional front-end separation in the Southern ReclamationPlant if it becomes necessary in the future.   The Southern Reclamation Plant will not only reduce material beinglandfilled, but will also give the authority the opportunity to recycleexisting landfill space in the future. Timely completion of the plant willbe essential for assuring safe solid-waste disposal capacity in SussexCounty for several decades, said the official.   The plant will have the best available control technology, whichincludes the scrubbing of acid gases and a baghouse to remove fineparticulates. The authority will dispose of the ash from thewaste-to-energy plant in its Southern Solid Waste Management Centerlandfill. With state and federal assistance and approval, the authoritywill explore constructive uses for ash in order to minimize ash disposal inthe landfill, said the official.   The waste-to-energy plant will generate approximately 15-megawatts ofelectricity, according to officials at ABB, headquartered in Windsor,Connecticut. Contract and price negotiations are expected to begin inSeptember and construction could begin as early as the fourth quarter of1992. The plant will feature ABB's state-of-the-art environmentalcontrols, which have been subjected to rigorous testing by the U.S.Department of Environmental Protection and its Canadian counterpart,Environment Canada, said the official. The new facility will feature theCombustion Engineering DeBartolomeis mass-burn grate system, proven in 79plants around the world for 35 years, an ABB Combustion Engineering Systemssteam generator, and other ABB-manufactured products and systems.   ''In today's market, winning this project against two qualitycompetitors is a significant accomplishment,'' said the ABB official.''The Southern Reclamation Project will strengthen our company's positionin the North American waste to-energy market and enhance our stature as amajor full-service vendor.''   ABB Resource Recovery Systems designs, builds and operates bothmass-burn and processed fuel waste-to-energy plants, including operationalfacilities in Hartford, Detroit and Honolulu, and several projectscurrently under development.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION   The Massachusetts Industrial Finance Agency (MIFA), Semass andunderwriters closed a $342-million refinancing and facilities expansionbond issue for the shred and burn Semass Resource Recovery Facility inRochester, Massachusetts, said a project official.   The Semass facility is a 52-megawatt shred and burn, waste-to-energyresource recovery plant with a capacity of 1,900-tons of solid waste perday. It is the largest facility of the three of its type in operation,according to the official.   The expansion would increase total electrical output of the plant to78-megawatts and the waste acceptance capacity by about 900-tons/day to2,800-tons/day. The expansion is slated to be on line by the end of 1993.   Semass is still working on building permits and obtaining a review ofthe plans by the Department of Environmental Protection. It is expectedthat some work on the expansion can begin this fall, he said.   The sources of revenue to repay principal and interest on the bonds arewaste disposal fees to be derived from waste disposal contracts withmunicipalities and private sources, as well as income from the solid-wastespot market, said the official.   Other sources of revenue will be derived from the sale of electricity toCommonwealth Electric Company, the sale of ferrous and non-ferrousrecyclables and interest earned on funds and accounts as defined by theindenture.   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semassplant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,Massachusetts. Prudential Securities was the lead underwriter andplacement agent for the issue, which consisted of $255.6-million oftax-exempt, 24-year bonds, $61.6-million of taxable bonds and $25-millionin taxable subordinated notes.   Greenwich Partners, Inc. of Greenwich, Connecticut, was underwriter andplacement agent for the tax-exempt bonds, and Stephens Inc. of Little Rock,Arkansas, was underwriter and placement agent for the taxable portion ofthe issue.   The major portion of the financing consisted of $145.6-million non-alternate minimum tax (AMT) and $110-million AMT tax-exempt revenue bonds.The non-AMT bonds were priced at par to yield 9%. The AMT bonds werepriced at par to yield 9.25%.   The $61.6-million of taxable bonds are priced at par to yield 11.25%;the subordinated notes were priced at par to yield 13.2%. The majorportion of the tax-exempt bonds were purchased by bond funds, according toGreenwich Partners. The Semass bond issue will refund $178.6-million ofoutstanding debt and provide approximately $160-million of the expansion ofthe existing Semass plant.   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semassplant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,Massachusetts. There is also a debt service reserve fund consisting ofapproximately one year's maximum debt service.   The existing Semass facility currently has operating contracts with 31municipalities, one regional waste disposal district, Otis Air NationalGuard Base and a commercial waste hauler.   The Semass facility in Rochester, Massachusetts, went into commercialoperation in 1989. The shred and burn technology is based on the principleof shredding municipal solid waste and magnetically removing a largepercentage of the ferrous metals.   Shredding solid waste to a uniform six-inch size enhances the fuel valueso that a ton of processed refuse fuel has the equivalent heating value of72-gallons of fuel oil. The fuel is fed to boilers where it burnsprimarily in suspension creating heat and producing steam to generateelectricity, he said. The process includes clean-up systems forremoving pollutants from boiler exhaust gases. A bottom ash processingsystem recovers ferrous and non-ferrous metals and converts the residualinto a usable aggregate product.   The fly ash is stabilized to form a non-toxic, non-hazardous mortarwhich is then landfilled and does not pose a threat to the environment,continued the official. Potential uses for the Semass boiler aggregateinclude cinder blocks for construction and as a gravel substitute for roadbases.   The patented flyash stabilization system ensures that no hazardous ortoxic material from the facility leaves the site, they said. Otherfacilities using the process have operated in Albany, New York, since 1981,and Hamilton, Ontario, since 1972.   During the 12-month period ending July, 1991, the existing plantoperated at the industry standard of approximately 85% of capacity and isexpected to continue at this rate. In the first year after completion, theexpansion facility is expected to operate at 80% of capacity and to reachthe 85% level thereafter, said the Semass official.   The Semass facility has, since it first began accepting waste in 1988,processed 1,250,000-tons of solid waste, and produced over 700,000-megawatthours of electricity, enough to service over 50,000 houses in southeasternMassachusetts.   It has recovered over 117-million pounds of metal, enough to build atleast 58,000 new cars, said the official. About 5% of the waste isrecovered as recyclable metals which are marketed. These metals contributea ''small percentage'' to the overall profits of the plant, he elaborated.''But we look at it as a source of revenue plus the avoided cost oflandfilling,'' he explained. It also contributes to the recycling goals ofthe regions, according to the official.   The facility has produced approximately 97,000-tons of boiler aggregatefrom bottom ash; and enough gravel substitute to produce over 6-millionconcrete blocks. Semass is currently reviewing tests with the Departmentof Environmental Protection. ''We're very confident the aggregate will befound suitable for use in construction of the expansion, and that we'll beable to market it in the future,'' the project official added.   Semass is a private, for-profit entity owned by subsidiaries of EnergyAnswers Corporation of Albany, New York, Bechtel Group Inc., StephensHolding Company and ESI Energy, Inc., an affiliate of Florida Power andLight Company.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT   Officials in Mecklenburg County, N.C. plan to issue a request forproposals on October 1 for a 600-ton/day, mass-burn incinerator to be builtat an industrial park south of Charlotte.   The county is seeking a turnkey contractor that will design, constructand operate the waste-to-energy plant, said Charles G. Horne, projectmanager at the county's engineering department.   The $80-million facility, which will be built at the Arrowood IndustrialPark, will generate steam for a General Tire factory and as much as 12.5 mwof electricity for Duke Power, the local utility (Integrated WasteManagement, 20 March, 3).   Horne told Integrated Waste Management that responses will be due Jan.30, and that the county will select the winning proposal by the end ofMarch. Construction of the plant is likely to begin in the second half of1993, with completion of the incinerator to follow in late 1995 or early1996.   Mecklenburg County's first waste-to-energy plant--a two-year-old,235-t/d facility at the campus of the University of NorthCarolina-Charlotte--was designed and built by MK Ferguson of Cleveland,which also operates the incinerator for the county.   Horne said that parties interested in receiving information about theupcoming RFP should call 704-336-6178.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency last week sought public commenton a wide range of options for the listing and management of used oil. Inissuing what an Agency official termed a ''neutral'' proposal--whichincluded one option that would list used oil as a hazardous waste--EPAofficials reiterated their interest in promoting used oil recycling in anenvironmentally safe manner.   In providing a 45-day public comment period, Agency officials said thiswould be followed by issuance of final EPA rules in May, 1992. At the sametime, EPA officials noted that used oil recycling is also being taken up byCongress as part of its reauthorization of the Resource Conservation andRecovery Act. Agency officials said they expected last week's proposal''would become part of a dialogue with Congress''--the consequences ofwhich are still difficult to predict.   Last week's proposal expands upon a 1985 Agency initiative that proposedto list used oil as a hazardous waste. The Agency noted again last weekthat it had backed away from that proposal as a result of public commentswhich ''convinced the (A)gency that listing used oil as a hazardous wastewould severely cripple the recycling industry.''   A successful lawsuit challenging this inaction, brought by the NaturalResources Defense Council and others, concluded with the court ruling thatEPA was required to make a listing determination for used oil based on thestatutory criteria for listing, which relates to whether a material istoxic or not.   In addition to its option to list all used oil as hazardous, a secondoption would list as hazardous ''only those categories of used oil that aretypically and frequently hazardous based on their toxicity at the point ofgeneration, rather than after collection and likely contamination.'' TheAgency said oils that may be listed under this option are those fromgasoline-powered engines, including used oils from automotive crankcases,marine engines, and piston-engine airplanes.   A third option would be not to list any used oils as hazardous, andinstead rely on management standards ''to address the types ofmismanagement that have historically occurred with used oil, such ascontamination with hazardous waste due to mixing, road oiling, releases,and spills associated with storage and transportation.'' Should thisoption be adopted, the Agency said used oil handlers would still berequired to test oil destined for disposal for hazardous characteristics,and then manage it accordingly.   The Agency stated its belief that used oils pose hazards to human healthand the environment, ''and therefore need to be managed safely.'' Thelatest proposal contemplates a ''phased-in'' two-stage approach tomanagement standards, which would include the following options:   --''Provide management standards for all used oils to some extent.''   --''Provide one set of management requirements for all used oilhandlers.''   --''Provide basic management standards immediately that balance theinterests of protective regulation and the need to promote recycling.''   The Agency proposed that the Phase-1 requirements ''would be fairlysimple 'good housekeeping' practices that address the improper storage anddisposal of used oil by generators, transporters, recyclers, and disposalfacilities.'' It added that ''good housekeeping'' would include suchpractices as ''inspecting for leaks, releases, or spills; maintainingstorage tanks and containers; and tracking recycled used oil fromgenerators to recyclers.''   This Phase I would also ban road oiling and establish guidelines thatpresume that ''all used oil being disposed is destined for recycling.''Phase II under this approach would involve possible additional managementstandards and controls for used oil, if needed.   The EPA proposal also considers possible incentives for promoting thecollection and recycling of used oil generated by people who change thierown oil, the so-called ''do-it-yourselfers.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE   The city and county of Denver as well as the Denver Metro WastewaterReclamation District have selected Camp Dresser & McKee to perform aremedial investigation/feasibility study and treatability study of theLowry Landfill, located in Arapahoe County, Colo., said a companyspokeswoman. The contract is valued at $1.6 million and completion of workis slated for March, 1993, she said.   The landfill accepted industrial and municipal wastes from 1967 to 1980,is listed on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's National PrioritiesList and will be cleaned up through Superfund, she said. Under thecontract, Cambridge, Mass.-based Camp Dresser & McKee will evaluate thenature and extent of contamination and evaluate remedial alternatives forthe soils and surface water and sediments media, she explained.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS   Wheelabrator Technologies, American Ref-Fuel and Energy Answers Corp.have all submitted revised proposals to build a 1,500-ton/daywaste-to-enegy plant in the Village of Green Island, New York, according toJohn Brown, spokesman for the Green Island Solid Waste Advisory Committee.   The town last month had sent letters to the firms allowing them tosubmit additions or amendments to their initial plans for the venture(Integrated Waste Management, 21 Aug., 1).   Jack Risteau, project manager for Wheelabrator Corp., said the companyhas added a shopping center to its proposal. ''We've added working withHeritage Development Company of Syracuse to build a retail center whichcould generate as much as $12 million a year for the village,'' he said.''We've interested them (Heritage Development Company) enough that they'veentered into a working agreement with us, but we're in the early stage.''   Risteau said both Wheelabrator Corp. and Heritage Development Companyare doing market studies and other analyses to determine the value of ashopping center for the village. ''They (Green Island) don't have anymalls. It would be a real benefit for them. It would be about 300,000square feet, and employ 750 people,'' he said. He said the mall would belocated north of Green Island's electric substation.   Energy Answers Corp. has added new air pollution control equipment, andupgraded the waste processing facility by adding a 500-ton/day constructionand demolition debris recycling facility and a paper recycling mill to itsproposal, according to Thomas Julien, Project Manager for Answers. Juliensaid the company's unsure as to how much the entire package will costbecause the sizes of the facilities have not been determined. However, itis expected that Energy Answers Corp. will generate between $3- and $4million annually in payments to the village.   Finally, American Ref-Fuel has proposed in its revision three differentprojects to complement the waste-to-energy and recycling facilitiesfeatured in its original plan. According to J. Kevin Cmunt, ProjectDevelopment Manager for American Ref-Fuel, one option is building a KraftMarket Pulp Mill, which would produce uncoated freesheet, coatedgroundwood, coated freesheet, uncoated groundwood and bristol at a rate of600 t/d. This includes stationery, tablets, and copier paper.   American Ref-Fuel also proposed a 100% recycled newsprint mill or alinerboard facility. According to Cmunt, six leading paper manufacturingcompanies have expressed interest in the projects. He added an addition ofa paper recycling project would result in benefits of $8,475,000 to$10,850,000 to the Village of Green Island per year.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES inKEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES inPhoenix, Arizona on September 27. The newly-designed community workshopsare intended to educate citizens and public officials about solid wastehandling practices, according to an official of the Stamford,Connecticut-based non-profit group.   Future solid waste workshops will be scheduled around the country. ''Thenew series will continue KAB's efforts to counter our growing dependence ona declining number of landfills, the increasing amount of trash producedeach year, and the inability of communities to site new disposalfacilities,'' said the official.   ''Our goal,'' he concluded, ''is to accelerate the training of concernedlocal citizens and public officials to prepare them to assume greater rolesin planning and implementing solid waste management programs at thecommunity level.'' KAB is a national public education organizationdedicated to improving waste handling practices in 460 certified affiliatedcommunities in 40 states, including 19 official, state-affiliatedorganizations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM   The Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA) has received 49responses to its request for qualifications (RFQ) from companies,universities and laboratories seeking to be subcontractors to performevaluations under the Environmental Protection Agency's Municipal SolidWaste Innovative Technology Evaluation (MITE) program.   SWANA and the EPA recently entered into a three-year cooperativeagreement in which the association is assisting the agency in implementingthe evaluation program (Integrated Waste Management, 29 May, 2). EPAestablished the program a year ago to ''help developers address barriers tocommercialization by providing objective, independent, third-partyevaluations of selected technologies,'' said a SWANA official.   Information produced by the program will be used not only by technologydevelopers but by local governments that are responsible for day-to-daymanagement of municipal solid wastes, the official said.   EPA's evaluation program in the first year included solidification andstabilization of municipal waste combustion ash residues. Second yearactivities are being directed at evaluating other strategies for managingmunicipal solid wastes, such as recycling, landfilling, combustion andmaterials processing.   A SWANA spokesperson said the association had not yet established theschedule for deciding on the RFQs and further evaluations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH   Mid-American Waste Systems Inc., which is one of the fastest growing andmost profitable solid waste companies n the U.S., should maintain annualearnings growth of 25% to 30%, according to a report prepared by StephenSchweich, research analyst at Alex. Brown & Sons, Baltimore, Maryland.   Mid-American revenues are growing at a better than 30% annual rate andoperating margins exceed 25%, he continued. Solid waste management is a$28-billion per year industry in the U.S., and ''we believe Mid-Americancan reach $300-million to $400-million in revenues by 1995 whilemaintaining its current profit margins,'' said the report.   The firm, based in Canal Winchester, Ohio, has extensive landfillresources, well-managed transfer stations and collection operations,growing special waste businesses, and experienced management, according toSchweich. It has 17 operating landfills, 9 transfer stations and 8collection companies.   Its principal areas of geographic focus include Ohio, Indiana,Pennsylvania, Illinois and West Virginia. New landfill sites are underdevelopment in Florida, South Carolina, California and Colorado. In the1986 to 1989 period, Mid-American's revenues grew from $4-million to$48-million, and net income increased tenfold.   The company's rapid geographic expansion came primarily fromacquisitions of 10 landfills and numerous waste collection companies inOhio, Indiana, Kentucky and Pennsylvania. Mid-American's basic acquisitionphilosophy has been to buy companies cheaply, bring in professionalmanagement, exploit synergies with other Mid-American operations, andultimately build critical mass and profitability, explained the analysis.   During the past two years, Mid-American has added other territories toits operations base including West Virginia, Georgia and Colorado.Moreover, the company is pursing ''greenfield'' landfill projects inCalifornia and Florida, elaborated the report.   According to Alex. Brown estimates, the total North American solid wasteindustry was about $28-billion in 1990. Municipalities and independentoperators control roughly 71% of the market. Waste Management handles 14.3%of the waste, Browning-Ferris controls 8.9%, and Laidlaw 2.7%.   Of the 3.4% of the waste handled by emerging players--representing$950-million in 1990--Attwoods earned $338-million. Chambers Developmentgarnered $214-million, and Western Waste $190-milion. Mid-Americanachieved revenues of $79-million, American Waste $61-million, Sanifill$39-million. Republic Waste had revenues of $18-million, and IntegratedWaste, $12-million.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-21IA086-000616-B017-340http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003241 text/html 32883HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:30:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:10 GMTContent-length: 32696Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev30.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS & TRENDS *************** (389 words) JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FOR HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT (117 words) NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOS FOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM (376 words) LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTS SAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE (397 words) HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELS FOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES (277 words) ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUP TO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES (123 words) ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESS FOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS (200 words) EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFS FROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER (166 words) AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALING FOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS (258 words) EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEF FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS (376 words) NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORS AWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS (928 words) REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUE HIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96 (128 words) MEDWASTE NAMES NEW CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER (148 words) HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION ELECTS TOP OFFICIALS (168 words) CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996***************SLANTS & TRENDS***************WHISTLEBLOWER UPDATE:  A Labor Department judge is slated tohear arguments Jan. 31 on whether to grant whistleblowerstatus to a former employee of a sharps containermanufacturer who complained about the integrity of productsbeing shipped (MWN, Dec. 12, p. 206). In that case, DOLAdministrative Law Judge Samuel Smith ruled for the firsttime the federal Environmental Protection Agency couldregulate sharps collectors under the Toxic SubstancesControl Act .THE LONG-AWAITED RULING could spell relief for whistleblowerSteve Balog. Dottie Balog, his wife, said she hoped thegovernment's budget problems would not interfere with theJan. 31 court trial. Much is riding on the decision. IfSteve Balog is granted whistleblower protection, then hisemployer, Med-Safe Systems, would be barred from suing him.Also, Balog could be eligible for back pay, legal fees, andeven his job, she said.* * *THE COST IS NOT EXCESSIVE for hospitals to switch fromincineration to either on-site autoclaves or regionalautoclave facilities for their medical waste management,says a soon-to-be-released cost analysis by a New Yorkenvironmental group. "We're finding its a small part ofhospitals' operating budgets," said Center for Biology ofNatural Systems' Catherine Hill. "We think its feasible."Hill said researchers focused on the "most accepted"alternative to incineration in crunching numbers on theattractiveness of abandoning incineration. The group, housedat Queens College, also factored in the necessary wastemanagement costs after using the steam sterilizer.MEDICAL WASTE BECAME A TARGET for the environmental groupwhen it embarked on a study of air pollution sources in theGreat Lakes (MWN, May 30, p. 84). That study recommendedmedical waste be sterilized and landfilled, rather thanincinerated, to decrease dioxin compounds in the Great Lakesregion. According to Hill, EPA's dioxin numbers for medicalwaste incinerators were accurate for the time data werecollected in 1989/1990. Since then, more than one-half ofthe incinerators have shut down, so the report may not be anaccurate snapshot of today's dioxin burden, Hill noted.THE GROUP's FINDINGS on the benefit of autoclaves is notnews to Vicky Jas at the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center,whose comprehensive cost analysis convinced the hospital toshut down its incinerator and apply for a permit to operatean autoclave (see story, p. 5).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FORHOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT     The Joint Commission on Accreditation of HealthcareOrganizations (JCAHO) recently prescribed its plan for asafe environment.     According to the latest manual, hospital leadersshould: plan for waste management space, equipment andresources; educate staff about the role of environment insupporting patient care; develop standards to measurehospital performance in managing and improving theenvironment; and develop an Information Collection andEvaluation System to continuously measure environmentalcare.     The manual outlines what should be included in ahazardous materials and waste management plan, and thestandards for personnel to meet in selecting, handling,storing, using and disposing of waste.     For more information, contact JCAHO, One RenaissanceBoulevard, Oakbrook, Ill. 60181; 708-916-5635.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOSFOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM     None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commission staffscenarios for the future of the commission's low-levelradioactive waste (LLW) program is satisfactory, NRC'sAdvisory Committee on Nuclear Waste (ACNW) concluded Dec.29.     Facing severe federal budget cuts, the staff reportlooked at three scenarios: continue the current program,reduce the program by eliminating or cutting back variousparts, or terminate all parts of the LLW program.     The staff concluded the present program could notcontinue at present budgetary levels, but the entire programcould not be abolished because that move would require majorchanges in a number of pieces of federal legislation. Theonly viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reducedprogram.     The major failing of the staff report "is the failureto address the question of what the LLW program ought to bein order to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW ChairmanPaul Pomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley AnnJackson.     The budgetary focus of the report fails to addressNRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health andsafety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be madein accordance with priorities set with reference to theunderlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.     Necessary elements in the reshaped LLW program are: astaff that includes experts in each of the technologiescritical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program thatprovides technical assistance to those preparing licenseapplications for LLW disposal facilities; a program thatmaintains NRC's capability for processing licenseapplications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposalfacilities; and a program that identifies and supportslimited research activities in priority areas and assuresthat the information value is maintained from studies thatare terminated or transferred to other programs.* * *NURSING STAFF INJURY is on tap in the new Institute ofMedicine (IOM) report to be released in mid-January. Thereport-Nursing Staff in Hospitals and Nursing Homes: Is itAdequate?- focuses on how the unprecedented change in thehealth care industry has affected the occupational health ofnurses, as well as patient care. IOM kicked off the probe inresponse to a congressional request. For information,contact IOM, 202-334-2138.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTSSAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE     More than 4.8 million needles and syringes were sold inthe United States in 1994, and safety syringe sales wereforecasted to jump at least 45 percent by the end of 1995,said a new market report on the medical disposal market.     Connecticut-based Theta Corporation predicted safetysyringe sales would increase more than 45 percent with unitshipments to exceed 2.25 billion by the end of 1995.     The report provided an in-depth analysis of the largestU.S. disposal medical equipment products market. The latestreport, Dynamic Medical Disposal Market, forecasted markettrends through 2001 for the following products: needles andsyringes, procedure kits and trays, evacuated bloodcollection tubes, respiratory therapy disposables andinfusion disposables.Needle Sticks Drive Market     According to Theta Corp., the most significant trendaffecting the medical disposables market is the increasingawareness of the danger of bloodborne pathogen infectionsfrom accidental needle sticks.  The greatest commercialsuccess will come from new features incorporated intoexisting products offered by vendors who currently dominatethe market, the firm found.     Safety needles and syringes are expected to reachmarket penetration exceeding 80 percent by 2001, the reportpredicted, and while the products may become more popular,safety product prices will also decline dramatically. Since1992, the U.S. Patent Office has approved more than 500patents for safety features for syringes and needles.     Today more than 60 percent of all surgical proceduresinvolve use of a kit, and the report charted the market forthe following procedure kits and trays: cardiovascular,angiography and angioplasty, orthopedic, OB/GYN, ophthalmic,endoscopic and others.     Theta Corp. predicted sales of all respiratory therapydisposables would reach 38.6 million units by 2001, and thatcompound annual growth rates of 17.1 percent was anticipatedfor sales of infusion sets from 1995 to 2001.     Fifteen companies were selected for detailed profilesthat included information on product development, productsand marketing strategies: Baxter International Inc., BectonDickinson and Co., C.R. Bard, Inc., Hudson Respiratory CareInc., Invacare Corp., Isolyser Co., Inc., Johnson & Johnson,Marquest Medical Products, Inc., MAXXIM Medical, Inc.,Puritan-Bennett Corp., The Med-Design Corp., SherwoodMedical, Siemens Medical System, Inc., Smiths Industries andSterile Concepts.     To order Theta Marketing Report No. 541, contactPhyllis Klaben, Theta Corp., Theta Building, Middlefield,Conn. 06455; 203-349-1054 or fax 203-349-1227. Cost for the121-page report is $995.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELSFOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES     The Healthcare Resource Conservation Coalition (HRCC),an ad hoc group of suppliers, haulers and hospitals, willreview national models that have proven successful inminimizing medical waste at its next meeting in May.     The reach of the nonprofit communications group hasbeen expanding over the last year. While not included atfirst, waste haulers have joined the group of thoseinterested in solving medical waste problems, said MayoMedical Center's Director of Waste Management Terry Horseth.The group recently has incorporated as a nonprofit networkand includes 50 members, such as representatives from BaxterInternational Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Beth Israel Hospitaland Kaiser Permanente.     Horseth said everyone recognizes education is key inkeeping health care organizations, manufacturers, suppliersand government informed on the issues. "There is no centralplace to find out all the information. Everyone must keepreinventing their own wheel," he said.     The meetings have been valuable, explained Horseth,since all players in medical waste management shareinformation on what is happening nationwide, as well asfinding solutions to thorny local problems. Medical wastemanagement issues vary as widely as state and localregulations, and HRCC members have the advantage of keepingup on ever-changing waste management and recycling markets.     "Right now we're looking for success stories," saidHorseth, who touted recycling efforts at the Mayo Center inRochester, Minn. The next meeting is tentatively slated forMay in Chicago.     HRCC offers a communications network for all members ofthe health care community to tackle issues such as wasteminimization, waste and product management and governmentregulation.     For information on HRCC, contact Terry Horseth, 507-284-1912.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUPTO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES     The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) hasformed a new working group to deal with health care wasteissues.     ISWA members have worked closely with the World HealthOrganization in assisting countries in preparing theirnational policies on health care waste management, said arecent bulletin from The World Resource Foundation.     The group has also named a new chairman: Bill Townend,deputy director of the London Waste Regulation Authority(LWRA). Townend represented ISWA on the European UnionPriority Waste Stream Project on health care waste that wascompleted last year.     For information on ISWA's new group, contact BillTownend, LWRA, Hampton House, 20 Albert Embankment, LondonSE1 7TJ, UK tel: (44) (0) 171-587-3000; fax (44) (0) 587-5258.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESSFOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronouncedgrowth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing69 percent to $2 billion, and the trend should continue,according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, afinancial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.     The report found that acquisition growth acceleratedover the past year. The top 13 waste companies are expectedto increase their revenues by 21 percent, with a majorrevenue component driven by acquisitions.     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish tostress that the improvement in the cost of financing hasbeen most notable for the smaller waste service companies. Alonger track record leading to enhanced credibility hasenabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs ofcapital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from theaccess to longer term financing and attractively pricedequity."     In general, the analysis said, long term financingrates for all firms, as represented by 30-year Treasurybonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdropfor continued aggressive acquisition.     For copies of the report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-SizedCompanies Lead Industry in a Torrid Acquisition, contact thefirm's William Fisher, 800-237-5643.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFSFROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER     Up to one-fourth of the Environmental ProtectionAgency's staff may be laid off by spring unless Republicanssubstantially increase EPA's funding, said EPA AdministratorCarol Browner. EPA's budget could have dramatic implicationsfor its medical waste emissions rule and its long-awaitedreport to Congress.     About one-third of the workers who promulgateregulations, issue permits and perform inspections could belaid off if Congress approves the EPA appropriations billvetoed by President Clinton, agency officials said.Researchers and employees involved in environmental cleanupswould not be cut. EPA officials were hesitant until now toestimate the impact of the budget cuts on staffing.     At a Dec. 18 press conference, President Clinton vetoedthe $5.7 billion spending bill, insisting the measure wouldhave cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent and safedrinking water aid to local governments by 45 percent.     In response, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.) argued thatthe cuts were based on recommendations from organizationsincluding the National Academy of Public Administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALINGFOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS     Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center may become thestate's first facility to shut down an incinerator and openan autoclaving facility in a dramatic move to save money andavoid having to comply with costly new emission regulations.     The medical center's Vicky Jas conducted acomprehensive, 12-year cost analysis that comparedretrofitting the existing incinerator to shipping wastesoff-site, autoclaving or using a gas sterilizer. Autoclavingwas by far the least expensive option, she said.     "We had the resources to evaluate these, while othersare running scared," said Jas, who added that many hospitalshave already inquired about when the facility will be up andrunning.     The Lebanon, N.H., facility is hoping to be granted itsstate permit soon, begin testing the new autoclave facilityon Jan. 29, and have it on-line in February. Right now, thehospital is spending $5,000 a week to ship the wastes off-site. With tens of millions being slashed from thehospital's yearly budget, staff had to look for less costlyalternatives.     "None of us was crazy about autoclaving since there isstill waste at the end," she explained. But Jas said thehospital said the gas sterilizer manufacturer could notgather independent emissions data for permit approval.     Another item that may be on the agenda for hospitaladministrators to consider include training a certifiedworkforce who would be involved only with waste managementin the hospital complex. Jas said she is looking into thisoption to beef-up the education of hospital staff who handlewastes.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEFFOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS     Companies that report self-discovered environmentalviolations within 10 days and act to correct thoseviolations will be eligible for reduced penalties or waiversfor civil violations and no criminal sanctions under theEnvironmental Protection Agency's final policy onenvironmental audits.     The policy, which appeared in the Dec. 22 FederalRegister, does not apply to violations that harm humanhealth and the environment.     The issue of EPA enforcement against self-discoveredviolations has been a sticking point for many companies.     Under the new approach, EPA retains its power to levyfines that equal any economic gain created by the violationin order to "preserve a level playing field." EPA also willoverride state laws shielding results of corporate self-audits from enforcement if the violations threaten publichealth or the environment. At the same time, the agency said"where a state has obtained appropriate sanctions needed todeter such misconduct, there is no need for EPA action."     The final policy is similar to an interim policyreleased in March. The earlier statement applied only toself-audits, while the final statement covers other self-discovery steps such as due diligence. EPA defines duedigilence as systemic efforts to prevent, detect and correctviolations.Audit Results Not 'Privilege'     EPA will continue its policy on not routinelyrequesting the results of corporate self-audits, althoughthe agency reiterated its position that environmental self-audits and related corporate self-discovery activities arenot privileged information protected from public disclosure.This contrasts sharply with an increasing number of statelaws that provide varying degrees of privilege for auditresults.     EPA said it will reduce gravity-based civil penaltiesby up to 75 percent. These penalties, which are based on theseverity of the pollution problem and not on economic gains,could be waived. The policy spells out a list of conditionsthat must be met to become eligible for reduced or no civilpenalties provisions.* * *RISK CHACTERIZATION: The American Industrial Health Council(AIHC) recently released Advances in Risk Characterization,a new publication designed to help risk managers improvedecisionmaking. The 11-page report describes information andterminology risk managers request from risk assessors. Formore information, contact AIHC's Dave Williams at 202-833-2131.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORSAWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS     New Hampshire regulators are holding tight on amendingmedical waste regulations until the Environmental ProtectionAgency's long-awaited report to Congress is released, saidNew Hampshire Department of Environmental Services' CarlWoodbury.     Woodbury said New Hampshire regulators are not onlyanticipating EPA's report but also its new Clean Air Actregulation for emissions from medical waste incinerators.State regulations have already incorporated a treatmentstandard similar to EPA's, he said.     New Hampshire houses one commercial incineratoroperated by Waste Management of New England that acceptsmedical waste, while there are approximately 15 smallincinerators at hospitals across the state.     "A lot of material is still going to landfills,"Woodbury noted. Under state regulations, medical waste mustbe treated before disposal "to achieve high-leveldisinfection plus a four log reduction 104 of Bacillussubtilis, for example by infectious waste incineration,steam sterilization, chemical disinfection, or gassterilization."Autoclave Breaks New Ground     The responsibility is on the manufacturer to provealternative treatment technologies are effective, Woodburysaid, noting that the state requires data with independentlaboratory confirmation. "We don't want to see just themarketers," he added.     But Vicky Jas, manager of the Dartmouth HitchcockMedical Center's Biosafety and Environmental Programs,complained that the state had little regulation foralternative treatment technologies, even the moretraditional autoclaving. "We really started from scratch,"she said. "The only standard the state relied on was whetherthe technology killed the bugs," Jas said.     Woodbury said New Hampshire hospitals are eying how themedical center is managing its wastes to decide what path tofollow in the wake of looming EPA regulation. In August, thehospital shut down its incinerator and has applied tooperate a less-costly, commercial-sized autoclave tosterilize wastes on-site.     After extensive research involving a cost analysis, thehospital opted to get out of the incinerator business, saidthe state's medical waste regulator. "Other hospitals arelooking to them for guidance."     Under New Hampshire regulations, there are certaintreatment and disposal exemptions. Limbs and recognizableorgans are to be disposed of by incineration or interment.Non-infectious blood and body fluids and non-infectioustissues processed by grinding may be disposed of in sanitarysewers. Gloves, gowns and other materials that have not comein contact with significant quantities of blood, body fluidsor secretions should not be handled as infectious wastes.Certain animal carcasses need not be regulated as infectiouswastes, and sharp infectious wastes can be incinerated orlandfilled if treated first. Household sharp infectiouswaste can be handled as municipal solid waste ifcontainerized.     Medical waste cannot be stored at room temperature formore than 72 hours, and waste stored at processingfacilities that receive waste from off-site generatorscannot be stored for more than seven days. The waste isrequired to be stored and transported in a sealed, non-permeable 3-mil polyethylene bag, placed in another bag ofsimilar construction and sealed.     Sharp infectious waste, such as broken glass, scalpelblades and hypodermic needles, must be segregated and en-cased inside rigid, puncture-resistant containers before thematerial is placed in polyethylene bags. Under New Hampshirelaw, sharps are not required to be ground up and renderednon-usable before disposal.     For more information, contact Carl Woodbury, 603-271-2925.CalendarFeb. 13-14: 1996 Conference on Corporate Environmental,Health & Safety Excellence, New York City, sponsored byArthur D. Little Inc. and the Conference Board. Forinformation, contact 212-339-0345.Feb. 28-March 1: Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl, Clearwater Beach, Fla., sponsored by Air & WasteManagement Association and U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency. For information, call 412-232-3444, ext. 3142.March 20-22: 5th Annual National Workers' Compensation andOccupational Medicine Seminar, San Francisco. Toxic exposureat work is among the topics slated for the seminar. Forinformation and 20-page brochure, contact S.E.A.K. Legal andMedical Publishers, fax 508-540-8304.Around the StatesNEW YORK - New York City Health and Hospitals Corp. (HHC)President Luis Marcos announced that 900 hospital beds willbe eliminated from the system. Marcos said the dramatic cutswould result in greater efficiency and save the city $80million, according to local news reports. Marcos said themove was necessary to remain competitive and that layoffswere not out of the question. After the cut, HHC will beleft with 5,964 beds. At a December board meeting, Marcosnoted a "dramatic decline" in the city's occupancy rates.Health care officials predict the city will eventuallyeliminate some 10,000 hospital beds in the public andprivate sector.ResourcesProtecting Yourself Against Bloodborne Disease, a demo diskillustrating an interactive computer-based training programis available from SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc. The interactiveprogram, which is designed to reach audiences in clinical,medical and industrial environments, offers instruction onwhat the Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) expects employees to know about the BloodbornePathogens Standard. It offers instruction on key OSHAregulations and how they apply to various rooms in a typicalhealth care facility. To order the demo or receive freeliterature, contact SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc., 801 EastChapman Ave., P.O. Box 3670, Fullerton, Calif. 92634; 714-870-7880 or fax 714-526-7400.Custom Medical Online offers a new online service fromCustom Medical Stock Photo, Inc., to view hundreds ofmedical stock photos and catalogues. For information,contact CMSP, 800-373-2677.Innovative Treatment Technologies: Annual Status Report, 7thEdition, describes innovative methods being used athazardous waste sites. For information, call theRCRA/Superfund Hotline at 800-424-9810.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUEHIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96     "The Economics and Issues Behind Medical Waste ReusableContainers" is one medical waste topic on the agenda of theupcoming WasteExpo '96 conference in Las Vegas.     Other topics for the May 20-24 meeting include:"Sustained Achievement in Medical Waste Minimization," and"Alternative Medical Waste Treatment Technologies: An ImpactAnalysis of the State Technical Assistance Manual."     For the first time, the meeting includes a new MedicalWaste Pavilion for firms to exhibit waste equipment,technology and services. More than 40 sessions presented bywaste industry experts and environmental professionals areplanned.     Early-bird registration deadline is March 20. Themeeting is co-sponsored by the Waste Equipment TechnologyAssociation, the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, and Waste Age Publications. For information,contact Waste Expo '96, 301-694-5243.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996MEDWASTE NAMES NEWCHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER     Med/Waste, Inc. of Opa Locka, Fla., has named MichaelElkin as its vice president and chief financial officer,replacing James Pekarek, who resigned.     "We are very pleased to have Mike as our chieffinancial officer," said President and Chief ExecutiveOfficer Daniel Stauber. "He's played an integral part inMed/Waste's recent turnaround and emergence as a leadingprovider of medical waste management services in Florida.Our rapid expansion and aggressive growth goals will be wellserved by someone of Mike's experience and expertise."     Prior to joining Med/Waste, Elkin was comptroller forMiami's Tecmarine Lines, Inc., and before that, was chieffinancial officer of Sequest Cruises of Fort Lauderdale.Elkin received his Bachelors Degree from the University ofFlorida, a Masters Degree in finance from FloridaInternational University and a Masters Degree in accountingfrom Nova Southeastern University.     For information, contact Med/Waste, Inc., 305-688-3931.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996HOSPITAL ASSOCIATIONELECTS TOP OFFICIALS     The American Hospital Association (AHA) announced thatRonnie Walker, president of Weatherford Hospital Authority-DBA Southwestern Memorial Hospital, Weatherford, Okla., isthe new chair of the group's special forum for small orrural hospitals.     During the one-term term, Walker will serve as a keyspokesperson for small or rural hospitals and oversee a 24-person governing council for the Section for Small or RuralHospitals.     AHA's governing council also elected Patrick Muldoon,president and chief executive officer of North AdamsRegional Hospital, North Adams, Mass., as chair-elect in1996 and will serve as chair of the group's policymaking armnext year.     Members new to the council in 1996 are: Brian Colfack,CEO/administrator, Berger Hospital, Circleville, Ohio;William Gravely, Jr., president, Culpeper Memorial Hospital,Culpeper, Va.; Leslie MacLeod, president, Huggins Hospital,Wolfeboro, N.H.; Gerald Worrick, administrator, Door CountyMemorial Hospital, Sturgeon Bay, Wis.     For information on other AHA news, contact AHA's AliciaMarshall, 325 Seventh St., N.W., Suite 700, Washington, D.C.20004; 202-626-2339.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-22IA086-000616-B017-361http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003256 text/html 45196HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:31:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:15 GMTContent-length: 45009Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev03.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (377 words) ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES (662 words) REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS (724 words) AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA (293 words) DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS (429 words) SDMP NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47 SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY (492 words) ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH (542 words) D&D NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN (278 words) NEWS BRIEFS (252 words) DOE COMPLEX (1805 words) CALENDAR (262 words) CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSNO CIGAR: None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commissionstaff scenarios for the future (or non-future) of thecommission's low-level radioactive waste (LLW) program aresatisfactory, NRC's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste(ACNW) concluded Dec. 29. Facing severe federal budget cuts,the July staff report looked at three scenarios: continuethe current program, reduce the program by eliminating orcutting back various parts, or terminate all parts of theLLW program. The staff concluded the present program couldnot continue at present budgetary levels, but the entireprogram could not be abolished because it requires majorchanges in a number of pieces of federal legislation. Theonly viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reducedprogram (NWN, Oct. 26, 1995, p. 413).   The major failing of the staff report, "is the failure toaddress the question of what the LLW program ought to be inorder to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW Chairman PaulPomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley AnnJackson. The budgetary focus of the report fails to addressNRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health andsafety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be madein accordance with priorities set with reference to theunderlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.   Necessary elements in the rescaled LLW program are: astaff that includes experts in each of the technologiescritical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program thatprovides technical assistance to those preparing licenseapplications for LLW disposal facilities; a program thatmaintains NRC's capability for processing licenseapplications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposalfacilities; and a program that identifies and supportslimited research activities in priority areas and assuresthat the information value is maintained from studies thatare terminated or transferred to other programs.   Some areas targeted for termination or limited support inthe staff report need re-evaluation. These include review oftopical reports and the quality of Agreement-State programsand NRC representation of the U.S. LLW policy.   % Pomeroy's letter to Jackson, 8 pp., is available forpurchase through BPI DocuDial, No. 48-1111, as is the July31 report to the commission from the NRC staff, 29 pp., No.48-1112.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILESby Gordon Feller   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve nuclear waste, safety andother environmental problems related to its former StrategicRocket Forces (SRF) bases.   The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense NuclearAgency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation. The program was set up to assist the countriesof the former Soviet Union in elimination of weapons of massdestruction and prevention of their proliferation.   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess radiation and conventional environmental damage atsites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were based,transported, operated or maintained, and will help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that it can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal andlow-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters containing unexploded ordnances.   As part of the effort to transfer environmentalrestoration expertise, Arthur D. Little will conductinternational conferences co-sponsored by DNA and theBelarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the worldwill be invited to Belarus to discuss environmentalrestoration experiences, technologies, and managementissues.   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active ground watermovement, which can exacerbate ground water pollution.   Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on theEnvironmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps ofEngineers' Waterways Experiment Station, Los AlamosTechnical Associates, Technology Management Co., theEnvironmental Chemical Corp., Environmental HazardsSpecialists International, Environmental CareersOrganizations, the World Environment Center, and Clean SitesInc.   Arthur D. Little, which managed the largest environmentalimpact assessment ever conducted in the Former Soviet Unionby a Western company, has handled more than 3,000environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia's ministerof nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclear smugglingshould be the top item on the agenda for the April G-7summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted tonuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" fordealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control overnuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution toRussia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much lessthan the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russiancivilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have aquestionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt onMikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boostedto $2 billion by 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPERTHAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS   Using existing facilities at DOE's Savannah River Site(SRS), Aiken, S.C., to reprocess civilian spent fuel (SF)would be considerably cheaper than continuing with thecurrent repository program, concluded a report prepared byWestinghouse Savannah River Co. for DOE at the request ofRep Charles Norwood (R-Ga.).   The report, delivered to DOE Aug. 21, is unclassified,but has not been officially released by DOE or Norwood'soffice.(% Available through BPI DocuDial, 28 pp., No. 48-1110.)   Questions about using SRS to reprocess spent civilianfuel and the impact on the civilian waste program promptedNorwood to make the request, an aide said. Reprocessingoperations could provide an economic boon to the regionaround SRS.   The report, Chemical Stabilization of Defense Related andCommercial Spent Nuclear Fuel at the Savannah River Site,said a repository is required, even with reprocessing. But"technical uncertainty would be significantly lessened bythe 20-fold volume reduction, and the conversion of thewaste to a single form containing only short-lived, non-fissile products."Billions To Be Saved?   Westinghouse estimates the annual cost of reprocessingcivilian spent fuel at $350 million a year and the cost fordealing with the current inventory of spent civilian fuel at$8 billion, including estimated repository fees. "Chemicalstabilization is almost certainly less costly than directdisposition technology, maybe by several billion dollars,"the report said.   "These facilities could consolidate and stabilize nuclearwastes into manageable and ultimately disposable forms,thereby providing a bridge to the future when decisions willhave to be made as to the long-term approach to energyproduction, defense needs and nuclear waste management inthis country," the report said.   Besides costs savings, reprocessing civilian SF at SRSsolves on-site storage problems at commercial nuclearpowerplants and allows DOE to comply with the Nuclear WastePolicy Act by accepting SF by 1998, the report said.   Under the plan spelled out in the Westinghouse report, SFnow stored at SRS would be reprocessed and then the facilitycould provide "ongoing treatment services for a wide varietyof defense and commercial spent fuels." Radioactive wasteproduced from the reprocessing operation would be vitrifiedin borosilicate glass logs. DOE could either sellreprocessed civilian fuel back to powerplants or dispose ofit in a repository.Upgrade Costs Omitted   In estimating the cost of reprocessing civilian SF atSRS, the report does not include the costs of upgradesneeded for the F- and H- canyons. John Duane, a Westinghousemanager who helped prepare the report, said the upgradescould be anywhere from minor to major, depending on whattypes of fuel will be reprocessed. It was an oversight thatupgrade costs were omitted; they should be in the report, hesaid.   A standard shear/leach process would be used to processcommercial SF. The report estimates these upgrades wouldcost $100 million. After that, only normal capital upgradeswould be needed, Duane said. Brian Costner, of the EnergyResearch Foundation, an SRS watchdog group, disputes thosefigures. When SRS reprocessing operations stopped in 1992,major upgrades to the facility were never completed.Completing the upgrades is expensive, Costner said. Duane,however, said about three-quarters of the planned upgradeswere completed before the shutdown. The buildings are 40years old, but the reprocessing equipment is fairly new, headded.   Costner thinks the purpose of the report is to buildpolitical support for commercial reprocessing. He expectsreprocessing supporters to use it to press for a change inU.S. policy, which now prohibits civilian SF reprocessing.Reprocessing, however, is gaining support in Congress.   Norwood's office had no comment on whether therepresentative would propose legislation to open SRS forcivilian reprocessing. At press time Jan. 4, Norwood wastouring SRS and would make a decision based on what helearned during the tour, an aide said.   Using a U.S. defense facility to reprocess civilian SF isa new idea and sets a dangerous precedent, said ArjunMakhijani, president of the Institute for Energy andEnvironmental Research. The report is "a clear waste oftaxpayers dollars and a dangerous waste of taxpayerdollars," he said.   No other Congress members contacted by NWN had seen thereport. Nuclear-industry representatives also wereunfamiliar with it or any plans to reprocess civilian fuelat SRS.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISVPROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA   An in-situ vitrification (ISV) system developed for DOEby Battelle is receiving international attention. TheAustralians tested the process for treating contaminatedareas of the Maralinga test range in South Australia. Thetests, carried out by Geosafe, a Battelle subsidiary, endedin October 1995.   The British used Maralinga as a  nuclear test site in the1950s and subsequently contaminated several kilometers ofdesert. Most of the contamination is plutonium, and includes21 pits containing equipment contaminated with transuranics.The Australians expect the cleanup of Maralinga to costabout $100 million Australian, equal to $75 million U.S.(NWN, June 6, 1995, p. 243).   The Australians hope to use in-situ treatment to dealwith the pits. The Geosafe tests involved 13 test melts oversix-months. Initial tests used a surrogate for the nuclearmaterials, but the final two tests used actualradionuclides. One five-ton test melt used soil and debriscontaining a kilogram of uranium as well as hazardous metalsand large quantities of scrap metals.   Another test melt used not only uranium-contaminatedsoil, but also a steel plate contaminated with about twograms of plutonium. The Australian Nuclear Science andTechnology Organization is analyzing the radioactivesamples.   The Australians are looking at radionuclide distributionwithin the vitrified material and at the strength of thematerial. They also will conduct leach testing of thevitrified material. Test results should be available earlythis year, Geosafe said.   Test results show the in-situ vitrification process canbe used to treat the 21 contaminated pits, Geosafe said."Most notably, the radioactive testing did not result incontamination of the off-gas hood or piping, indicating veryhigh uranium and plutonium retention efficiencies in thevitrified product," according to a Geosafe test report.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALDLLW VITRIFICATION TESTS   Design problems will delay the start-up of a pilot low-level radioactive waste vitrification plant at DOE'sFernald, Ohio, site by 17 months. But the problems will notdelay completion of the 10-year cleanup plan for thefacility, Fernald officials say.   The $21-million vitrification plant, built by GTS Duratekof Columbia, Md., was scheduled for surrogate testing inJuly 1995, but DOE moved the start date of testing with auranium substitute to March 1996, said Perry Richardson, aFernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO)spokesman.   DOE initially had problems getting bids on a melter forthe pilot plant. Originally, DOE requested a melter capableof operating at temperatures of 1,450 degrees C and able toprocess five tons of material per day. DOE revised itsspecification, requesting a melter capable of handling onlyone ton of material per day.   Superfund deadlines forced parallel design of portions ofthe plant that should have been designed in sequence,officials said. The delays do not surprise Richardson. "Thisis the closest thing to research and development we have atFernald," he said. A few "bumps" in the process should beexpected, he added.'We Were Overly Optimistic'   Fernald also overestimated the amount of time the pilotplant could operate. Initial plans were to operate thefacility continuously, but FERMCO decided that was notrealistic. "We were overly optimistic," Richardson said.   For planning purposes, Fernald officials are assuming themelter will operate 30 percent of the time, althoughRichardson said he thinks the actual operational operatingtime will be better.   DOE eventually will vitrify 9,700 tons of uranium milltailings now stored on site at Fernald. Information gatheredfrom the pilot plant operation will be used to design a $200million full-scale vitrification plant, capable ofprocessing 30 tons of material per day.   DOE plans to vitrify all the mill tailings at Fernald andsend the vitrified waste to a disposal facility on theNevada Test Site before 2005, Richardson said.DAVIS BESSE: Toledo Edison Co. Dec. 26 began transferringspent fuel from the fuel storage pool at its Davis Bessenuclear power plant to three dry storage casks at anindependent spent fuel storage facility on the plant site.The three casks will hold 72 fuel assemblies. The plantneeded to free space in the storage pool to receive new fueland to unload the full reactor core during a refuelingoutage in April. Inspectors from the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission's Region III office, Lisle, Ill., are monitoringthe fuel transfer.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SDMPNRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY   The latest version of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission'sSite Decommissioning Management Plan (SDMP) list, releasedDec. 26, shows 47 sites that still must be either evaluatedor remediated under the SDMP program. These sites are amixed bag of possibly contaminated sites where remediationwas in danger of falling through the cracks in NRC'slicensing system.   SDMP sites vary in the degree of radiological hazard,decommissioning complexity and cost. Some sites comprisetens of acres that require assessment for radiologicalcontamination; others have contamination known to be limitedto individual buildings or discrete piles of waste orcontaminated soil. Some sites still have active NRC nuclearmaterials licenses.   Some sites already are almost completely cleaned; othershave had little or no remediation.   NRC has removed nine sites from the SDMP list since theprogram began in 1990. Some of these sites have beensuccessfully cleaned; others are cases where NRC deferredoversight to other agencies or determined the site was notsubject to NRC licensing.   Sites are added to the list if they satisfy one or moreof the following criteria:Problems with the viability of the responsible organization,e.g. inability to pay for or unwillingness to performdecommissioning.Presence of large amounts difficult-to-dispose material suchas soil contamination, unused settling ponds or waste inburial grounds.Long-term presence of contaminated, unused facilitybuildings.Previously terminated license.Contamination or potential contamination of the ground waterfrom on-site wastes.   The 47 sites on the new list are:   Indiana (1): Jefferson Proving Ground;   Maryland (2): Anne Arundel County Curtis Bay site;Aberdeen Proving Ground;   Massachusetts (6): Engelhard Corp., Plainville; NuclearMetals Inc., Concord; Texas Instruments Inc., Attleboro;Watertown Arsenal, Watertown; Watertown GSA, Watertown;Wyman-Gordon Co., North Grafton, Mass.   Michigan (4): Brooks & Perkins, Detroit and Livonia; DowChemical Co., Bay City and Midland;   Minnesota (1): 3M Co., Pine County;   Missouri (1): Lake City Army Ammunition Plant,Independence;   New Jersey (3): Heritage Minerals, Lakehurst, N.J.; RTIInc., Rockaway, N.J.; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,Newfield, N.J.   Ohio (11): Advanced Medical Systems Inc., Cleveland;Alcoa, Cleveland; BP Chemicals America Inc., Lima; ChemetronCorp., Cleveland, Ohio, two sites; Clevite, Cleveland; ElkemMetals Inc., Marietta; Horizons Inc., Cleveland; NortheastOhio Regional Sewer District Southerly Plant, Cleveland; RMITitanium Co., Ashtabula; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,Cambridge;   Oklahoma (5): Fansteel Inc., Muskogee, Okla.; KaiserAluminum, Tulsa, Okla.; Kerr-McGee, Cimarron and Cushing,Okla.; Sequoyah Fuels Corp., Gore, Okla.;   Pennsylvania (13): Babcock & Wilcox, Apollo, and ParksTownship; Cabot Corp., Boyerton, Reading and Revere;Molycorp Inc., Washington and York; Permagrain Products,Media; Pesses Co., METCOA Site, Pulaski; Safety Light Corp.,Bloomsburg; Schott Glass Technologies, Duryea; WestinghouseElectric Corp., Waltz Mill; and Whittaker Corp., Greenville.   Contact: David Fauver Sr., Project Manager, Low-LevelWaste and Decommissioning Projects Branch, Division of WasteManagement, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Mail StopT7F27, Washington, DC 20555; (301) 415-6625.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFEREDFOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites atthe laboratory for collaborative ground water research. Pastdisposal of radioactive and mixed radioactive hazardouswaste at Oak Ridge has led to concerns about ground watercontamination that require a better understanding of thecomplex subsurface heterogeneous fractured media. Pastresearch has focused on water and contaminant movement.   Sites the laboratory is making available forcollaborative research include:   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)are particularly suitable for studies of subsurfacetransport processes. Each has a trench excavated across itsoutflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, andcontain six pans pressed against the face of the trench tocollect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracerdistribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects ofsolution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are locatedthroughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipmentis interfaced for computerized data collection.   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site wasdeveloped for investigating new ground water tracertechniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and hasbeen instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some ofthem multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels andtemperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals fortwo years. During the last three years, three principaltests have been conducted at this field site:A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neonto test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport.A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-sizetracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,to measure fracture-flow velocities.A test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers offracture flow.   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has beenused for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methodsin fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil andsaprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling portsinstalled close to the pairs of wells. Many data areavailable from the site, including six pumping tests,natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfurhexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemicalanalyses.   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium werereleased in an open borehole in fractured shale. Tritium wasmonitored in the injection well and in five monitoring wellsfor the first five years, with an additional sampling after16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium by pumpingwere unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium was stillpresent after 16 years. Results of this test have beeninterpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-treat methods.   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and EngineeringSciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak RidgeNational Laboratory, (423) 576-0567, fax (423) 576-3989, e-mail gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the WorldWide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/facilities/hydrology/.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996D&DNRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'STROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN   The Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff intends toapprove Portland General Electric (PGE) Co.'s proposeddecommissioning plan for the Trojan Nuclear Power Plant nearRanier, Ore.   The plant was closed down in 1993 and all spent fuel hasbeen removed from the reactor and placed in the spent fuelpool. The pressurizer and the four steam generators havebeen removed from reactor containment and shipped to a low-level radioactive waste disposal facility.   NRC's latest proposed action would allow PGE to completedecommissioning according to its proposed plan, submittedJan. 25, 1995. PGE intends to dismantle the plant using theDECON alternative after a five-year transition period.Transition Period   During the transition period, which began with theJanuary 1993 shutdown date, PGE intends to remove anddispose of selected large components; license and constructan independent spent fuel storage installation (ISFSI); andtransfer fuel to the ISFSI. The utility also would assessenvironmental impacts associated with construction andoperation of the ISFSI.   The DECON phase will consist of the major disassembly anddismantlement of radioactive structures, systems andcomponents. Low-level radioactive waste resulting fromdismantling the plant will be sent to a licensed wastedisposal site for burial.   At the end of the DECON phase, the site, except for theISFSI, will be released for unrestricted use.   Requests for a hearing on NRC's proposed approval ofPGE's decommissioning plan (Docket No. 50-344) must beforwarded to the commission by Jan. 22. See the FederalRegister, Dec. 22, for details and instructions forpetitioning for a hearing. % Copies also are available forpurchase through BPI DocuDial, 3 pp., No. 48-1105.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996NEWS BRIEFSCalifornia and DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratoryhave agreed to work together to evaluate new environmentaltechnologies for certification under the state'sEnvironmental Technology Certification Program (ETCP). TheCalifornia Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA) andLivermore signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) givingthe state access to skilled laboratory personnel andlaboratory facilities to evaluate new technologies inradioactive and hazardous waste management, site cleanup,waste minimization and pollution prevention. In 1993, thestate set up the California Environmental TechnologyPartnership (CETP) to promote research, development,commercialization and export of California-basedenvironmental technology, goods and services. ETCP wasestablished by CalEPA's Department of Toxic SubstancesControl in response to a CETP study of the state's $18billion environmental technology industry that found a needfor a simpler, less cumbersome evaluation and permitprocess. The program provides one-stop scientific andengineering evaluation of new technologies to encouragedevelopment and speed their acceptance. Contact: DanPellissier, CalEPA, (916) 324-9670.NCSL: The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)has introduced a new version of LEGISNET, NCSL's intelligentinformation retrieval system that includes theTransportation Legislative Database (TLDB). TLDB is an on-line information service containing summaries of federal,state and certain local government statutes and regulationsrelating to the transportation of radioactive materials inthe United States. TLDB is operated by NCSL under acooperative agreement with DOE's Office of CivilianRadioactive Waste Management. Contact: Bob Frohling, NCSL,1560 Broadway, Suite 700, Denver, Colo. 80202; (303) 830-2200; fax: (303) 863-8003; e-mail: bob.frohling@ncsl.org.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996DOE COMPLEXDEAR: DOE has revised its Department of Energy AcquisitionRegulation (DEAR) to codify the department's technologytransfer mission for the national laboratories and weaponsproduction facilities operated by management and operating(M&O) contractors. Details of the revised regulation appearin the Dec. 22 Federal Register or % can be purchasedthrough BPI DocuDial, 7 pp., No. 48-1106.Hanford: DOE and the Washington State Department of Ecologyseek public comments on DOE's proposal to amend the HanfordTri-Party Agreement to make it compatible with DOE'sproposal to privatization cleanup of Hanford's radioactivewaste tanks. Under the proposal, private companies willcontract with DOE to treat the wastes and return a treatedproduct to DOE. The department anticipates awarding multiplecontracts to encourage innovation and competition amongcontractors. Selected contractors will invest private fundsto design, construct and operate the facilities needed tomeet the needs of the Tank Waste Remediation Systems. DOEwill define and monitor the requirements to be met byselected contractors in order for treated tank waste to bereturned to DOE control after treatment. DOE will offerincentives to contractors to reduce immobilized wastevolumes and optimize waste loading. The first phase of theprivatization strategy will demonstrate the technical andbusiness viability of using privatized facilities to treatand immobilize the waste. The Phase One treatment facilitywill be capable of treating six to 13 percent of the low-activity tank wastes. In Phase Two, a full-scale productionfacility would be capable of processing and immobilizing theremaining waste on a schedule that would accommodateremoving waste from the single-shell tanks by 2018. Commentsare due Feb. 15. Public meetings are scheduled tentativelyfor Jan. 30 in Portland, Ore., and Feb. 1 in Richland, Wash.For more information, contact: Toby Michelena, WashingtonDepartment of Ecology, (360) 407-7144; Carolyn Haass, DOE,(509) 372-2731; or the Hanford Cleanup Hotline, (800) 321-2008.INEL: The Environmental Management Site-Specific AdvisoryBoard (SSAB) for Idaho National Engineering Laboratory willmeet Jan. 16-17 in Boise, Idaho. The purpose of the meetingis to continue discussions of DOE's prioritizations ofenvironmental management (EM) funds for fiscal year 1998.Other topics include the environmental restoration scopingprocess, prioritization of the INEL SSAB's own activitiesfor the remainder of FY '96 and participation in aneducational activity highlighting research and developmentcapabilities at INEL. Contact: Idaho National EngineeringLaboratory, (800) 708-2680, or Marsha Hardy, JasonAssociates Corp., staff support, (208) 522-1662.Los Alamos: The Environmental Management Site-SpecificAdvisory Board for Los Alamos National Laboratory will meetJan. 9 in Mora, N.M. Contact: Lisa Roybal, EM SSAB, LosAlamos National Laboratory, Northern New Mexico CommunityCollege, 1002 Onate St., Espanola, NM 87352; (800) 753-8970or (505) 753-8970.Oak Ridge: The Environmental Management Site-SpecificAdvisory Board will meet Jan. 17 and Jan. 24 in Oak Ridge,Tenn. The Jan. 24 meeting was called solely to discuss theproposed by-laws for the board. The Jan. 17 meeting willdiscuss not only the by-laws, but a report on anadministrative session held in Denver in November and atechnical presentation on results of the aerial remote-sensing survey of the Oak Ridge Reservation. Contact: SandyPerkins, Site-Specific Advisory Board Coordinator, DOE, OakRidge Operations Office, 105 Broadway, Oak Ridge, TN 37830;(423) 576-1590.UMTRA: DOE has completed cleanup of uranium mill tailingsand contaminated materials from the 61-acre abandoneduranium processing site southwest of Gunnison, Colo., underthe Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action Project (UMTRA).Some 750,000 cubic yards of contaminated material was hauledby truck to a disposal site seven miles east of the oldprocessing site. DOE and the state of Colorado jointly begancleanup of the site in 1991 with demolition of the millbuildings. The disposal cell was excavated in 1992 andtransportation of contaminated material to the cell began in1993. Cleanup activities at the mill site ended in November,and the cleaned areas were backfilled with clean soil to alevel comparable with the surrounding terrain. Constructioncrews completed work on the disposal cell cover in December.The Gunnison mill is the 16th of 24 congressionallydesignated uranium mill tailings sites to be cleaned.Business & TechnologyESRI: Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety (IDNS) decidedin 1992 to use a computerized, integrated GIS/GPS/radiationdetection system to map for remediation the former Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp. thorium milling facility in WestChicago. The department contracted with GIS Solutions Inc.,Springfield, Ill., to assemble and develop a database forthe Kerr-McGee remediation. The company also conducted theGIS analysis based on the GPS data collected in the studyarea. GIS advised IDNS to use ARC/INFO and ArcView GISsoftware from ESRI, which would allow the database to beused for project management. ESRI is a research groupfounded in 1969 to develop methods of handling georeferenceddata. It is the world leader in development of GIS software,with more than 100,000 clients worldwide. Contact: TimRunyon, IDNS, (217) 786-6365; or Bob Lindquist, GISSolutions Inc., (217) 546-3654.NUKEM GmbH of Germany has acquired ENSR Nuclear Services andENSR Nuclear Engineering, the nuclear divisions of ENSRCorp., a key U.S. hazardous waste treatment and remediationfirm. The names of the two divisions have been changed toNUKEM Nuclear Technologies Corp., with two divisions -services and engineering. NUKEM is owned by RWE AG, thefifth largest German corporation, with annual sales of morethan $45 billion. NUKEM is a world leader in engineering anddesign for the nuclear industry, including radioactive wasteprocessing and storage, decommissioning, nuclear materialshandling and processing and related services. Othercompanies in the NUKEM family include WasteChem Ltd., amajor British decommissioning company; DETEC, the leadingGerman decommissioning company; ANSA-A, a French state-of-the-art robotics company; and GNB, a German spent fuelstorage system designer. NUKEM intends use the NuclearTechnologies Corp. to introduce its nuclear technologies toDOE, DOD and the commercial nuclear market. These includeliquid and solid radioactive waste volume reduction,vitrification, pyrolysis, incineration, tritium control,spent fuel services, robotics, engineering, decommissioningand other nuclear waste services. Ruediger Koenig will serveas Nuclear Technologies Corp. president. The existing ENSRcore leadership will remain in place, including JohnRaymont, vice president; Glen Rae, national sales andmarketing manager; Robert Williams, operations manager inthe services division; Detlef Schmidt, general manager inthe engineering division; and Jim Janzen, engineeringdivision manager. Contact: Glen Rae, NUKEM NuclearTechnologies, 250 Berryhill Rd., Suite 500, Columbia, SC29210; (803) 731-1588; fax: (803) 731-8435.Holtec International and U.S. Tool and Die (UST&D) havereceived a $6-million contract to supply spent- and fresh-fuel storage equipment to the Angra Unit 1 nuclear powerplant, owned and operated by FURNAS Centrais Eletricas S.A.,headquartered in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Holtec will serveas prime contractor and UST&D will fabricate the fuelstorage equipment. The reracking will increase the unit'sin-pool fuel storage capacity from 363 storage locations to1,252. Holtec will design, license, remove and volume-reducethe existing racks and install the new racks. UST&D will beresponsible for manufacture and testing of the new racks.The racks are designed to store fuel in a discrete zone two-region storage pattern. Region 1 is designed for storingfresh fuel assemblies and Region 2 for spent fuelassemblies, taking credit for burnup. The racks will be of adetuned cellular construction so as to minimize pool slabloading under seismic conditions. Boral will be used as aneutron poison. All hardware is due to be delivered by May1997 and installation will be completed by October 1997.Contact: Christian Blessing, Holtec International, 2060Fairfax Ave., Cherry Hill, NJ 08003; (609) 424-0999, ext.620.Rust Federal Services has entered into a CooperativeResearch and Development Agreement (CRADA) with Kaiser-HillCo. LLC, operating contractor at DOE's Rocky FlatsEnvironmental Technology Site, for commercialization ofpolymer encapsulation processes for stabilizing low-levelradioactive wastes (LLW) and mixed wastes. Personnel fromRocky Flats developed a process to encapsulate LLW usinglow-density polyethylene. Under the CRADA, Rust will examinethe economic feasibility of using waste plastic in theencapsulation process. Low-density polyethylene, whichincludes post-consumer products such as coffee can andyogurt container lids, now is not recycled in Colorado. Rustis working with its affiliate, Waste Management of ColoradoInc., to determine if post-consumer plastic collection isfeasible. If it is, this could lead to full-scalecommercialization of the technology, with wide-rangingapplications at DOE sites and commercial nuclear plants.Contact: Rust International Inc., 100 Corporate Parkway,Birmingham, AL 35242-2926.SOLUTIONS Software Corp. has available a CD-ROM with all 50titles of the Code of Federal Regulations, including alltext, tables and graphics and Adobe Acrobat search-and-retrieve software, at a cost of about $1 per title. Contact:Mark Wemhoff, SOLUTIONS Software Corp., 1795 Turtle HillRoad, Enterprise, FL 32725; (407) 321-7912; fax: (407) 323-4898 or (407) 321-3098; Internet: solution@env-sol.com;World Wide Web: http://www.env.sol.com.LLW CompactsMassachusetts: The Low-Level Radioactive Waste ManagementBoard will meet Jan. 10 in Boston. The agenda includes adiscussion of possible changes in language on IndependentReview Grants contained in the Draft Volunteer SitesProgram; decommissioning of the Yankee Rowe nuclear powerplant; review of literature on very-low-dose radiationexposure; and discussion of issues surrounding disposal ofradioactive materials via release into sanitary sewersystems. Contact: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Board, 100 Cambridge St.,Room 903, Boston, MA 02202; (617) 727-6018; fax: (617) 727-6084.Texas: The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission isrunning about a month behind in its review of the licenseapplication for a low-level waste disposal facility atSierra Blanca in west Texas, said sources in the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Authority (TLLRWA). The commissionoriginally planned to complete its review by the end of theyear, but now are saying it will be the end of January.TLLRWA submitted the last three additional revisions to thelicense application requested by the commission before theend of the year. Revision 12 addressed site closure anddecommissioning; Revision 13 addressed various generaldescription changes, design criteria and features, operatingprocedures, radiological and non-radiological impacts and alist of permits the authority will have obtained prior tooperation; Revision 14 addressed the remaining questionsfrom the commission. The Natural Resources Commission didnot request any more information. Contact: Texas Low-LevelRadioactive Waste Disposal Authority, 7701 North Lamar,Suite 300, Austin, TX 78752; (512) 451-5292.Professional Development41st Annual Underground Corrosion Short Course, May 14-16,West Virginia University, Morgantown, W.Va. Course includesbasic, intermediate and advanced classes covering practical,technical information about the causes of corrosion,instrumentation, corrosion surveys, cathodic protection,pipe coatings, water and wastewater and methods of corrosioncontrol. Contact: Angela Durham; (304) 293-3745.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996CALENDAR   Jan. 10-11, 1996: Nuclear Waste Technical Review BoardMeeting, Las Vegas. Contact: Paula Alford, Nuclear WasteTechnical Review Board, 1100 Wilson Blvd., Suite 910,Arlington, VA 22209; (703) 235-4473.   Jan. 18, 1996: Central Interstate LLW Compact CommissionMeeting, New Orleans. Contact: Don Rabbe, Central InterstateLow-Level Radioactive Waste Commission, 1033 O St., Suite530, Lincoln, NE 68508; (402) 476-8247.   Jan. 24-26, 1996: Meeting of the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste, Rockville,Md. Contact: Richard K. Major, Chief, Nuclear Waste Branch,NRC; (301) 415-7366.   Feb. 3-6, 1996: National Governors' Association, Fajardo,Puerto Rico. Contact: National Governors' Association, 444N. Capitol St., NW, Suite 250, Washington, DC 20001; (202)624-5300.   Feb. 5-6, 1996: Canadian Nuclear Association/CanadianNuclear Society Winter Seminar, Ottawa, Ontario. Contact:Sylvie Caron, CNS Office, 144 Front St. West, Suite 725,Toronto, Ontario M5J 2L7; (416) 977-7620, ext. 18; fax:(416) 979-8356.   Feb. 25-29, 1996: Waste Management '96, Tucson, Ariz.Theme: HLW, LLW, Mixed Waste and Environmental Restoration -Working Towards a Cleaner Environment. Contact: WM SymposiaInc., 245 S. Plumer, Suite 19, Tucson, AZ 85719; (520) 624-8573; fax: (520) 792-3993.   Feb. 25-29, 1996: American Institute of ChemicalEngineers Spring National Meeting, New Orleans. Contact:AIChExpress Service Center, 345 East 47th St., New York, NY10017-2395; (800) 242-4363.   March 10-14, 1996: International Conference on NuclearEngineering, New Orleans. Sponsored by the American Societyof Mechanical Engineers and the Japan Society of MechanicalEngineers. Contact: Brian Bigalke, ASME, 345 E. 47th St.,New York, NY 10017; (212) 705-7057; fax: (212) 705-7856.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-23IA086-000616-B018-14http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev32.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003308 text/html 19260HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:31:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:09 GMTContent-length: 19073Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev32.html Sample Issue Copyright OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet May 3, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches (372 words) Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway, Scotland (400 words) USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report (203 words) US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators (362 words) ***WORLD NEWS BRIEFS*** Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas (118 words) US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas (292 words) Exxon Rejects Environmental Proposals (69 words) Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill (108 words) Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly (240 words) Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky (185 words) ***HOTLINE*** Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephone (83 words) CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches     On 1 May, Exxon deployed its first five cleanup squads,totaling 100 workers from Seward and Valdez, back to the beachesin Prince William Sound, Alaska, USA.  The beaches were pollutedby nearly 11 million gallons of crude oil that spilled from thetanker Exxon Valdez in March 1989.     For the past several weeks, survey teams walked these beachesto determine both surface and subsurface oiling conditions.  Theteams -- made up of Exxon employees, state and federalrepresentatives, scientists, and land owners -- recorded theirobservations with maps, sketches, and questionnaires that askedabout location, oil coverage, oil characteristics, and theirsuggested method of cleanup.  Thus far, two out of threesurveillance phases are complete: crews have studied close to 480miles of beach in Prince William Sound and the Gulf of Alaska.The third phase will begin this week and will address theremaining priority areas in the Gulf of Alaska (86.4 miles).     At the end of each day, the groups faxed their findings backto Exxon's command center in Anchorage where a Technical AdvisoryGroup (the TAG team) in Anchorage plugged the information into adecision matrix.  The TAG teams are made up of representativesfrom Exxon, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation(ADEC), the US Coast Guard (USCG), and the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration (NOAA).     Days before cleanup was to begin, crews deployed boom inenvironmentally sensitive areas, near commercial fishing areas andwhere wildlife has begun to migrate for the spring.  The squadssent out on 1 May will begin removing tar mats and debris from:Herring Bay; Seal Island; northwest Prince William Sound; southPrince William Sound; and Kenai and the Gulf of Alaska.     Officials have not yet established a general cleanup plan,especially for subsurface oil.  The disagreement has, for the mostpart, centered around the use of bioremediation.  Though there arefew practical alternatives to bioremediation, and although theUSCG, NOAA, and Exxon agree that it is the best solution for thissummer's cleanup, ADEC, which has undergone agency personnelchanges and claims there is not enough time and information tomake a knowledgeable decision, has not yet approved its use.  ADECis expected to give its answer within the next few days.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway,Scotland     At 0022 LT on 25 April, the 2,654-ton Bulgarian motor sternfish factory ship Kondor sank three kilometers east of Kebock Head(Lat 58 0.25N, Long 06 18.4W), south of the town of Stornoway, onthe Isle of Lewis, Scotland.  The vessel, owned by OkeanskyRibolov of Bourgas, Bulgaria, was under tow following a groundingon Sgeir Graidach (Lat 57 48N, Long 06 28W).  At 1600 LT, the crewof the fishery protection vessel Sulisker confirmed that thesunken vessel was leaking diesel oil and lubricating oil.  TheKondor's masters estimated that there were 17,000 to 24,000gallons of diesel oil and 1,500 to 1,800 gallons of lubricatingoil in the vessel's bunkers.  "Although there are no estimates ofthe actual amount that has spilled thus far, all of it willeventually seep out," said Ian Stephen, an officer with theStornoway Coast Guard.     Officials were concerned about the proximity of the spill tolocal fish farms and the use of dispersants in this location, eventhough it was a "fairly light spillage," David Deas of the BritishMarine Pollution Control Unit (MPCU) in London told OSIR.  TheMPCU finally gave permission for the Sulisker to apply 2.1 cubictons of dispersant at 2145 LT on the evening of 25 April.  TheMPCU, after approval from local authorities, the NatureConservancy Council, and the Department of Agriculture andFisheries in Scotland, applied an additional four tons ofdispersants from aircraft over the next two days.  The MPCU hastaken no further action after 28 April, according to Deas.     Stephen told OSIR that the diesel fuel slick was surveyedtwice in the last two days -- once by a Coast Guard boat and onceby a Nature Conservancy boat.  Both surveys showed the 1.9- by3.7- kilometer slick to be breaking up and moving north and southaway from the coastline of the Isle of Lewis.  "There was greatconcern about the large number of fish farms in the sea lochsalong the coast," said Stephen, "but it may not be as bad asoriginally feared."     The Kondor, which was a part of a large fleet of "Klondikers"that buy mackerel and herring fish from local fishermen duringon-sea transactions, will continue to leak what remains of itsfuel oil, according to Stephen.  "It is hoped that nature willtake its course and disperse the fuel oil naturally," Deas toldOSIR.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report     The US Coast Guard (USCG) recently released its final reportof the Tanker Safety Study Group.  The five USCG officers in thestudy group, headed by USCG Rear Admiral H.H. Bell, meant the45-page report to be an internal working document.  However, thereport, dated October 1989, was made public two weeks ago.     The report is a comprehensive review of the USCG's US andforeign tankship inspection programs, a review that has not takenplace for over a decade.  Among the problems outlined in thereport, the study group found that: there are too few inspectors,many of whom are overworked or inexperienced; present-day shipsare made with less steel and travel at higher speeds, making themmore vulnerable to cracking; and crews have been reduced, makingcrewmembers fatigued and overworked.  "The age-old problem of toofew people and not enough fully qualified inspectors still exists.These problems have been around for years although their magnitudehas increased rapidly since 1982.  Decreased budgets, manpowercuts, larger ships, more sophisticated shipboard systems, quickerturn-around times, and the shifting emphasis of USCG duties fromsafety to law enforcement have had far-reaching effects on theprogram."     For a copy of the report, contact the OSIR Hotline.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators     The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recentlyextended the financial responsibility compliance dates for twopetroleum underground storage tank (UST) owners and operators.Petroleum marketers owning between 13 and 99 tanks who wererequired to comply by 26 April 1990, now have until 26 April 1991.Those owning between one and 12 USTs, those having fewer than 100at one site, non-marketers with less than $20 million tangible networth, and local governments have until 26 October 1991 to complyinstead of 26 October 1990.     The requirements fall under subtitle I of the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act, which demands that owners andoperators of USTs meet certain financial responsibilities incleanup and third-party damages resulting from leaks.  Petroleummarketers owning 1,000 or more USTs and non-marketers with morethan $20 million in tangible net worth were required to comply inJanuary 1989; and petroleum marketers owning between 100 and 999USTs were required to comply in October 1989.     The EPA recognizes that those in the third and fourthcompliance groups, however, need more time to comply.  Many ofthem cannot obtain insurance because they cannot meet insurers'underwriting requirements.  "We heard loud and clear ... aboutunnecessary hardships that would be imposed by the earliercompliance dates," said EPA Administrator William K. Reilly.  "Insome cases, the affected service station or store is the onlyavailable facility for miles around and without adequate assurancefunding would have had to close.  The challenge we face along withCongress and the states is to protect groundwater and theenvironment from leaking USTs while making sure that mom-and-popgas stations and other small operators are not subjected toneedless economic hardships because of real problems in securingthe required insurance arrangements.  This is a problem that weintend to solve in order to make this important program succeed."     To date, 34 states have enacted legislation creating stateassurance funds to help owners comply with the requirements and toclean up releases.  However, the EPA has approved only seven ofthese to be used as compliance mechanisms.  The states and the EPAwill use the additional time to approve the funds and make themoperational.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas     On 24 April, an Amoco pipeline ruptured and spilled anestimated 50,000 gallons of crude oil into Millsap Lake, inMillsap, Texas, USA.  Amoco spotted the four-inch-thick slick fromthe air, and immediately hired local contractors to begin cleanupefforts with sorbent booms and vacuum trucks.  Though workersplaced boom around the water intakes, heavy rains and localflooding caused some oil and sorbent pads to be washed past thebooms and into the nearby Brazos River.  The Texas Department ofHealth sampled the lake water, which services 300 customers, anddetermined that Millsap's water requirements can be safely met byadjusting the water intake to a depth of 30-48 inches.  Officialsexpect environmental damage to be minimal.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas     The 246-foot US tank barge MGM 2001 leaked approximately10,000 gallons of #2 diesel fuel into the Colorado River at theWay Energy dock, Texas City, Texas, USA, on 22 April.  Workersfrom Georgia Transporters of Panama City, Florida, USA -- theoperator of the tug that was pulling both the MGM 2001 and the MGM2002 -- noticed the leak near the #1 starboard tank.  Diversconfirmed reports of a crack three to ten inches wide and five tosix feet long.  The barge carried a total of 500,000 gallons.     The tug's operator first contacted the two companies in thearea, Way Energy and Hoechst Celanese Chemical, for assistance.Celanese sent out about 300 feet of boom until Martin Gas Marine,the owner of the barges, hired Garner Environmental Services ofHouston, Texas, to set up an additional 2,500 feet of containmentand sorbent boom around the barge, and at two locations across theentrance to the Colorado River turning basin.  With the help ofsorbent pads and sweeps and vacuum trucks, crews were able torecover about 44,000 gallons of oil/water.  Salvage crews pumpedthe remaining oil in the tank to barge MGM 2002.  "This cleanupwent better than the one a month ago in Freeport, Texas (OSIR, 29March)," Richard Rhodes, USCG investigation officer in charge ofpollution, told OSIR.  "This time we had better weather and tides ... and it was in an ideal area.  In the Freeport spill, thetides switched three times on us."     The barge is currently undergoing permanent repairs at theChannel Shipyard in Channelview, Texas.  An investigation into thecause of the accident is underway.  "The captain says he didn'thit anything," said Rhodes, "but I can't imagine how that crackgot there."Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Exxon Rejects Environmental ProposalsAt Exxon's annual shareholders meeting on 25 April in Houston,Texas, USA (OSIR, 24 April), Exxon overwhelmingly rejected sixproposals by a small portion of the 1,850 shareholders present toestablish "responsible" environmental policies, including aproposal to adopt the "Valdez Principles," a set of corporateguidelines to safeguard the environment.  Exxon further impliedthat the company has no intention of voluntarily replacing itstanker fleet with double-hulled vessels.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill     US District Court Judge H. Russel Holland recently ruled thatthe owner (Trinidad Shipping Co.) and operators of the tankerGlacier Bay, which spilled 160,000 gallons of crude oil into CookInlet, Alaska, USA, in 1987 may not limit their liability to $6.6million, the value of the ship and its cargo, under the LiabilityLimitation Act of 1851.  In its complaint, Trinidad claimed thatthe 1851 law held precedence over the Trans-Alaska PipelineAuthorization Act (TAPAA), which holds a spiller liable for $14million and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund liable foranother $86 million.  But Holland ruled that TAPAA repealed theLimitation Act in this instance.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly     In an October 1989 US General Accounting Office study on theadequacy of preparation and response of the US Coast Guard (USCG)to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, the USCG reported that it hadinitiated a nationwide study of contingency plans, "because of thePresident's concern about the nation's ability to respond to majorspills."     The USCG study has since evolved into a review by the entirefederal government including the fourteen agencies that make upthe National Response Team -- the Environmental Protection Agency,the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, theDepartment of Commerce, the Department of Agriculture, theDepartment of Transportation, the State Department, the Departmentof Labor, the Department of Justice, the Department of Health andHuman Services, the Department of the Interior, the FederalEmergency Management Administration, the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission -- and all the USCG Regional Response Teams, accordingto Commander Doug Lentsch of the USCG Chief Pollution ResponseBranch in Washington, DC, USA.  The review includes a total of 75reports from these various agencies.  "It will be a snapshot intime, as to where we stood at the time the report was done,"Lentsch told OSIR.  "The basis of it is well-founded.  What thepoliticians will do with it is unknown."  According to Lentsch,the nationwide US contingency plan review, still awaiting thesignatures of the Environmental Protection Agency and theSecretary of Transportation, is due out in a few weeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky     On 23 April, the 206-foot US barge Chotin 2880 struck asubmerged object and spilled an estimated 18,000 gallons ofunleaded gasoline while mooring at the Southern States Petroleumfacility on the Ohio River, Owensboro, Kentucky, USA.  Accordingto the USCG Marine Safety Office in Louisville, Kentucky, thesubmerged object, believed to be a "D" ring off of the mooringcell, caused an 18-inch by 2-inch crack in the vessel's hull,approximately six inches below the waterline.  Although crewssmelled gasoline, they did not observe a sheen, since most of thegasoline evaporated in the warm weather.  A local cooperative,Owensboro Cooperative, deployed boom around the vessel andoffloaded the remaining product.  The lightering of the vesselcaused the crack to rise above the waterline, which stopped thedischarge.  The vessel is currently on its way to Owensboro RiverService for permanent repairs.     To prevent barges from hitting the "D" rings in the future,USCG Lt. Terry Hoover told OSIR, the local towing company willinstall fenders between the barges and the mooring cells andSouthern States will weld metal beams outside the mooring cells.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephoneEditor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephoneline.  Please make note of the new number: 1-617-641-5110 -- A.S. . . . Exxon recently pleaded not guilty to federal chargesstemming from the Exxon Valdez oil spill.  The company will go ontrial 18 June . . . If you need more information on these briefnotes or any article in this issue, contact the OSIR Hotline; Tel:1-617-641-5110 or 617-648-8700; Fax: 1-617-648-8707; Tlx: 650 1009891 MCI UW.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-24IA086-000616-B018-27http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003319 text/html 7152HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:31:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:08 GMTContent-length: 6966Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev46.html Sample Issue Copyright OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ------------------------------ New Ozone Depleter Suit to be Filed (211 words) --------------- Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout Plans (330 words) DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years Early (332 words) CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996New Ozone Depleter Suit to be FiledThe Environmental Law Foundation (ELF), U.S. Public InterestResearch Group (PIRG), Earthday 2000 and Ozone Action will file suit January 6, 1996, against refrigerator manufacturers Maytag and Sanyo and their retailers Montgomery Ward, Circuit City and Basic Living Products. The suit alleges that the parties are in violation of the Clean Air Act in failing to label products manufactured with and containing CFCs.The Clean Air Act states that all products containing ormanufactured with CFC must be labeled to warn consumers that thechlorfluorocarbons are harmful to public health and the environment.  Manufacturers Amana, GE and Whirlpool replaced CFCs with HCFCs in their refrigerators. As a result of another recent settlement with ELF, Ozone Action and Earthday 2000, these three manufacturers are required to halt all advertising that their HCFC refrigerators are "ozone free" or "CFC free."According to ELF associate attorney Christine Mailloux, "TheCFC-containing refrigerators sold by Maytag and Sanyo pose far moreof a public threat than those containing HCFCs. Especially with other manufacturers selling HCFC-based models in the same stores, it is imperative that Maytag, Sanyo and their retailers comply with federal law to help consumers make more environmentally conscious decisions."For details contact Kalee Krieder at 202/265-6738.(OZONE ACTION RELEASE: 12/21)Back to Headline List CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout PlansAs the CFC phaseout takes effect, heating, ventilation and air conditioning industry contractors are being urged to make good ontheir New Year's resolutions to start a retrofit/replacement program and to do it now.Even though the use of equipment using CFCs is still legitimate, the cost of the refrigerant will continue to climb as time passes.  End users who have not looked at their options for phasing out equipment that uses CFCs will "have to think about the future," says Tom Crane, manager of communications for fluorine products of AlliedSignal Chemicals.Melody Dixon-Brown, marketing communications program manager forDuPont Fluoro-products warns that complacency is the major problem."It's prudent to have a transition plan," she said.  At the beginning of 1996, Dixon-Brown estimates that three million commercial refrigeration systems and 67,000 centrifugal chillers in the U.S. will still operate on CFCs, representing $135 billion of refrigeration and a/c equipment.Dixon-Brown predicts that those still operating CFC-using productswill begin running into serious shortages within two to five years.Speaking for Elf Atochem, Harold Lamb, business manager for refrigerants is not so sanguine: "I suspect we'll see spot shortages during the next year," said Lamb, who predicts shortages may become acute by 1997.  The tax on CFCs in the U.S. is now $5.35 per pound and will rise again in 1996.Supermarkets in particular need to investigate options after takinginventory of their existing equipment and its projected life,manufacturers advise.  Retrofitting can be expensive but even changing to the use of more costly HFCs over HCFCs makes sense when equipment can expect a long service life since the refrigerant is not due to be phased out.  In some cases it will, in the long run, be less expensive to replace equipment entirely, the industry advises.  The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and DuPont suggest that the time to convince customers to switch to alternative refrigerants is during routine service jobs.(RSES JOURNAL: DECEMBER 1995, p.24)Back to Headline List CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years EarlyDuPont, in an effort to stem criticism of its production of ozonedestroying products, says it will phase out HCFCs 10 years earlierthan the Montreal Protocol requires.Earl Clark, senior refrigerant engineer for the company's CFC Retrofit Program announced the plan at the Mechanical Service Contractors of America's 10th annual conference in San Antonio recently.  Under the Protocol, a 100 percent phaseout of HCFC production is called for by 2030.  DuPont says it will discontinue sale of R-22 in new equipment by January 1, 2020.  The company, according to Clark, is working on an "aggressive industry program for R-22 replacements" to be in use by that date.The gradual phaseout planned from 1996 through 2030 will probably be accomplished in Europe by 2015, Clark said.  The Clean Air Act nowsays that a loss of 15 percent of HCFCs used in industrial air conditioning units of 50 pounds or more constitutes a violation and that fines of up to 25,000 per day may be levied by the EPA.DuPont remains an advocate of HCFC in centrifugal and screwchillers, however, along with residential air conditioners,commercial and transport refrigeration and in heat pumps.  DuPont says advantages of R-22 include low toxicity and  ozone depletion potential (ODP) 20 times lower than R-11 or R-12.HCFC-123, said Clark, is vital to DuPont's success, and points outthat its ODP and global warming potential (GWP) are far lower thanany other refrigerant.  The company also revealed that a two-year inhalation study completed in 1991 indicated that the benign tumors found in lab animals had "little relevance to man."  HCFC-123 is DuPont's replacement for R-11 since their operating characteristics are similar and the same lubricants can be used.DuPont is now producing HFC-134a as its replacement for R-12 andR-500 in centrifugal and screw chillers.  The product's ODP and GWPare 0.0 and 0.28 compared with R-12's ODP OF 1.0 and its GWP of 3.0.(ACHR NEWS: 12/18, p.17)Back to Headline List WT02-B37-25IA086-000616-B018-71http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003349 text/html 102468HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:31:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:15 GMTContent-length: 102280Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev04.html Sample Issue Copyright RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet September 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HEALTH BEAT PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATION EXPOSURE (259 words) RADON IN WATER ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINES (242 words) VIEWPOINT ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATION (811 words) NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONS (1088 words) NEWS BRIEFS INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992 (45 words) RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAIN (57 words) AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGN (64 words) DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP" (95 words) BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITY (111 words) ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FAST (183 words) RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORM (36 words) CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALL (47 words) RESEARCH FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS (721 words) MITIGATION NEWS CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSED (1236 words) RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATION STANDARDS (54 words) INDOOR AIR POLLUTION FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS (364 words) RADON FACTS RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKING (32 words) LEGAL NEWS RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURT (370 words) CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITY (367 words) REAL ESTATE HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEW (610 words) DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLS (332 words) RADON MAPPING EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAP DISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZED (242 words) LEGISLATIVE UPDATE RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERS (2451 words) HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNS (1158 words) CALENDAR OF RADON EVENTS SEPTEMBER (38 words) OCTOBER (51 words) RADON QUOTES DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYS (40 words) EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTOR RESPONSES ARE VARIED (1437 words) RADON FACTS RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTER IMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODES (24 words) RISK ASSESSMENT THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENT (298 words) RADON NEWS HEADLINES School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools is (38 words) Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states to (17 words) Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a (16 words) New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams will (35 words) RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program. (27 words) RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants. (7 words) Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of final (21 words) EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on the (49 words) LETTERS READER'S VIEWS (937 words) CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATIONEXPOSUREThe possibility that exposure to ionizing alpha radiation may damagedescendent human cells could help explain the "Gardner Phenomena,"in which cases of children's leukemia are believed to have beencaused by father's employment at a British nuclear facility.Scientists now have some reason to believe alpha radiation emittedby radon and plutonium may be responsible for those chromosomalabberations.These findings, however, are extremely controversial because theychallenge traditional knowledge and involve scientists leaping fromone biological principle to another in order to make their case.The scientists examining alpha radiation and its effects linkedleukemia among children to their fathers, who worked at a nuclearfuel reprocessing plant. Research data indicate increased risk ofleukemia (six to eight times) in the offspring of fathers receivingtotal radiation does of 100 millisieverts or greater prior toconception.From examining the results of laboratory tests, the researchersbelieve they have found an unexpected mechanism associated withalpha radiation -- chromosomal abberations which occur in anapparently random fashion -- in descendent cells. The chromosomalabberations shed new light on the potential damage alpha radiationmay cause."If a comparable phenomena could be demonstrated in spermatogonial(sperm forming) stem cells," says researcher Eric Wright, "then itis possible that a similar abberation could arise in sperm."Whilst our experiments don't actually address the GardnerPhenomena," Wright says, "they do offer a biological mechanismworth thinking about if you are going to take the alleged paternaltransmission of radiation damage seriously."  Wright is researchleader at the British Medical Research Council's Radiobiology Unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINESGuidelines created by the U.S. EPA to assist public water utilitiesdispose of wastes created during the radionuclide removal processneed more work, according to EPA's own Science Advisory Board(SAB). The SAB Radiation Advisory Committee says it's worriedEPA's non-binding guidelines will "by default ... become thestandard."According to committeeman Richard G. Sextro, in the absence of"specific" federal regulations, EPA's guidelines for removingradioactive wastes from treated drinking water will be viewed as astandard and cause states to spend billions of dollars to comply.Greg Helms of EPA's Office of Ground Water says the agency doesn'thave authority to "require" anything specific regarding disposal oftreated ground water waste.A 27-member California congressional delegation says it disagreeswith EPA's proposed radon in water rule. In a letter to PresidentBush, the group called EPA's proposed rule "very stringent andcostly," adding that the $3.7 billion compliance price tag will onlyreduce "on average, about one percent of the public's total exposureto radon according to EPA's Science Advisory Board." Californiarepresentatives asked Bush to direct EPA Administrator WilliamReilly to conduct a full multi-media risk assessment in order toproduce a comprehensive cost effective radon reduction program forthe U.S.The delegates also asked Bush to direct EPA to adopt a radon indrinking water standard consistent with the goals of the IndoorRadon Abatement Act of 1988.Contact: Scott Abel (317) 843-0804Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATIONRecently I spoke at a radon meeting sponsored by the National CivicLeague. A number of county health officials and neighborhood housinggroups were in attendance. The meetingTs purpose was to develop aradon action plan designed to reach local communities. But, itbecame clear early in the meeting that neither of these groups had avery good grasp of basic radon fundamentals, nor were theyconvinced there was a radon problem in their area.I'm sure they aren't much different than any average American. Yes,they've heard of radon, but radon is a problem in someone else'shome or neighborhood, not in their's.EPA has been trying since 1988 to convince the public radon is aserious health threat. Their efforts have probably made them feelmuch like the "boy who cried wolf" because nobody seems to bepaying attention. Government officials have known the danger ofradon exposure for many years. In fact, in the early 1940's the U.S.Public Health Service warned the Atomic Energy Commission aboutradon and its threat to uranium miners. Unfortunately, theCommission chose to ignore the warnings, and as taxpayers, we arenow compensating the miners' families for their exposure.As you may know, radon didn't make headlines until it became a"crisis" in the home of Stanley Watras. He and his family wereforced to vacate their house until their radon problem could becorrected. When you stop to think about it, radon is still that way inthe majority of homes. Until someone moves, there is no radoncrisis, even if they know it is there!My company has tested thousands of homes for radon. But more-often-than-not, when home owners learn they have elevated levelsthey usually don't take any action to lower their exposure. Initiallythey might be concerned enough to start calling local "experts" untilthey find someone who will calm their fears and tell them not toworry. It seems the only time radon indeed becomes a crisis whichleads to action is when it comes time to sell a home. When sellersbecome buyers, however, they are far more likely to insist on lowradon levels. Ironic? Perhaps. But, it's not such a bad situation,because two houses get fixed as a result of the original transaction.Radon isn't really much different than other health-related issues.We generally don't do anything until we are forced to do so. Doctorstell us we must lower our cholesterol, quit smoking, loose weight,etc. or we may face the possibility of premature death. Look at thechange AIDS has brought to our society due to the tremendous feargenerated by public information. EPA took a lot of heat last yearover their public service ad campaign. The sad thing is the mostsevere criticism of the campaign was due to a set of billboardsdeclaring "Radon is a Severe Risk in this Area" showing an X-Ray ofa pair of lungs. Some who saw the ads said they were "scared" thevisability of the ads would lower their property values. They couldcare less, it seems, about the health risk radon poses.I'm not a health physicist, but I do review a lot of scientificinformation about radon that seems to validate the old adage "wherethere is smoke, there is fire." Some researchers now believe radonexposure may cause damage to genes that prevent tumors. Othersreport possible links to leukemia, cancer of the liver, breast andbrain. I know there are those who will read these words and respondwith "show me the bodies." Although that evidence may be providedin the future, until it is, we will just have to "smell the smoke."When I was a small child, I can remember seeing ads with doctorsadvertising Lucky Strikes and Chesterfields. When scientists beganraising the possibility that cigarette smoking might cause lungcancer, other experts derided their research saying "prove it." But Iask, where are those critics now?The funny thing about radon is that the actions of one lawyer may besaving more lives than the efforts of all health professionalscombined. Several years ago, Dick Mansfield, chief attorney for theEmployee Relocation Council, began evaluating environmentalpollutants. He issued a white paper in the late 1980's advising allmembers of the relocation industry to test homes for radon beforetaking them into inventory. He has since been criticized for thatdecision but remains resolute in his position. Even though hisdirection was designed to protect corporations against futureliability, the end result is that he may be responsible for savingthousands of lives over the next decade or two. Ironic, isn't it, butthen again, pioneers always seem to get arrows in their backs.Richard Jordan - Editor & Publisher, Radon News Digest.Contact: (317) 843-0804Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONSDespite less than favorable sales of radon detectors over the pastseveral years, Glenwood, Illinois-based Landauer, Inc. has reason tobe excited about radon. The AMEX-listed corporation recently rolledout a new testing and mitigation program designed to help relocationcompanies reduce administrative costs while increasing Landauer'sshare of the radon detector market. According to company brochures,the program would take the "corporation, relocation company,transferee and real estate agent out of the testing and mitigationprocess."Landauer calls their new relocation marketing scheme the HomeBuyer's Preferred Radon Protection Program. It is a novel idea withpotential. In fact, at first glance, I'm sure it sounds very attractiveto relocation administrators, many of which are alreadyoverburdened by increasing environmental concerns.HERE'S HOW IT WORKSThe Landauer plan is sold as a service agreement provided by thecorporation or relocation company to the buyer at closing. Afterclosing is completed, Landauer sends the buyer a RADTRAK( alphatrack detector (manufactured by Landauer), which the buyer deploysin the home, removing and returning it to Landauer after 120 days.Landauer analyzes the device and provides results to the buyer, nowthe owner of the home.If levels of radon gas of 4 pCi/l or higher are detected by Landauer,the home will be mitigated by a Landauer selected mitigator at nocost to the buyer or relocation company. Landauer provides for post-mitigation testing "to confirm the radon concentration has beenreduced to below 4 pCi/l."WHAT'S THE PROBLEM?Company brochures tout Landauer's RADTRAK long-term  alpha trackdetector as the type of test kit "recommended by the EPA," addingthat short-term tests "may produce a false positive or negativeresulting in unneccessary mitigation, or worse, an undetected healthhazard."Landauer ought to know a lot about "false" test results. Rememberthe Landauer Quick Screen( detector? That device, also touted bythe company as reliable, was sold all over the United States to anunknown number of consumers and yet never managed to pass EPAproficiency tests. In fact, according to officials with the company,Landauer never bothered to alert those consumers who relied on theQuick Screen that their test results might not be accurate. Somestates, like Pennsylvania, ordered the device off retail shelves andout of the state.In addition, Landauer's ability to provide accurate results have beencalled into question once again. According to the EPA, the company'smost recent attempt to pass their alpha track detector through theRMP failed. According to EPA staffers, Landauer has been "delisted"from the U.S. EPA's RMP program for failing to pass the latest roundof blind tests. Will Landauer fail to notify recent RADTRAKcustomers as well?SOMETHING IS WRONG WITH THIS PICTUREAlthough Landauer's program seems to be a great potential money-maker for the company and its stockholders, it deserves scrutiny bythe radon and relocation industries.For starters, it is commonly believed that the soon-to-be-released"Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will not "recommend"long-term test devices, but rather, short-term tests, when testingis performed as a result of a real property transfer. As a majorplayer in the industry, Landauer  should have planned their marketingmaterials to reflect this.Second, Landauer shouldn't be in the radon business if they can'tmeet EPA proficiency standards. That's just asking for trouble. Andnot just for the company, but for the entire radon and relocationindustries. Negative media coverage of radon service companies likeLandauer, who fail to meet EPA criteria, yet continue to offerservices to the public, can damage the credibility of the entire radonindustry, giving the public another reason not to test or mitigate.Third, Landauer's plan, although perfectly legal, leaves itscustomers open to intense scrutiny, and perhaps, liability. AlthoughLandauer's Brett Ladda describes the program as "no different thangoing to the doctor" (Landauer provides the test, analyzes it,remediates if necessary and then provides a confirmatory test andresults, similar to physicians who both examine patients andprescribe treatment), the plan does not provide enough details to beattractive to the relocation industry. For instance, who will auditthe test results? How can homeowners be assured that Landauerdevices will detect radon without a confirmatory reading from anindependent firm of their choice? What does Landauer know aboutmitigation? What experience do they have mitigating homes? Howwill they ensure their "network" of mitigation contractors willactually do the job right -- and that their work will meet EPAstandards? And, perhaps more importantly, do they guarantee theirwork?A GOOD IDEA, BUT POORLY PLANNEDAlthough the concept of the Landauer plan is not such a bad ideafrom a consumer savings point of view, choosing Landauer foranything radon-related could be a mistake for a corporation orrelocation company. It's a public relations disaster waiting tohappen. For instance, if one of Landauer's RADTRAK detectors werediscovered to have performed poorly, the media would first point toLandauer as "the fox guarding the henhouse," comparing thecompany's service agreements with those currently under firebetween physicians, insurance companies and home health careproviders.Good reporters would then do a "history" of Landauer, pointing outthe company's size, revenues, other business dealings,  the QuickScreen fiasco and the company's current delisting. Landauer and itsclients would be portrayed in a negative light.The way I see it, Landauer has two options. One -- Landauer couldstop pretending to be a radon service company.  After passing EPAproficiency tests, Landauer could begin making improvements to itsplan to make it more marketable.Two -- Landauer could drop out of the radon testing and mitigationindustry altogether.  The companyTs error-ladden radon efforts arenothing but a liability. Its past record speaks for itself. Today,Landauer is still attempting to sell its new testing and mitigationplan to a fictional corporate America . They call the plan "the nohassles solution to radon" -- as if hassles top the corporaterelocation gripe list. In the real world of radon and relocation,liability is of more concern. And, liability concerns can only be putto rest when all environmental defects have been disclosed. Withoutaddressing disclosure, the Landauer plan falls short of "preferred"and offers little "protection" to anyone.Scott Abel is associate editor of Radon News Digest and president ofReincarnate Marketing and Design Group, Indianapolis. Abel, afreelance journalist, has been an observer of the radon industrysince 1987. Contact: (317) 843-0804.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992"Assessing the Risk," the 1992 International Symposium on Radonand Radon Reduction Technology, September 22-25, 1992, SheratonPark Place Hotel, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Sponsored by the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency and the Conference of RadiationControl Program Directors. Contact: Diana Fry (502) 227-4543.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAINThe American Medical Association and EPA have joined together toproduce a half-hour documentary on radon. The program has airedseveral times already this year and is scheduled to be shown againOctober, 10, at 12:30 p.m. on cabel channel CNBC. Copies of the videoalso are available by calling 800-933-4AMT. ($29.95)Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGNThe Advertising Council is in the process of developing new TVpublic service announcements due to be released in mid-August ofthis year.According to the Council, radon hotline volume is one way to assessthe impact of the advertising campaigns to date. Recent hotlinevolume (Jan-July 1992) included 43,033 calls, twice as many callsas were logged in all of 1991.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP"Dow Corning recently withdrew its "Fire Stop Intumescent WrapStrip 2002" from the market. Recent testing of the wrap striprevealed what the company calls "some performance limitations"which develop as the product ages.Dow Corning says it will no longer sell the product and advisescontractors and suppliers to return all unused wrap strip forreplacement. The company is looking into whether or not retrofitswill be necessary "in homes where Dow Corning Wrap Strippreviously had been installed."For more information contact: Greg Whitaker (517) 496-8378 orDave Horschig (517) 496-5206.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITYBowser-Morner, Inc., an independent, accredited testing facility inDayton, Ohio, has opened a commercial radon calibration laboratorythe company says is identical to the chambers used by the U.S. EPAin size, air flow, temperature, humidity controls, radon source,monitoring methods and equipment.The lab's quality assurance program features periodic datacomparisons with both EPA environmental laboratories inMontgomery, Alabama and Las Vegas, Nevada; and the Department ofEnergy's Environmental Measurements Laboratory in New York.Editor's Note: Commercialcalibration facilities calibratemeasurement devices for radon service providers. The quality ofcalibrations conducted for radon service providers affects theaccuracy of radon measurement results provided to consumers(Source U.S. EPA).Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FASTAccording to attorneys interviewed by Indoor Air Quality Update(IAQU), the courts have seen a tremendous increase in indoor airquality (IAQ) lawsuits. The attorneys say as plaintiffs' interest inIAQ lawsuits rise, so too will the interest and attention of thedesign and construction industries.Attorneys interviewed by the monthly trade journal say thatalthough many past lawsuits have centered around residentialpollutants, the focus is now shifting. In the future, they predict,more and more IAQ lawsuits will center on commerical, industrialand multi-family residential properties.Building designers, construction contractors and building operators,attorneys say, should ensure the safety of their tenants by testingfor the presence of all possible known contaminants and routinelyinspecting HVAC systems for problems.Frank Cross, author of "Legal Responses to Indoor Air Pollution"says, "Most building managers are hesitant to do this, in part,because they may not want to know, and in part because they don'twant to unnecessarily alarm their tenants. "But if they want toavoid future litigation," Cross told IAQU, "this (testing and HVACinspections) could make a big difference."Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORMThe relocation industry introduced a homeowner's disclosurestatement at this year's Corporate Relocation Council meeting inChicago. The homeowner disclosure statement is a form designed fortransferees to disclose any known housing problems, including radongas.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALLAccording to Clinton/Gore media relations associates, Democraticpresidential candidate, Gov. Bill Clinton, will test the Arkansasgovernor's mansion for radon this fall. Clinton staffers say thecandidate is aware of the radon problem, and, if elected, would helpfocus more attention on indoor air quality issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKSMan's best friend might also be his best doctor. "The family dog andother pets can be ideal sentinels of health hazards in yourenvironment," says researcher Dr. Lawrence T. Glickman of PurdueUniversity's School of Veternary Medicine. "Now, for the first time,a state health department is considering using animals to helpidentify human diseases caused by environmental factors, in hopesof spotting health problems before they happen or diagnosing themwhen they do."North Carolina is considering such a system, following a Mayconference at which Glickman and other public-health expertsexplored the possibility.Glickman and Dr. Ralph C. Richardson, also of the Purdue School ofVeternary Medicine, say using animals as health sentinels hasseveral advantages."Pets are ideal health sentinels because they intimately share thesame environment as their owners and often eat the same things,"says Glickman, an epidemiologist and head of the Department ofVeternary Pathobiology.Richardson, professor of small animal medicine and oncology andhead of Purdue's Department of Veternary Clinical Sciences, says,"Dogs acquire diseases sooner because of their shorter lifespans.This gives us a chance to perhaps figure out why a disease develops,thereby allowing owners to take preventative measures forthemselves and for the other animals in the environment."Two years ago Glickman chaired the National Academy of Sciences'Committee on   Animals as Monitors of Environmental Hazards,which reviewed and evaluated the usefulness of animal studies inassessing health risks for people.The committee found that although many scientists view animalsentinels as valuable indicators of environmental hazards, theapproach has not been widely accepted. Part of the reason, Glickmansays, is that such studies rely on epidemiology as the basic tool, andthat the science is relatively new. Epidemiology is the study of howdisease develops and spreads into a population.Another reason, Glickman says, is that many government fundingagencies are unaware of the value of such animal studies. "But Ihope that the report might help legitimize this approach," he says.The committee published its report last summer. One of the group'srecommendations was to require the reporting of environmentallycaused animal diseases to appropriate state or federal agencies,which would allow the data collected to be shared with public healthofficials."It's done for infectious diseases like rabies, so it just makes senseto do it for something like bladder cancer, which can affect people,too," Glickman notes.The report also recommended making the best use of animal-exposure and disease record systems via computer not only forcompanion animals and livestock, but also fish and wildlife. Inaddition, the report noted more and more veternary and biologicalsciences schools are offering courses and graduate programs inepidemiology, with an  emphasis on environmental health.Glickman has done several animal-sentinel studies, including one onbreast cancer and diet in dogs. Another study linked bladder cancerin dogs to owners' using flea and tick dips on the animals and livingnear areas sprayed with insecticides.Glickman also is part of a Purdue study of dogs to assess theirowners' exposure to radon gas in the home. The first phase of theresearch involved attaching radon detection collars to about 30 petdogs in Tippecanoe County, Indiana, to measure home radon levels.Phase one has been completed and researchers hope to obtain fundingfor phase two, which will compare radon levels in homes of dogswith lung cancer and a control group without cancer from the sameneighborhood.Purdue's Comparative Oncology Program, which seeks novel andeffective ways to treat animals afflicated with cancer, includes atumorregistry of tissue samples suspected of being cancerous.The programTs most recent work on animals as human healthsentinels found owners of dogs with cancer used 2, 4-D herbicide ontheir lawns and/or used a lawn-care company about one-third moreoften than did owners of dogs without the disease. Maligantlymphoma in dogs is very similar to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma inpeople. 2, 4-D also is one of the components in Agent Orange, thedefoliant used during the Vietnam War."We definitely want to help animals with better diagnosis andtreatment," says Richardson. "But the dream is to use animals thatmay have been exposed to environmental hazards as sentinels forhow cancer develops in people."By Ellen Rantz.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSEDThere is a risk of carbon monoxide poisoning in any building withfuel burning equipment. In some buildings this risk is essentially nil,such as houses that use electricity for home and water heating,clothes drying, and cooking and that do not have attached garageswhere gasoline engines may be operated. In other buildings, the riskof carbon monoxide poisoning is also very low, such as houses withnewer, high-efficiency, closed-combustion furnaces, boilers, orwater heaters. However, the overwhelming majority of houses haveboilers, fireplaces, furnaces and water heaters that use house air tosupport combustion and depend upon traditional chimneys or flues tovent combustion products to the outdoors. When combustion productsspill into the house (backdraft), the potential for carbon monoxidepoisoning is established.Unfortunately, many conventional boilers, fireplaces, furnaces andwater heaters spill combustion products into the home. Spillagecommonly occurs during the first minute or two of ignition until thechimney is sufficiently warm to draw combustion products to thetop. The longer the spillage occurs, the greater the risk. Completespillage may result from several causes: a blocked chimney, adisconected flue, a cracked heat exchanger, or an insufficientamount of air to support the draft up the chimney. The lattercondition occurs when the combustion appliance is located in aspace that is under negative pressure (depressurized) relative to theoutdoors. The amount of depressurization depends on the air-tightness of the space containing the combustion appliance and thecapacity of other exhaust devices as well as duct design and leakagein forced-air heating/cooling systems.Fortunately, carbon monoxide is usually found in very smallconcentrations in combustion gases from properly maintainedfurnaces, boilers and water heaters. However, when combustion isstarved for oxygen, an atom of oxygen is stripped from carbondioxide (CO2, a common combustion byproduct) and carbon monoxide(CO) is produced.WHAT'S THE RISK OF CO POISONING?Several hundred people die from carbon monoxide produced bycombustion appliances in the home each year. Several thousandadditional people have less dramatic symptoms of carbon monoxidepoisoning (headaches, nausea, shortness of breath) although not allthe symptoms may be attributed to carbon monoxide.WHO SHOULD BE CONCERNED?Any contractor, tradesperson, inspector, or sponsor who makesmodification of ventilation rates in houses should be concernedabout combustion spillage. This includes those who: install exhaustfans and devices, modify HVAC systems, and/or modify airtightnessof buildings or install mitigation systems. Mitigation contractorshave been alerted to this concern since 1986 by the New York StateEnergy Office (NYSEO) and, since 1988 by the U.S. EPA. These alertscited previous guidance directed to low-income weatherizationproviders and other contractors by the U.S. Department of Energy(DOE). Portions of DOE's guidance reflect tests required by building codes.WHICH TEST IS BEST?First, any of the described tests is better than none. Second, eachtest is like a tool -- one may fit a specific radon mitigator in asituation better than another contractor in another situation. Selectthe test that best fits your situation (understanding limitations),conduct it, document and report it.WHY NOT PROVIDE CLIENT WITH A DETECTOR?Passive carbon monoxide detectors are available for about $3.However, there are several concerns about such detectors: first, theminimum sensitivity of such detectors may be above the thresholdof health effects; second, the detectors must periodically bereplaced (for example, every month); and third, the detector requiresa significant CO exposure that may not be discovered by the occupantin time.WHAT ABOUT HEAT-SENSITIVE DETECTORS?These devices are probably fine as a back-up but are not a substitutefor spillage testing when working on a house. Such detectors requirethe client to monitor the detector.WHY NOT MEASURE CARBON DIOXIDE NEAR COMBUSTION APPLIANCESTO DETECT SPILLAGE?If you have a carbon dioxide monitor (several hundred to severalthousand dollars) or hand pump and detector tubes (several hundreddollars), you can measure for it. For most radon mitigation, aninexpensive smoke bottle will be adequate to test for spillage associated withdepressurization (conditions may be related to radon mitigation). Of course, acarbon dioxide test may reflect other defects (e.g. cracked heat exchanger) notrelated to radon.WHY NOT USE A BLOWER DOOR TO CHECK SPILLAGE?A blower door is a great diagnostic tool in the hands of a skilledoperator, especially for advanced indoor air quality work. If you usea blower door and understand interzonal analysis, use your blowerdoor in your spillage checks. However, a blower door is not arequirement for testing for backdrafting.WHO HAS DIED FROM CO DUE TO RADON MITIGATION?The best available evidence suggests about 10 percent of houseswith conventional combustion appliances have unacceptable spillagedue to depressurization. Most radon mitigation increasesdepressurization. A brief test for spillage, requiring several minutesby an EPA-approved conractor, is not unreasonable. No EPA-approvedcontractor should reduce one environmental health risk while increasinganother.GIVE ME A SIMPLE CHECKLIST SO I CAN GUARANTEE I'LL NEVER HAVEA PROBLEM.There are simple procedures and checklists to help you test forspillage, as previously identified. However, there is not any one testthat will ensure future maintenance and use of combustionappliances. Thus, it is unclear how a reasonable person could expector offer anunconditional guarantee.ADDITIONAL SOURCES FOR BACKDRAFTING INFORMATION* National Fuel Gas Code, Appendix H (pages 2223.1-89), 1988,"Recommended Procedures for Safety Inspection of an ExistingAppliance Installation." This procedure includes a combustionappliance spillage test (at the draft hood using smoke) whileexterior windows and doors, fireplace dampers, and the doorbetween the combustion appliance and the remainder of the houseare closed and exhaust fans and devices are operated.* American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air ConditioningEngineers, ASHRE Standard 62-1989, Appendix B, "PositiveCombustion Air Supply." This procedure includes combustion spillagetesting involving measuring the ratio of dilution air in the stackabove the draft hood (40 percent minimum) under "closed house"conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devicesoperated. This test should not be performed when the inside-outsidetemperature difference is more the 30 degrees farenheit (18 degreescelsius) or wind velocity is more than 5 mph (2.2 m/s).* "Procedure for Determining the Safety of Residential Chimneys"in Chimney Safety Test User's Manual (Second Edition) prepared forthe Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CHMC) by Scanada -Sheltair Consortium (January 12, 1988). This document outlines atwo-step procedure: the first step involves a simple paperexcercise; and, if necessary, a more rigorous "worst casesimulation" test using pressure measurement in spaces containingcombustion devices as well as spillage tests.* "Worst Case Draft Test"  required by the Minnesota Department ofJobs and Training, St. Paul, MN., for all weatherization contractorsusing state administered federal funds. This procedure outlines asimple pressure measurement in flues under "closed house"conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devicesoperating.* "Retrofit Ventilation System Guide," 1991 (November), EnergyConservatory, Minneapolis, MN., for blower door operators. Thisprocedure outlines an indoor air quality strategy involvingcombustion spillage tests using simple equipment and procedures.Radon mitigation contractors may wish to check with local HVACinspectors, HVAC contractors, or low-income weatherizationproviders about these or similar procedures. Each procedure hasadvantages and disadvantages that should be considered.BILL ANGELL, MIDWEST UNIVERSITIES RADON CONSORTIUMBack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATIONSTANDARDS5.8  All buildings where active depressurization systems have beeninstalled "shall" be tested for backdrafting of combustionappliances immediately upon completion of the mitigation systeminstallation. Any backdrafting caused by the installed mitigationsystem "shall" be corrected immediately. The mitigation system"shall not" be operated until backdrafting conditions are corrected.Source: EPA draft standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS"Phototron" indoor greenhouse claimed to remove everything,including radon and pet odors.Phototron indoor greenhouse isn't all it's cracked up to be. At least,that's the opinion of investigators at the Federal Trade Commission(FTC), who charge that San Diego-based Pyraponic Industries II, Inc.and it's owner, Jeffery Julian DeMarco, made false andunsubstantiated claims that their "Phototron" indoor air cleanerwould remove all indoor air contaminants.According to the FTC, Pyraponic ran advertisements in a variety ofnational magazines claiming it's "Phototron natural home airpurifier" would remove "radon, formaldehyde, pet odors, kitchen andbathroom smells, cigarette smoke" and, at the same time,"replentish oxygen 33 times, along with the fresh scent of theplants of your choice." Furthermore, the ads claimed a Phototroncould eliminate all pollutants in a 1,000 square foot area.FTC staffers agreed to a consent decree to settle the charges withPryaponic, which prohibits the firm from representing in the futurethat its products remove all indoor air contaminants.The decree also requires the company's future ads be based on"competent and reliable scientific evidence supporting its claimsthat Phototron is a viable substitute, or is superior to, any other aircleaning products, or is effective within a specific size area."A January 1992 General Accounting Office report makes it clearmisrepresentation and public manipulation in the air and waterfiltration and treatment industries is occuring. The report warnsconsumers that disjointed regulation of these emerging industrieshas left the door open for unscrupulous businesspersons.Policing air and water cleaning systems is something the FTC doesunder its "Green Claims" category. FTC staffers say complaints thatfocus on a company's attempt to take advantage of public concernabout the environment are becoming more common.  Several claimshave been made to date by the FTC against water and air purificationcompanies.Editor's Note: Consent agreements (decrees) are forsettlement purposes only and are not an admission ofparticipation in an unlawful act. Consent orders carry the force oflaw, once finalized by the agency, with respect to futureactions. Violations can result in fines as high as $10,000.For more information contact the FTC at (202) 326-2161.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKINGSmoking, smokers & radon gasCurrent smokers face lung cancer risk 20 times that of never-smokers. Former smokers risk is about 8 times that of never-smokers.Source: U.S. EPABack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURTIn the Spring 1992 issue of RND, we reported the story of aBaltimore, Maryland tenant who broke her lease after discoveringher rental home had an indoor radon level of 9 pCi/l.The renter, Nina Bingham, moved out of the home immediately afterdiscovering the elevated radon level and was sued by the owner ofthe rental unit for past rent, damages and legal fees.Unfortunately for Bingham, her lease agreement did not include aprovision (relating to radon or other indoor air pollutants) forbreaking the lease, the judge reluctantly sided with the propertyowner, ruling that Bingham did not follow proper protocol forbreaking a lease in the State of Maryland.Cindy Scott Hibert, a producer at WMAR TV Channel 2 in Baltimore,the station which originally reported on the  story, told RND "theproblem with Nina was that she didn't follow the proper steps. If shejust would have followed our county statutes -- which requireproper return of keys, notification, and  the establishment of anescrow account for rent payments -- the judge would have ruled inher favor."Hilbert, a licensed attorney, says  the most  interesting twist tothis emotional story is that the realtor who arranged the leaseproduced a document releasing Bingham from it."Unfortunately, Nina didn't want to sign it," Hilbert says. "Sheshould have."Hilbert says although the judge determined an elevated radon leveldoes pose a health risk to Bingham and her children, he had no legalgrounds to support his personal feeling that Bingham had done theright thing."I'm just praying that a tenant (with an elevated radon level in aleased property) will come forward and follow the law as it regardsbreaking leases."Breaking a lease for reasons of elevated radon is possible (inMaryland, or elsewhere) if it is done so by the books," Hilbert says."I can't wait," she added. "Then we'll really see some changes."Editor's Note: Our original story was based, in part, on an articlereported in the Midwest AARST Radon Reporter. The  article reportedBingham had won the case, which she did, until a motion by theplaintiff's attorney forced the judge to rule against Bingham forimproperly breaking her lease.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITYThe U.S. EPA's long-awaited rule on lender liability was published inthe Federal Register, April 29, 1992 (57 Fed Reg 18344). The ruleprovides protections to lenders from  contamination they areinnocent of causing.The rule was issued to clarify statutory phrases in theComprehensive Environmental Response, Liability and CompensationAct (CERCLA), pertaining to property ownership and liability forpollution cleanup.The "security interest exemption," as defined by EPA, specifies therange of activities which may be conducted by an entity/person whomaintains  "indicia" ownership of a facility for security interests -- without such activities being deemed "participation" in managingthe secured  property.The resulting EPA final rule adopts a new test for "participation." Inbrief, a lender participates in property management only if thelender either exercises decision-making control over environmentalcompliance issues on the property, or, where the actions of thelender create or assume responsibility for the day-to-day operationsof the property. The agency also determined that a governmentlender, receiver or conservator  which involuntarily aquires acontaminated property is entitled to "innocent landowner" third-party defense provided under CERCLA Section 101 (35)(a)(ii) and(107)(B)(3).According to environmental attorneys interviewed by RND, agovernment entity, not-for-profit organization or university, forexample, which acquired a property as a gift, would qualify for theinnocent landowner defense. Under CERCLA there are three defensesunder which a property holder may be absolved of liability. If thepollution was caused by 1) an act of a third-party with whom theproperty holder has no contractual relationship; 2) an act of God; or3) an act of War.Although radon gas is listed  in the Hazardous Waste Regulations (40CFR 302.4)(Appendix B), environmental attorneys say they aren'tclear whether or not radon is actually a CERCLA issue."Theoretically," one attorney  says,"itTs a CERCLA issue. But, alender making a residential loan probably wouldn't be concernedabout radon.Nevertheless, lenders should be concerned about radon. They'll wantto do their environmental due dilligence upfront, whether they arerequired to do so by law or not."Editor's Note: EPA has classified radon as a "Class A" carcinogen.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEWDraft copy yields variety of responses; comments shed light onconcerns.There has been much speculation as to what the soon-to-be-releasedEPA "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will advise. Thepurpose of the guide, according to EPA, is to help both home buyer'sand seller's become informed about radon and its dangers, learn howto test a home and, should it be necessary, determine the best wayto remediate.A draft copy of the "Real Estate Guide" (October 1991) along withinterviews with EPA officials reveals some of the agency's possiblerecommendations for radon testing during a real property transfer.EPA advises buyers of homes that have already been tested for radonto "select your own professional radon contractor." In addition, theagency instructs buyers to find out: 1) The results of the previoustest, 2) Who conducted it, and, 3) Where in the house the test wasperformed.Buyers of homes that have not previously been tested for radon areadvised to: 1) Make sure a radon test is done as soon as possible, 2)"Work with the seller to arrange testing," 3) Make sure the test isconducted on the lowest level in which the buyer intends to use.In addition, the draft includes sections on test results and what theymean, radon in water, remediation, selecting a mitigator, EPA's RMPprogram, radon myths and a copy of the risk chart from the"Citizen'sGuide".INDUSTRY COMMENTSAs usual, many radon industry members submitted comments to EPAexpressing their concerns about the contents of the draft "RealEstate Guide". Many of these concerns were expressed in the reviewcomments submitted by the radon industry via the AmericanAssociation of Radon Scientists and Technologists (AARST). Some ofthese concerns are detailed in the followingAARST COMMENTS.AARST recommends that EPA change the words "lowest living area"to "lowest liveable area" before finalizing the document. AARSTreviewers say the "lowest living area" instruction (contained in thedraft) does not provide enough direction for the buyer of a realproperty, which may result in a "grey area" in need ofinterpretation. In many cases, AARST reviewers say, a buyer of ahome relies on a real estate agent to interpret these unclear issues.Real estate agents, the reviewers say, have a vested interest inmaking certain that radon results are low and that his/herinterpretation of what constitutes the "lowest living area" may notbe in the best interest of the buyer.Instead of following EPA's lead, AARST reviewers offer several"good" reasons for continuing the "lowest liveable area" approach.The basement, according to one EPA  contractor, can be easily andconsistently maintained under closed house conditions. Thismeasurement location gives the most consistent readings in bothsummer and winter. Confirmation of results, he says, is moreconsistent, thus avoiding the confusion of the larger measurementvariations found during first floor testing.As an interesting twist, results of an informal survey of AARSTmembers also was provided to EPA. The survey found that most radonindustry leaders believe the "lowest liveable area" of a home shouldbe tested at a minimum. A majority of those surveyed said theybelieve that both the "lowest liveable area" and "lowest livingarea" should be tested simultaneously.Sixty-seven percent of those polled said they support a singlemeasurement period with duplicate measurements versus 36 percentwho said they would support a recommended follow-up test.According to EPA's Rita Hoyt, the draft guide currently is undergoingan internal review. The agency hopes to release the final version ofthe "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" this fall.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLSThe following is taken from a draft version of EPA's "Buyer's andSeller's Guide to Radon." These are NOT the finalized radon testingprotocols for real estate transactions. Draft documents arepresented here for your review. Please be sure to check with the EPAbefore making decisions based on information contained in anygovernment document draft. EPA says it expects to release the finaldocument later this fall.TESTING PROTOCOL ONEProtocol 1(a). Take a short-term test.Protocol 1(b). If your results are 4 pCi/l or higher, take a follow-upshort-term test to be sure.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 1 (a) or (b): Fix the home if the average of the firstand second tests is 4 pCi/l or more.TESTING PROTOCOL TWOProtocol 2. Take two short-term tests at the same time.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 2: Fix the home if the average of the two tests is 4pCi/l or more.TESTING PROTOCOL THREEProtocol 3. Test the home with a continuous monitor for at least 48hours -- preferably longer.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 3: Fix the home if the average radon level is 4 pCi/lor more.RADON TEST DEVICE PLACEMENTAccording to a recent EPA draft, the testing device(s) should beplaced in the lowest level of the home suitable for occupancy. Forexample, the basement, if it is used frequently. If you are the seller,and currently not using the basement, you may still want to test thebasement if it could be used by a buyer without renovations. The testshould be conducted in a room used regularly (like a living room, playroom, den or bedroom, but not a kitchen or bath).In selecting a testing option, you may want to consider factors suchas cost, accuracy, availability of tamper-resistant features, andhow soon you can get test results. Your State Radon Office can helpyou decide which option is best for you.Source: EPA draft document.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAPDISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZEDAttendees of the National Association of Counties annual meeting inMinneapolis, Minnesota this past July, received  draft copies of theU.S. EPA's "Geological Probability of Elevated Indoor Radon" map.The map is designed to reflect NURE data, as well as radon testingdata from both EPA and U.S. Geologic Surveys.The map, still in draft form, is a political football, some governmentinsiders say, because it is highly generalized and fails to provideenough specific data.Several state radon program directors say they agree. "Theusefulness of the map (to the public), is not very great," says oneprogram director whose opinion seems to be shared by severalothers interviewed by RND. Program directors who have seen thedraft, say the map is better than nothing, but needs some improvement beforebeing released to the public.Local and state government representatives say they have madetheir concerns about the map known to EPA, but says one, "we're notsure they'll do anything to address our concerns."Mike Hanson of the Ohio Geologic Survey says the map leavessomething to be desired. For instance, Hanson says, in some areas,where we know 60 percent of the homes are likely to have elevatedradon levels of 4-20 pCi/l, the map says otherwise.Another problem is that the map is based on "lowest liveable space"readings. States are concerned their test databases would becomeobsolete because of new protocols in the Citizen's Guide.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERSNational, state and local radon legislation reviewedAs the downturn in the U.S. economy continues, every corporatedepartment is under pressure to reduce costs and relocation is noexception. Some companies are reducing relocation costs bytransferring fewer employees and all are carefully scrutinizingtheir relocation policy for cost-cutting opportunities. In the pastseveral months, I have been asked whether there have been anyrecent events that would justify saving money by eliminating radontests. The answer to the question is an uncategorical "no." In fact,there has been a spate of recent state and federal legislationdesigned to encourage radon testing and awareness.STATE LEGISLATIONThe following is a list of radon legislation compiled by theConference of Radiation Control, an association of state and localradiation control programmers showing both proposed and enactedlegislation in the 18 states in which the issue has come before thelegislature (as of February 1992).California -- AB765, Chapter 1.5. Establishes requirements for thecertification of radon measurement laboratories, radon testing andconsulting specialists, and radon mitigation contractors.Connecticut -- Sec. 19a-14b, General Statutes. Requires anycompany that performs testing or mitigation to be certified by thestate, and mandates publication of a list of these companies.S.234. Addresses radon hazards in schools.District of Columbia -- Proposed "Indoor Safe Air Act." Wouldestablish procedures for testing and abatement of radon gas andradon progeny in District of Columbia buildings.Illinois -- HB1611, The Radon Testing Act.Authorizes the Department of Environment to establish aregistration program for individuals and companies that test forradon.HB 2709, The Radon Mitigation Act. This is basically an omnibus act,authorizing the Department of Environment to conduct a wide rangeof activities including surveys, public education programs, and otherradon-related activities.Indiana -- IC 13-1-14. Authorizes rules to establish and operateprograms for the certification of individuals engaged in testing forradon gas in buildings and in soil, and the abatement of radon gas inbuildings.Iowa -- Chapter 136B of the Iowa Code. Mandates that persons whodo testing and mitigation be certified by the state. Establishesrequirements for reporting test results on non-public buildings, andoutlines department spot-check validity measurements andreporting procedures.Kansas -- Proposed HB 2408. Would require state certification ofpersons providing devices or services related to radon testing andmitigation.Maine -- Chapter 165 Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 22, sec. 771et seq. Establishes a program to register firms and individualsinvolved with radon testing, consulting, or other remedial servicesto ensure accurate radon testing, to encourage safe and effectivemitigation of dangerous radon levels, and to protect propertyowners from unqualified or unscrupulous vendors.Massachusetts -- Proposed HB 548. Would establish requirementsfor persons testing and mitigating radon. Would require that aradon test be done by the seller of any residential dwelling andwould require pertinent information about the test be madeavailable to a prospective buyer.Proposed HB 2099. Would require any peron who tests for andmitigates radon to be certified by the state and to file timelyreports.Proposed HB 3160. Would provide a tax credit for testing andabatement of radon gas.New Hampshire -- RSA 125:9. States that the director of theDivision of Public Health Services shall conduct inspections of allbuildings and dwellings, upon request, for the presence of radon orother health hazards present in indoor air. Provides education,technical consultation, and recommendations for abatement of suchhealth hazards in conjunction with the University of New Hampsirecooperative extension service.RSA 477:4a. States that, prior to the execution of any contract forthe purchase and sale of any interest in real propoerty that includesa building, the seller or the seller's agent shall provide notice to thebuyer that radon may be found in some areas of New Hampshire.New Jersey -- PL 1985, Chapter 408. Establishes a state radonprogram.PL 1986, Chapter 83. Establishes a certification program for radontesters and mitigators.PL 1989, Chapter 189. Mandates that newconstruction be tested for radon.New York -- S. 6496, A. 8594. Directs the State Energy Office todevelop and implement a radon diagnosis assistance program andpromote radon remediation actions in at least one of every fourfamily residences with elevated radon levels. Also establishesresearch grants for not-for-profit organizations.S. 7690, A. 9978. Provides financial assistance for the performanceof radon diagnostic services and the preparation of specificationsfor appropriate, energy-efficicient mitigation measures for one- tofour-family residences with elevated radon levels.S. 9594, A. 11717. Directs the State Energy Office to develop andimplement a radon detection, public information, and technicalassistance program, to further energy conservation and assist andpromote radon remediation.Ohio -- Am. Susb. HB 279. Establishes a state program forlicensure of individuals and businesses involved in radontesting and mitigation activities, and requires the Public HealthCouncil to establish rules regarding the licensing program;requires the Director of Health to administer and enforce theprogram in accordance with the Public Health Council's rules;establishes civil and criminal penalties for violation of laws andrules governing radon licensure; and establishes a standard ofliability for license holders.Pennsylvania -- SB 857. Authorizes low-interest loans forradon gas mitigation and appropriation.HB 687. Provides personal income tax credits for expensesincurred for home radon-reduction projects.HB 956. Requires radon testing and notification before certain realproperty transactions, and provides a remedy for failure to do so.HB 2001. Requires radon testing and notification for sale ofresidential property; imposes administrative penalties; andimposes powers and duties on the Department of EnvironmentalResources.Rhode Island. Has proposed an act that would authorize the Directorof Health to promulgate regulations and conduct programs related toradon control. The act would also create a state radon trust fund.Virginia -- Section 32.2-299 A.1. Provides for a program ofeducation and technical assistance related to radon.Section 32.1-299 A.2. Requires the State Department of Health tomake available the U.S. EPA Radon Mitigator Proficiency (RMP) andRadon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) lists.Section 32.1. Requires that persons screening, testing or mitigatingradon be listed as proficient by EPA.Washington -- SHB 2662. Authorizes the certification of person whoperform radon gas or radon progeny measurements, including samplecollection, analysis, or interpretation of such measurements, and ofthose who perform radon mitigation of buildings for radon gas orradon progeny; and authorizes fees for certification.SHB 1535. An act relating to radon testing required by the StateBuilding Code Council.Wisconsin -- Act 399. Authorizes the development anddissemination of radon information, and the coordination of aprogram to measure radon gas, perform home surveys, developtraining materials, and conduct training classes.Most of the aforementioned legislation concerns certification orlicensing of companies engaged in testing for, or mitigation of,radon. It is likely that the majority of states will have this type oflegislation in place within the next few years. Licensing andregistration of testers and mitigators is a positive change forrelocation because it upgrades the overall quality of testers andremediators and identifies a pool of qualified companies available tothe relocation administrator.It is more difficult to predict whether more states will enactmandatory testing and/or disclosure statutes. However, given theincreasingly broad court interpretations of the duty to disclose, theNational Association of Realtors' recommendation that its statemembers propose and lobby for state disclosure laws, and currentfederal legislation (discussed below), it is likely that a substantialnumber of states will enact radon testing and disclosure legislationin the coming years.The significance of state laws to the relocation administrator isthat such legislation may conflict with a company's relocationpolicies in some way. In all cases to date, state requirements withrespect to testing and disclosure are minimum standards, and thereis nothing wrong in exceeding them. For example, a company maydecide to require mitigation as well as disclosure of test results.However, varying state laws necessitate that a company's radonpolicy also vary according to the state from which the employee istransferred.FEDERAL LEGISLATIONFor the past several years, I have been reporting on billsintroduced before the U.S. House and Senate on the subject of radon.Few have been voted on. On March 10 of this year, the Senate passedS. 792, a reauthorization of the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of1988, known as the Indoor Radon Abatement Reauthorization Act of1991. This very comprehensive bill is likely to be modified inconference, should the House pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the"Radon Awareness and Disclosure Act." The House bill has not comeup for a vote as of the date this article was written, but is expectedto pass if the House is able to vote on it in this an election year.Among the provision of S. 792 of interest to relocation:1) Federally mandates the EPA's development of a "Home Buyer's andSeller's Guide to Radon," a document specifically aimed at the realestate process. As with the "Citizen's Guide to Radon," E-R-C andother organizations have been working with and advising EPA on thecontent of this document for more than a year. The current draftpresently is undergoing review by the administrator of EPA. (Editor'sNote: EPA staffers say the document should be released sometimethis fall.)2) The "CitizenTs Guide to Radon" is described in the legislation.This guide already has been completed.3) The bill requires that "every original mortgage institution"provide the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" to eachperson "from whom it receives or for whom it prepares a writtenapplication for an applicable mortgage loan." In addition, it barsfederally chartered secondary mortgage institutions frompurchasing any loans in which this requirement has not been met.The application for a mortgage usually is made after the contract ofsale is signed by the buyer. In order to reduce pressure to amendcontracts based on the warnings in this brochure, it is likely thatreal estate agents will begin making the booklets available at orbefore the signing of the contracts, should this part of the bill beadopted into law.4) The bill also provides for federal radon disclosure. Anyresidential dwelling or multi-unit structure owned by the federalgovernment or any government corporation located in a high priorityradon area (as defined below) will have to be tested prior to thecontract of sale, and the results of that test disclosed to thepotential buyer.5) The bill requires EPA to come up with a list of high priority radonareas, based on indoor radon test results and geology. The countrywould be divided into three such zones, each ranking the likelihoodof finding indoor radon. However, EPA will not change itsrecommendation that all homes, regardless of their location, betested. See Radon Map page 11.6) EPA, in conjunction with other agencies, will be required todevise model construction standards for radon resistant housing. Allfederally assisted housing, and federal office and other structuresare to be built using this technology in high priority radon areas.The remainder of the bill contains outreach, research, and disclosureprovisions, all of which are designed to increase radon awarenessamong the general public and encourage testing and disclosure.EPA ACTIVITIESRegardless of whether any federal legislation is passed this year,EPA will continue to carry out its mandate under the 1988 Act toprovide information to the public on the dangers of indoor radonpollution and its elimination. EPA's Radon Division currently has anumber of projects underway. The ones most directly affectingrelocation are the publication of the previously mentioned "Citizen'sGuide to Radon" and the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon."In addition, it has begun programs to provide information and grantsto state radiation control departments, to perform research on radontesting and mitigation, to perform research and devise recommendedmodel building codes for radon-resistant construction, to administerthe Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) program, and to devise andimplement public information campaigns aimed at persuading thepublic to test for and mitigate indoor radon. EPA already hasproduced the first draft of a national radon potential map thatdivides the U.S. into three radon zones, similar to the requirementsof S. 792.Acting on the advice of E-R-C and other real estate groups, EPA hascommitted to producing the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide toRadon" as a supplement to the "CitizenTs Guide," aimed strictly atthe real estate transaction. Besides being a more concise documentthan the "Citizen's Guide," the "Real Estate Guide" will recommendshort-term testing protocol that is not as time consuming and,hopefully, not as expensive as the two-test recommendation in the"Citizen's Guide."After months of consulting with outside groups and scientists, EPAnarrowed the possible testing methodologies to eight, and asked foran opinion from its Science Advisory Board as to the efficacy ofeach. Although the board has yet to return its recommendations, itappears likely that the "Real Estate Guide" will recommend eitherone short-term test in the lowest liveable area of the house, or twoshort-term simultaneous tests in the lowest living area.WHAT THIS MEANS TO RELOCATIONThe relocation industry took an early, pro-active stance concerningindoor radon. Because of the policies that were enacted years ago, ithas been argued that a potential spate of claims and lawsuits hasbeen avoided.When EPA began to reconsider its recommended testing procedures,the scope of the testing and remediation required to limit liabilitybecame unclear. When released in the "Citizen's Guide" and the "RealEstate Guide", these recommendations essentially will form theminimum standard for any relocation policy.Absent any federal or state law to the contrary, relocationadministrators will be free to reevaluate their radon policies,bringing them into compliance with the recommendations of EPApublications, making judgements about, for example, whether it isnecessary, from a liability point of view, to remediate homes withlevels moderately above 4 pCi/l, or whether simple disclosure willadequately protect against liability.All of these decisions will be made in an environment in which, ifEPA is sucessful, all home buyers will be better informed aboutindoor radon potentials.By Richard Mansfield III. Mansfield is a partner in the Washington,DC, law firm of Mansfield & Muse. He has served as general counselof the Employee Relocation Council since 1977. Reprinted withpermission from Mobility, 1992. Mobility is the official publicationof the Employee Relocation Council, Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNSAs radon-related bills develop and mature on Capitol Hill, bothprivate and public sector lobbyists spend considerable effortorganizing letter writing campaigns, telephone trees andencouraging industry members to make known their concerns. Duringthe formulation and development of House Bill 3258, and itscompanion, Senate Bill 792, the radon industry showed it is noexception to the rule.On March 10 of this year, the Senate passed S. 792, a reauthorizationof the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of 1988, known as the IndoorRadon Abatement Reauthorization Act of 1991. This verycomprehensive bill is likely to be modified in conference, should theHouse pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the "Radon Awareness andDisclosure Act."The comment period for H.R. 3258 drew a variety of responses,including comments providing insight into organizations and theirconcern for the radon issue. Of particular interest to our readers arecomments submitted by Richard Martin (AARST), Dr. Jill Lipoti (NewJersey, Department of Environmental Protection), Bob Chase(National Education Association and the National Parents andTeachers Association), and representatives for the NationalAssociation of Home Builders (NAHB) and the Consumer Associationof America.NAHBNAHB comments indicate the organization supports "prescriptiveconstruction techniques only in areas where radon is a problem."NAHB says its members might need an "incentive" to cooperatevolunarily, such as a limitation on liability for builders who build toEPA construction standards or state equivalents.As has been the case in the past, NAHB says it "does not believetying radon testing to the home sales transaction is the answer."The primary objection, short-term test reliance. As a justificationfor their objection to testing new homes as a condition of sale,NAHB says its members believe testing should only be done while thehomeowner is actually living in the home. In addition, they say, "newhomes take up to a year to settle" so testing a brand new house thathas not fully settled "is likely" to produce a false reading.The association says its members already are complaining thatbanks are refusing to make loans for homes where testing isrequired as a condition of sale -- "out of fear for future legalliability."CONSUMER FEDERATIONThe Consumer Federation for America, in conjunction with theAmerican Cancer Society, the American Lung Association, theAmerican Public Health Association and the U.S. Public InterestResearch Group, made their feelings about H.R. 3258 known tolegislators as well.Representatives from these organizations say they believe thepublic can no longer rely on realtors, builders, salespersons or theradon industry to inform them about radon. The reason: ignorance.These organizations say they believe the American public is in needof an education when it comes to radon, especially if they are tomake decisions about testing and mitigation voluntarily.According to a national survey conducted by the Federation, fewAmericans are prepared to make such decisions by themselves. Whensurvey respondants were asked "Why is radon a problem?", 17percent replied because it can cause high blood pressure, 15 percentbelieved the gas caused unpleasant odors, and an additional sixpercent said they believed it discolored walls and furniture.As far as testing is concerned, nearly half of all respondants knewnext to nothing about radon testing.According to the Federation survey, 45 percent of Americanssurveyed answered the question "How do you detect radon?"incorrectly. Twenty-two percent of the respondants said radon couldbe detected by smell, 12 percent by stains on walls and 11 percentby using a Geiger counter.The Federation says its supports H.R. 3258 because "it addressestwo fundamental issues for consumers: saving lives and protectingconsumers in radon-related transactions. Protection? From what?According to the Federation, consumers need protections frompotentially unscrupulous radon contractors and test devicemanufacturers who fail to participate and pass proficiency exams.Civil penalties should be put in place, the Federation says, "to act asa deterrent."PARENTS AND TEACHERSThe NEA and PTA, both organizations specifically concerned aboutradon in schools, say a two-tiered approach is needed to address theissue in America's schools. First, they say, schools in high radonpriority areas should be tested as soon as possible. Schools notlocated in high radon priority areas should be allowed four yearsfrom the date of enactment to test.In determining compliance, NEA says it believes the legislationshould specify waivers to school districts which have already testedand/or mitigated -- providing all EPA protocol, including parent andteacher notification of testing and mitigation results, werefollowed.NEA also says it supports an "ongoing annual notification rule"requiring schools to keep parents notified of the mitigation processprogress until completed.NEW JERSEY DEPThe New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection says itsupports the continuation of grant assistance to state programsfound in H.R. 3258, however, the agency says, "more" stateassistance is needed. The agency says it believes the feds must kickin additional support, including 75 percent program costs, in orderfor most states to continue existing and planned radon programs.They cite a recent Conference of Radiation Control ProgramDirectors survey which indicates state radon programs are in dangerof being cut back. The survey found that if State Indoor Radon Grantsare not extended beyond fiscal year 1991, 84 percent of theresponding state radon program leaders said they "would be forcedto reduce their radon program, drastically."Thirty-four percent said they would eliminate staff, while sixpercent would have to abandon their programs entirely.NJDEP, no doubt echoing the opinions of other states with existingradon programs and legislation, suggests exempting personsparticipating in state programs from mandatory participation in afederal program, in order to "avoid placing undue burden on regulatedindividuals in states which already have a state certificationprogram, the requirements of which, in most cases, far exceed thoselisted in H.R. 3258."AARSTRepresenting the radon industry, Rich Martin, president of DMA-RADTECH, said H.R. 3258 would help reduce cancer risk byproviding increased industry professionalism by mandatingparticipation in testing and mitigation programs. Mandatoryparticipation in RMP/RCP programs, the association says, will help"elevate the quality" of radon related services to a minimumcompetence level acceptable to a federal agency.Not unlike the Consumer Federation, AARST also supports the civilpenalties contained in the bill.  those contractors who choose not tofollow the laws regarding certification and participation.The radon industry association says if H.R. 3258 is enacted it willhelp reduce cancers risk by: 1) providing financial assistance toschools which need to test and/or mitigate but cannot afford to doso, 2) requiring schools that test or mitigate to utilize approvedfirms or individuals who have satisfactorily passed certificationprograms, and, 3) forming a Presidential Commission on RadonAwareness designed to assure radon public outreach programs reachtheir specific goals.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992SEPTEMBERSeptember 26, 1992 -- RCP Biennial re-exam. In conjunction withthe 1992 International Symposium on Radon and Radon Reduction,Minneapolis, MN, at the Sheridan Park Place Hotel. Applicationpackage fax request to ICF, Inc. at (703) 218-2669.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992OCTOBEROctober 18-20, 1992 -- Environments for People. Golden GateHoliday Inn, San Francisco, CA. Sponsored by ASHRAE. Informationcall Jim Norman at (404) 636-8400.October 19-21, 1992 -- Indoor Air Quality Continuing EducationCourse.  American Industrial Hygiene Association, sponsor. Salt LakeCity, UT. Contact Continuing Education at (216) 873-2442.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYSWhat is the Employee Relocation Council's position on disclosure ofradon testing results during a relocation property transfer?"Disclosure is critical," says the Employee Relocation Counil's ChiefCounsel, Richard Mansfield. "We recommend all houses be tested andresults be disclosed."Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTORRESPONSES ARE VARIEDLast fall, radon industry professionals participated in an intra-agency review of EPA's Radon Program. Comprised of members ofgovernment and the private sector, the agency's Radon ProgramReview Panel was charged with assessing the program's pastefforts, current progress and future direction. Their effortsproduced a draft report, sent to reviewers earlier this year, whichassessed the costs and effectiveness of a range of radon controlstrategies and contained the Panel's findings and recommendationsfor improving the radon program.EPA REVIEWERSEPA says it is looking for "opportunities for pursuing newdirections" in an effort to increase radon reduction in the U.S. Theagency says the review was conducted with three objectives inmind:1) to examine the appropriateness of program goals and EPA'sprogress in achieving them;2) to evaluate the effectiveness of the current approach; and3) to identify alternative approaches and determine what they mightenable EPA to accomplish.EPA representatives on the panel included senior managers who wereresponsible for recommending actions which would improve theradon program and determine the appropriate role government shouldplay in reducing public risk. Four major recommendations wereissued.1) EPA should focus on the greatest risks first. In the near-term,EPA should target its efforts and resources on high radon potenitalareas and smoking-related risk. EPA survey data indicate about halfof the homes over the action level are located in areas comprising(as a group) about one-fifth of the country. This same area isestimated to contain a significant portion of the lives projected tobe saved if all U.S. homes above the current 4 pCi/l action level weretested and mitigated. Current epidemiological data indicate bothsmokers and former smokers face over 90 percent of radon risk.While EPA should not abandon its efforts in other areas, thesefactors must shape EPA's policy.2) EPA should work now to support the long-term strategies ofpromoting radon-resistant new construction and testing andmitigation in connection with real estate transfers. Beginning intargeted areas, EPA should encourage and support pilot projects atthe State and local level and explore new approaches to implementthese strategies. EPA experience to date indicate the vast majorityof radon risk reduction occurs in the context of real estatetransactions and adoption of new construction standards has thepotential for very cost-effective risk reduction -- in some casessaving both lives and dollars. While the risk reductions offered bythese strategies are modest at first, over the long-term, they offerthe possibility of very large risk reductions. Only through thesestrategies can EPA aspire to its ultimate statutory goal ofapproaching ambient levels in all U.S. homes.3) A new strategy for public information. As a health risk controlledprimarily by individual citizens, EPA has properly set for itself acentral and independent goal of informing the public about radonrisk. The public's generally weak response suggests EPA must movebeyond a program of nationwide public information efforts such asthe "Citizen's Guide" and the Advertising Council's public serviceannouncement campaign. In the short-term, EPA's public informationefforts should focus on high radon potential areas and populations. Inthe long-term, efforts should be directed toward construction ofradon-resistant new homes and testing and mitigation of existinghomes when they are sold.4) EPA should develop a coordinated research plan. EPA hassuccessfully supported a wide range of radon testing, mitigation,and characterization research. With basic technologies established,EPA must develop a long-term plan to prioritize and coordinatepotential future research in areas such as health effects,measurement, mitigation technology, geographic targeting, and riskcommunication approaches.THE PRIVATE SECTORPrivate sector reviewers developed recommendations addressingseveral dozen issues which affect the radon industry. Ofsignificance are three of the panel's findings relating to radon andpublic information, resistant building techniques and radon testingat point of sale.1) Reducing Risk by Radon Resistant Construction. The paneldetermined "if all new homes built in designated areas" were builtwith radon-resistant features, an estimated 30-50 lung cancersdeaths would be averted each year. The panel noted the rate of livessaved would increase each year."Radon resistant new homes," the panel says, "are also speciallysealed and weatherized, which, in addition to retarding radon entry,can make the home substantially more energy efficient. Thisincreaseed efficiency is estimated to yield a substantial energycredit."2) Reducing radon risk at real estate transactions. Because mostradon testing and mitigation currently occurs during real estatetransactions, the panel says "testing and mitigation of all homessold would yield steadily increasing risk reduction each year."According to the panel, nationwide testing and mitigation of allhome sold (when necessary) would avert an estimated 110 lungcancer deaths at a cost of $700,000 per life saved. The panel notedrequiring distribution of radon information when homes arepurchased with federal-guaranteed mortgages would offer onlymoderate risk reduction -- averting an estimated 10-15 lung cancerdeaths each year.Editor's Note: It would take approximately 10 years of informationdistribution in federal-related mortgages to produce lung cancerdeath reductions equal to or greater than one year of requiring radontesting and mitigation during all real property transfers.3) Public Information. The reviewers determined that state and localpublic information and incentive programs have yielded "limitedresponses." EPA's experience to date suggests, the panel says,"public information alone is not enough to contribute significantlyto future risk reduction."Public information may make its most significant risk reductioncontribution by providing support for long-term institutionalchanges encouraging both actions to reduce radon risk when homesare sold and the adoption of radon resistant new construction codes.Other key issues examined by the panel include:What role should government play in dealing with radon in homes?The panel says it believes government bears a special responsibilityto inform the public about radon. Success in fulfilling this roleshould be measured by the quality of information provided and theextent of improvement in public understanding -- not necesarily theamount of testing and mitigation it triggers.When public protection cannot be achieved with stronger action,government should move beyond providing information. The paneldetermined government's role should be shaped by level of risk. And,it's role in informing the public should be stronger in areas withhigher levels of risk. Both federal and state, as well as localgovernments, health and consumer organizations, should play acritical role.What should be the ultimate goals of the radon program?The reviewers make five suggestions, first of which is radonreduction. Informing the public and building a private sector radontesting and mitigation industry also is critical, the panel says.Moving beyond solely providing information to achieve reduction isnext on the list with recommendations to establish "separate butcomplementary" short- and long-term goals by which to judgesuccess. Improving and maintaining credibility, ranked fourth andfifth.To what extent should special efforts be made to reach smokers andformer smokers?Because of substantial risk differentials between smokers, formersmokers and non-smokers, EPA should make a strong effort to targetsmokers and former smokers.The panel recommends EPA urge organizations and agenciesproviding anti-smoking programs to warn smokers radon is a serioushazard to their health  even if they stop. Exploring specific ways totarget current and former smokers is a must, they say.How can EPA most effectively increase testing and mitigation at thetime of real estate transfers?Voluntary testing in connection with real estate transactions iscurrently too infrequent to result in significant risk reductions, thepanel says. Such voluntary testing will not increase significantlyuntil action is taken to remove or reduce some of the obstacles (e.g.workable testing protocols.The panel also says the agency should seriously examine radonescrow accounts and dissemination of radon information at the timeof a real estate property transfer.Is there a need for additional radon-related research?EPA's radon-related research efforts have been successful, the panelsays, however, they are in need of greater coordination. EPA needs acomprehensive, prioritized and coordinated plan to guide its futureresearch activities. Further research topics include health effectsand risk to smokers, former smokers and never smokers,measurement device accuracy, correlations between short- andlong-term measurements, new testing devices, tamper resistantmeasurement techniques, ambient radon levels in high radonpotential areas, mitigation technology, geographic targetingresearch and risk communication.Editor's Note: It will interesting to see how these recommendationsaffect future EPA activities.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTERIMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODESFirst year: 30-50Second year: 60-90After 10: 300-400Assuming 100 Percent Implementation of Radon-Resistant BuildingCodes. Source: US EPABack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENTAs a young industry with many critics, professional riskassessors say they are re-examining the way in which theydetermine environmental risks. The industry is searching for thebest methods of determining risk by making swift strides away fromdefining risk by "maximum worst case exposure" standards andmoving toward a "reasonable maximum exposure" unit of measure.According to industry news articles, changing the way assessorsmeasure risk will make a big difference in how a site is evaluatedand treated. Risk assessors say they are ready to move towardevaluating environmental hazards by using the "weight of evidence"approach, which if adopted by the industry, would put radon higherup on the EPA priority list.Under the "weight of evidence approach," assessors would compileall relevant data, including animal and human toxicology studies,extrapolated estimates of risk and all additional informationavailable on a potential hazard, to help make a determination of risk.Estimates of risk would then be made by examining all dataavailable and formulating a "reasonable maximum exposure."The risk assessment industry is not alone in seeking change. TwoNuclear Regulatory Committees are examining risk assessmentmethods; the interagency Federa; Coordinating Council on Science,Engineering and Technology is attempting to standardize the U.S.government's health and environmental risk assessment methods.Vice President Danforth Quayle's Council on Competitiveness isevaluating biotechnology risk assessment policy. The U.S. Congressand the White House have agreed to set up the Risk Assessment andManagement Commission. And, EPA Chief William Reilly isprioritizing environmental hazards so EPA can perform bureaucratictriage.Should the EPA and risk assessors adopt the "weight of evidence"approach, and bureuacrats begin funding environmental cleanupprogram based on risk to the public, funding for the radon issueshould get a significant boost.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools isSchool Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools isscheduled to be released this fall. According to the agency, 928schools have been surveyed over the course of the past year or so.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states toResidential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states tobe included in this report.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop aMitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a"consensus standard" for radon mitigation.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams willNew RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams willreflect new measurement protocols, new device specific protocolsand the changes relating to radon and the latest "Citizen's Guide toRadon." Exams start this November.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.506 primary, 1259 secondary, 314 both. Number of people whopassed the individual operator test -- 278.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of finalBackdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of finalmitigation standards out this fall. Will require mitigators testsystems for backdrafting.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on theEPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on thefollowing issues: radon mitigation and entry into sub-soil;measurement of radon content in various types of buildingmaterials, including concrete; research in large buildings withelevated radon levels; computer models for determiningindoor air mixing rates; backdrafting issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992READER'S VIEWSDear Editor:I would appreciate it very much if you would publish this letter. Theso-called "radon experts" in the Ohio Department of Health haveargued with me that radon companies that utilize continuousmonitors are not primarly laboratories and for that reason theirhandlers need not be licensed as primary labs, nor need they pay the$600 license fee required by the state.As a result of their false interpretation of our State law(3701-69-08), there are testers using continuous monitors who havenot paid their State registration fee and are not licensed to operateprimary laboratories according to EPA definitions.A continuous monitor has been defined by EPA as a primary lab. It isnot fair to those of us who have paid their laboratory license fees toallow these people to compete with us in the radon testing marketwithout having paid the $600 license fee. Some of these people arein further violation of the law since they are not maintaining theircurrent listing in the EPA RMP Round. This fact again gives thesepeople a further advantage to offer cheaper radon testing services.I had to fly to Las Vegas to the EPA Radon facility on order tomaintain my current listing for continuous monitors. Flight, hotel,cab fare, etc., cost me $650, which I now have to pass on to theconsumer.Therefore, I am asking that the DOH immediately enforce the law byordering non-licensed and non-EPA listed primary labs to ceaseradon testing using continuous monitors.The success of the newly-enacted State Radon Licensure Programdepends on its fair and equitable enforcement for all.Helmar H. A. Dollwet, PhDAkron, OHEditor's note: We contacted the Ohio radon program and were toldthat the state "as of now" does not require continuous monitoroperators to meet the requirements of a primary radon laboratory.State officials told RND that continuous monitors are considered "atool" and for that reason operators of those devices need not meetprimary lab requirements.We also contacted EPA and they seem to be in agreement with Mr.Dollwet, although at presstime, we were unable to get through tothose "in the know" at the agency. We will follow-up on this issueand report our findings in a future issue.Mr. Dollwet, meanwhile, has found his own solution. He says, if theState of Ohio won't make the situation right he will refuse to payfuture State licensing fees.Dear Editor:I just received the enclosed bulletin from Mr. Cris Collie of theEmployee Relocation Council. (The bulletin alerts those concernedwith real estate property transfers that H.R. 11, a House billcontaining a proposal to place a cap of $5,000 on allowable movingexpense deductions, needs an immediate response from radonindustry members.)With the consumer deficient awareness of the radon hazard and theapathetic attitude of many in the federal and state governments,radon testing where it is not mandatory will be an expense that willnot be considered. It is addressed at the lattermost orientation ofthe employee's move and close to the cumulative dollar total.To be perfectly frank, my past experience as an executive with alarge Fortune 200 company leads me to believe that expenses whichhave tangible value will be considered as foremost. The family willforego the expense of radon testing and other "nuisance" expenses.They do this so as to escape the burden of taxes.Since we are so directly Involved, we point out the dangers of thisbill, H.R. 11. I believe we as the representatives of an industry, mustpoint out the detrimental health effects of this bill. Though theprofit motive is important, the paramount motive is to save lives.Nick NickitasTampa, FLEditor's Note: We contacted Mr. Collie, who told RND that the Househas already passed the bill, although, the Senate is consideringanother, more favorable version. Contact Mr. Collie at 202-857-0857for information on how you can help make sure radon-related issuesare not left out.Dear Editor:The United States Code of Federal Regulations includes an entiresection (10 CFR 20) devoted to both occupational and non-occupational exposure to many forms of radiation. However, there isnot one mention of indoor radon exposure despite the fact thatradon-related research has produced the most complete body ofevidence that radon exposure causes lung cancer.For miners, radiation is an occupational hazard. In an attempt tominimize exposure, miners are restricted to a total yearly dose of 4WLM and must wear respirators if the concentration of radon in themine reaches 16 pCi/l.Although it is quite common for indoor radon levels to reach 16pCi/l in many U.S. homes, government regulations offer moreprotection from radiation exposure in mines than they do in ourhomes.Why is it that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission believesoccupational radiation exposure should be limited to 500 MREM peryear in nuclear facilities while residents of homes with a 4 pCi/lradon level are allowed to receive over 650 MREM of exposure (12hours per day in the home, 340 days per year)?If regulations governing radiation exposure at nuclear powerfacilities were applied to residential radon exposure the NRC policywould make better sense. We must treat radon as the health hazardthat it is. And, according to the U.S. EPA, radon is a Group Acarcinogen with solid human data directly linking it to cancer.Dick ManningVice President, American Association of Radon Scientists andTechnologistsBack to Headline List WT02-B37-26IA086-000616-B018-96http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev28.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003419 text/html 39575HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:32:10 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:10 GMTContent-length: 39388Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev28.html Sample Issue Copyright REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet JANUARY 5, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS & TRENDS (312 words) DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLING TECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM (658 words) RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURE TO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT (340 words) GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNT OF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL (553 words) EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTY AGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS (572 words) BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTS IN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE (334 words) ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOIL TO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION (183 words) DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICES SEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES (521 words) DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUM LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC (624 words) LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEW REFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT (266 words) DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECK LIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH (132 words) HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense Nuclear (107 words) OTHER BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY NEWS ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order (97 words) Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct (66 words) Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the (65 words) DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec. (104 words) CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990SLANTS & TRENDSNEW READINGS OF URANIUM CONTAMINATION in wells drilled at the FeedMaterials Production Center may be alarming the public needlessly. Regularmonitoring of ground water contamination in an admittedly contaminated arealast spring showed a sudden spike in uranium concentrations,and comments by officials from the U.S.  Department of Energy and OhioEnvironmental Protection Agency were misinterpreted.ALTHOUGH THE LEVELS WERE 10-30 TIMES as high as proposed standards by thefederal EPA, results in the lower end of that range were fully expected.When word of higher readings came out early this month, newspapers andnewswire services quickly said the officials suspected new contaminationand even contended the water supply of Cincinnati, 18 miles away, andDayton, 40 miles away, might be endangered.NO SUCH THREAT EXISTS, the officials tell DPW, and they never hinted atone. Graham Mitchell of Ohio EPA explained his comment about thecontamination possibly being more recent meant it might have happened 10years ago instead of 20 years ago. And while contaminated wells are tappinga part of the same aquifer used for drinking water for Dayton, the pollutedplume extends only about 1.5 miles from the plant and is heading away fromthat city. Even though it is headed generally toward Cincinnati, both DOEand Ohio EPA officials are confident it can be stopped long short of there."I don't think it will ever have the chance to get to Cincinnati," saidMitchell.IF FERNALD AND ROCKY FLATS LOOK BAD, the explosion at a high-level nuclearwaste dump at Kyshtym in the USSR was much worse than anyone has admitted,the Soviets now say.  That accident in the late 1950s released not the 2million curies admitted by Soviet officials only a year ago, but 20 millioncuries. This compares to the 50 million curies released by the Chernobylcivilian nuclear accident.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLINGTECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM    Department of Energy will develop and evaluate sampling techniques infiscal 1990 and 1991 under its Deep Microbiology Program. This will befollowed by an accelerated five-year (FY'92-96) Phase II research programincluding field experimentation to test new concepts with contaminatedzones at one or more DOE sites.    The 15- to 20-year goal of the program is to contribute new scientificinformation that will make bioremediation of contaminated DOE sites easier,the agency says in an implementation plan. Experience gained at the DOEsites will be transferred to other agencies and to private industry. Themost important scientific goal of the transitional program is to obtaincomparative information on subsurface microbial communities among DOEsites.    At present, DOE says, "no cost-effective technologies exist for cleanupof ground water contamination at depths of 400-600 ft. or greater." Bystudying the presence, diversity and adaptability of deep microorganisms atvarious sites, DOE hopes to contribute to, and speed the cleanup of, deepaquifers. "Recently discovered deep microorganisms obtained [last year]during Phase 1 appear to be physiologically capable of degradingrecalcitrant organic chemicals (and possibly organic-radionuclidecomplexes), and their activity may be enhanced in-situ to eliminate ortransform contaminants," says the implementation plan.    DOE's Richland and Idaho Operations Offices, Pacific NorthwestLaboratory's Environmental Sciences Research Center and the Idaho NationalLaboratory, run by EG&G Inc., will provide financial and scientificsupport. DOE's Office of Energy Research Subsurface Science Program isfunding competitive research and essential logistical tasks to ensureaseptic samples are obtained.    DOE will implement the transitional program at INEL and the Hanfordsite. Results at the first site will meet two or more scientificobjectives in the program plan and provide scientific and technologicalexperience needed to confirm results or meet objectives at the next site.Site sampling and analysis will be completed sequentially throughactivities at INEL, Hanford and the Nevada Test Site. Operational andscientific payoffs of FY'90 activities are as follows:    o Savage Island Exploratory Borehole (Hanford). Operational:Development of microbial tracers; initial experience in hard-rock samplingprotocols; refinement of rotary-mud drilling methods for partiallyconsolidated sediments. Scientific:  First indication of microbes in deepzones with different hydrochemistry from SRS; improved detection ofmicrobial contamination with labelled natural bacteria.    o Snake River Deep Interbed Probe (INEL). Operational: Enhanced use ofhard-rock and unconsolidated sampling for use at Hanford; specificevaluation of use of new air/argon drilling technique for microbial sampleacquisition. Scientific:  Substantiation of lack of organisms inlow-permeability formations; determination of organism distributionpatterns in fracture flow terrain at DOE sites; determination of organismphysiology and distribution in high-flow ground water.    o Aseptic Sampling Technology Development (Hanford). Operational:Development and evaluation of new aseptic sampling methods for collectionof high-quality microbiological samples in varied and complexhydrogeologic systems at DOE sites.    o Western States Mixed Softrock/Hardrock Sequence (Hanford/YakimaBarricade).  Operational: Use of verified aspectic techniques for mixedsoft- and hard-rock sequence; demonstation of particle/colloid andmicrobial tracer efficiency under complex hydrologic conditionsrepresentative of DOE sites. Scientific: Widening range of lithologies,geochemistry and permeabilities to maximize comparative opportunities withSRS; varied ground water age and recharge sources to make unique genetic,physiological and metabolic comparisons to organisms at SRS and INEL.    o Subsurface Hardrock Spatial Variability Experiment (NTS).Operational: Refine statistical sampling strategy to assessmulti-dimensional distribution of organisms; improve techniques forisolation of microbes from hard-rock samples.  Scientific: Document rockfracture control on organism distribution; identify minimum sample size todefine macroscopic population characteristics; unique data-set on microbialdistributions for application of geostatistical techniques.    o Contaminated Site/Bioremediation Research Site (FY'91). Operational:Use of specialized aseptic sampling techniques in chemically contaminatedenvironments; co-quantification of chemical and microbiologicaldistribution with depth; use of proven tracer technology to document sampleintegrity. Scientific: Effects of organic/inorganic contaminants onmicrobial populations, activity and diversity; indentification/isolation ofcontaminant-adapted or contaminant-using organisms; microbial distributionsin a representative site requiring bioremediaton.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURETO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT    The risk of developing cancer from exposure to low levels of X-rays andgamma rays could be as high as 3-4 times greater than those previouslyestimated, but epidemiological studies of nuclear weapons workers appear toshow only that the risks are as high as expected, says a National ResearchCouncil committee.    The committee updated findings of the BEIR III panel, which issued itsreport on health effects from alpha particle emitters. Higher riskestimates presented in the new report, BEIR V, stem from new risk models,revised dose estimates for survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomicbombs, and additional epidemiological data on cancers and other healtheffects experienced by both A-bomb survivors and persons exposed toradiation for medical purposes.    The new report notes several studies reviewed on nuclear workerepidemiology "have yet to accumulate a sufficient number of deaths to reachany sensible conclusions relating to individual types of cancer. The mostconsistent result ...  is that the risk estimates for all types of cancercombined and for all types of leukemia combined are consistent with therisk estimates" in BEIR V.    The worker studies include reviews of British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.(Windscale Plant and Sellafield Plant) in the United Kingdom; Hanford Site,Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, and Rocky FlatsNuclear Weapons Plant, in the U.S.; and Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. inCanada, along with studies of workers at civilian nuclear plants.    Energy Secretary James D. Watkins on Dec. 20 directed Peter Brush,acting assistant secretary for environment, safety and health, to reviewthe BEIR V report and its potential implications for DOE's nuclearoperations, including making recommendations for modifying operations,where needed. Watkins called for an interim report within 90 days and afinal report by June 30, 1990.    Health Effects of Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation isavailable for $35 in paperback or $40 in hardcover from the NationalAcademy Press, 2101 Consitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418, (800)624-6242 or (202) 334-3313.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNTOF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL    The Department of Defense fails to minimize unused hazardous materialstransferred for disposal, the General Accounting Office says in a newlyreleased report. The accounting arm of Congress based its analysis on arandom sample from 10 installations, finding that 40% of the waste wasunused hazardous materials.    Hazardous materials with a $250 million acquisition value weretransferred for disposal during fiscal 1986-88, says the report, preparedat the request of Rep. Vic Fazio (D-Calif.), chairman of the HouseGovernment Operations Subcommittee on the Environment. Materials initiallyworth more than $195 million were disposed of in FY'86-88 by sales to thepublic (43%), disposal service contracts (31%), reuse within DOD (13%),transfer/donation to non-DOD users (12%) and miscellaneous disposals (lessthan 1%). The remainder will stay in storage until a decision is reached onthe manner in which the materials will be disposed of.    The inventory control procedure of first-in, first-out (FIFO), whichcan minimize the chance of hazardous materials becoming hazardous wastedue to shelf-life expiration, is not always followed because of a lack ofinternal controls, GAO found. Some exceptions to the procedure arepermitted that do not fully take into account extra costs incurred in thedisposal of hazmat.    DOD does not always follow its regulations that the condition ofhazardous materials be evaluated periodically, GAO points out. The rulesalso say shelf life is extended after inspection and testing at the depotor installation, when possible. Officials contacted by GAO blame the lackof evaluations on funding constraints, inadequate emphasis by management ora lack of guidance to users on how to evaluate hazmat conditions. Suchmaterials sometimes are transferred for disposal without testing orevaluation to see if shelf-lives could be extended, GAO maintains, and someArmy installations keep hazmats in their inventories for an extended periodof time without evaluating their condition.    DOD uses the same management procedures for hazardous and nonhazardousmaterials, GAO notes. If it had special procedures for managing hazmatinventories, the report concludes, the cost of unnecessary disposal andpotential liability for environmental damage and future cleanup costs couldbe decreased.    Some improvements are on the way, GAO adds. The Navy establishedinstructions June 20, 1989, to improve life-cycle management of itshazmats. The rules address management of hazmat inventories, includingcontrols over their procurement, management procedures for excess hazmatsand waste, quality assurance evaluations, documentation, and record-keepingand reporting. These elements bring a structure to the management of wastesin the Navy, GAO contends, pointing out that the Air Force and Army have nocomparable effort under way.    GAO wants each service to provide special attention to inventorymanagement procedures for hazmats. These should include directing theDefense Logistics Agency and the General Services Administration, throughthe memorandum of agreement between DOD and the GSA, to make greater useof direct delivery contracts for hazmats with a short shelf-life; supplyorganizations to make greater use of FIFO procedures for short shelf-lifehazmats and to discourage exceptions; and supply depots and installationsto evaluate the condition of hazmats consistently through periodic testingor inspections before sending them out for disposal.    Free copies of "Hazardous Waste -- Attention to DOD Inventories ofHazardous Materials Needed," GAO/NSIAD-90-11, are available from GAO, Box6015, Gaithersburg, Md. 20877, (301) 275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTYAGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS    Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio would receive a much stiffer finethan initially proposed for violations at the Feed Materials ProductionCenter at Fernald, under a motion filed by the Environmental ProtectionAgency Region 5. The amended complaint, filed Dec. 19, asks for $330,500and is based on violations discovered at the facility after an initialfiling of a Feb. 9, 1989, complaint with a proposed fine of $196,500.    During two inspections last August and October, EPA found more than 25new and recurring violations of federal hazardous waste regulations.Specifically, EPA alleges that Westinghouse has failed to complete requiredwaste analyses and waste determination plans; failed to designate itself asoperator on the hazardous waste permit application; continued to monitorground water inadequately; and submitted inadequate closure plans,operating records, job descriptions and training records.    EPA filed this latest motion with Administrative Law Judge Thomas Hoya.If Hoya grants the motion to amend the original complaint and boost thepenalty, Westinghouse will have the right to request a hearing to contestany new allegations made by the federal government.    In a related note, the Department of Energy says it is dropping itsappeal of a $78 million judgment by the U.S. District Court for theSouthern District of Ohio resolving a $300 million suit filed in 1985 bythe facility's neighbors, who maintain that radioactive emissions overthree decades from the plutonium-processing plant have endangered theirhealth, caused emotional distress and lowered the property value of theirhouses (DPW, July 7, 1989).    "We're not going to pursue our appeal," explained DOE attorney StevenWakefield, but "the bad news is that the department discovered earlier [inthe week of Dec. 17] that it cannot pay the judgment from a fund it hadplanned to use." DOE had wanted to use a federal contingency fund, but wasbarred from doing so because the suit was initially filed against acontractor, not the government.  DOE now must seek a separate appropriationfrom Congress to establish the fund.    The plaintiffs accepted the decision -- with the money earmarked forlifetime epidemiological studies and health monitoring -- but the finalagreement and acceptance by Judge S. Arthur Spiegel was held up as DOEdisagreed with plaintiffs over the decision's interpretation (DPW, Sept. 1,1989). Two private companies in the area had complained that someof the industrial waste pollution for which they had been cited separatelywas due to FMPC's operations. One corporate complainant said his firm'sproperty value also was diminished, but the court said he would have tofile separately for compensation.    DOE had appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for theSixth Circuit, arguing the accord barred any future claims, but plaintiffscontended that it covered only emotional distress and reduction of propertyvalues. They demanded they could still file to obtain funds to covercleanup work; DOE had said some of the $78 million could be earmarked forcleanup.    The suit had involved FMPC's operations by NLO, a subsidiary ofNational Lead of Ohio, the former contractor, which went out of business.Because of NLO's departure, DOE had to step in as defendant. The change inthe operations and maintenance contract came after the initial filing andbefore the settlement. The contract was transferred to Westinghouse at endof 1985. Activities at the plant were suspended last year to speed updecontamination.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTSIN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE    Battelle Memorial Institute's device for improving detection of fueloil, stored gasoline, solvents and other organic liquids dumped or leakinginto soil (DPW, Dec. 22, 1989) is expected to be more accurate,less expensive and simpler to use than current competing technologies.Developed by researchers at Department of Energy's Pacific NorthwestLaboratory, operated by Battelle, the device will be made available forcommercialization and manufacture.    Battelle's new sensor, constructed from materials costing less thanthose employed in current devices, could be used by environmentalresearchers to measure the amount and location of organic liquids thathave seeped into the soil.  "It could be used to detect leaks in newstorage tanks as well as to monitor the severity of leaks from olderstorage facilities," suggests John W. Cary of Battelle's Earth andEnvironmental Sciences Center.    Cary created the sensor to assist Battelle researchers in their studiesof how organic fluids move in the subsurface environment and how to reduceor repair their ecological effects. "Traditionally, devices such as 'gypsumblocks' are used to measure water content within soil," he explained."These measuring instruments are more expensive and do not detect organicliquids. On the other hand, most sensors that are used to detect organicliquids in soils detect vapors rather than the presence of liquid. These,too, are expensive."    The sensor features an optical switch containing a solid-stateinfrared-light-emitting device joined to a porous disk made of ceramic,fritted glass, PTFE (Teflon) or various carbon-based materials. Whichmaterial is selected determines whether water or organic liquid is absorbedinto the pores.    The disk is placed into the soil where liquid, if present, is absorbed.Light transmitted through the disk is measured and is proportionate to theamount of water or organic liquid that is absorbed into the pores. Theamount of liquid in the disk can be related to the amount of liquid in thesurrounding soil. The disk remains in the soil the entire time themeasurement is made.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOILTO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION    The U.S. Army's 19,700-acre Umatill Depot near Hermiston, Ore., will bethe testing site for an experiment in treating soil contaminated byexplosives. The composting experiment will use microorganisms to consumethe contaminants in soils and sediments, explains Capt. Craig Myler,project officer for the Army's Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency(USATHAMA).    Because microbes do not naturally feed quickly enough on TNT particles,they will be coaxed in tests in special greenhouses, where soil is enrichedwith addi tional microbe food sources, such as hay, straw, manure orlivestock feed. Much of the contamination comes from dry ponds used 25years ago to settle out high-explosive residues, Myler says. The explosivematerial seeped through the ponds' sandy bottoms.    Contamination also had spread across some 1,100 acres used for disposalof rocket fuels, battery acid, explosives and propellants. Some of thesepollutants, which include nitrates, nitrites, cyanide and metals, havemigrated to ground water. The composting system is less expensive thanincineration, the only alternative. Burning the residue costs about $300per ton, or as much as three times that for composting.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICESSEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES    The Department of Energy's Idaho and Richland Operations offices willseek better technologies to solve waste management and environmentalrestoration problems in Idaho and Washington under a new agreement. Theaccord will address Secretary James D. Watkins' Environmental Restorationand Waste Management Five-Year Plan initiatives announced earlier this year(DPW, Sept. 1, 1989).    The new agreement will run through Sept. 30, 1994, providing forcollaboration on waste management and environmental restoration issuesamong the Boise and Richland offices, their contractors, and universitiesin Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana. Funding for the activities willbe provided by DOE as part of Idaho and Richland Operations offices'approved spending plans.    The agreement encompasses, but is not limited to: (1) establishing aDOE team to address parallel research needs and activities; (2) focusing ofcombined expertise on objectives of regional interest and nationalimportance; (3) drawing on existing working relationships effectively touse technical expertise and experience to assure appropriate resourceapplication in specific areas of waste management and environmentalrestoration; and (4) developing a consortium of the laboratories and otherDOE contractors with northwestern and mountain states universities forpromoting waste management and environmental restoration education througheducational training support and research and development opportunities.    The accord involves nine areas of collaboration: stabilizing ordestroying waste on site; quantifying potential health and environmentalrisks and exposure reductions; processing wastes to recover potentiallyuseful materials; treating solid and liquid wastes using high temperatures;developing robotic waste retrieval technologies; differentiating specificwaste sites; demonstrating technologies; developing waste minimizationtechniques; and collaborating with universities on research and training.Additional areas might be added.    The first tier in a three-tiered management will be a committee ofoperations office managers, laboratory directors and operating contractorpresidents/general managers. The second tier will be a six-member steeringcommittee from each operations office and up to two representatives fromtheir laboratory or operating contractor. It will be co-chaired by theoperations office representatives. The third tier will consist of activityproject managers, with an Idaho National Engineering Laboratory and aHanford project manager for each activity.    "The collaborative agreement provides a means for better use of time,talent and funds in solving waste management and environmental restorationissues important to the Pacific Northwest and the nation," said Watkins."An important part of this agreement involves collaboration not justbetween different groups in one federal agency, but with regionaluniversities as well.    "We expect the universities to play an important role in research onwaste cleanup issues and in developing education and training programs inwaste management and environmental-related areas," Watkins added. "Webelieve the education and training programs fostered by this agreement willproduce the additional skilled people needed to clean up both industrialand DOE wastes." Since he first arrived on the job, Watkins has complainedthat he could not find enough trained and experienced people to mount theeffort he would like.    The agreement was signed by the two operations offices, BattellePacific Northwest Laboratory, Westinghouse Hanford Co., Westinghouse IdahoNuclear Co., EG&G Idaho Inc., Mountain State Energy Co. and UNC Geotech.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUMLEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC    Surprisingly high uranium contamination levels found in wells drilled70 ft.  into the Great Miami River Aquifer from a point in the southwestcorner of the Feed Materials Production Center at Fernald, Ohio, could havebeen the result of last summer's drought, says Andrew Avel, deputyenvironmental manager of the Department of Energy's Site Office.    The contamination had been known for years, but the concentrationlevels unexpectedly rose from 309 + 51 parts per billion (ppb) insamplings taken in late February 1989 and reported the following month, to851 + 136 ppb in tests made on May 11 and results received June 19, andfell back down to to 232 + 39 ppb in samples taken July 28 and resultsreached on Sept. 7, DPW was told by Avel.    One theory is that the contamination results from a temporary, partialdrying of the aquifer during a drought last summer. All the readings aremany times higher than U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's unreleasedproposed standard of 30 ppb; there are no standards in place today. Thereduced rainfall could have caused the ground water flow to reverse itsnormal southerly course and place the test wells downstream, instead ofupstream, of contamination sources in the nuclear weapons facility, DPWwas told. Renewed rainfall could have returned the gradient to its normalcourse, according to this line of thinking at DOE.    The readings were taken by Advanced Sciences Inc., contractor to theDepartment of Energy, not to Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio (WMCO),operations and management prime contractor at FMPC. They are part of theremedial investigation/ feasibility study (RIFS) to characterize theenvironment surrounding the plant.  Now in the effort's "RI" stage, thetests on wells within the plant site were made to gather information for adata base for future environmental restoration.    The results were first released publicly about two weeks ago by WMCO'sAdvisory Committee, an independent group of local citizens, who had beenbriefed by WMCO in a regularly scheduled quarterly meeting that touched onthe results of the monitoring of the wells. The readings' results wereburied in the citizen group's press release and picked up Jan. 3 by theCincinnati Enquirer.    The contaminated plume appears to be moving south at a rate of about200 ft.  per year and now extends some 1.5 miles away from the plant. Thecontaminated water wells tap into the Great Miami River Aquifer. No knownpolluted water is used for drinking, but some water unsafe for drinking istreated and used for industrial purposes. Ohio EPA wants to assureavailability of water supplies from the aquifer even though the main watersupply for Cincinnati is the Ohio River.    The monitoring wells were drilled specifically for the test; they arenot used to draw water for other purposes. Production wells in the area arechecked often, Avel said, and those that have been identified ascontaminated are no longer being used for drinking water. The few outlyingwells in use for drinking water have readings essentially at backgroundlevel and are being monitored.    DOE is working on an agreement with the state and EPA to find asolution to the contaminated water. One option under consideration is topump out the water from the contaminated plume, treat it and return it tothe surface of the ground, DPW has been told, but there is no commitmentyet to take any particular action.  DOE maintains that the 1989 readingspose no new threat to the public and are not evidence of any new instanceof contamination from FMPC, although that may be the public perception. "Weare concerned, but it's really nothing that surprises us," Avel told DPW.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEWREFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT    Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) has delivered the plansfor operating its incinerator and hazardous waste storage and treatmentfacility to the California Department of Health Services (DHS) and the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency. The 12 volumes are the documentation LLNLneeds to obtain a permit to run the facility.    They were provided in response to notification of EPA's proposedintention to deny a hazardous waste permit for nearly all waste operationsat LLNL. The material was delivered in person at a Dec. 18 meeting withagency officials, but there has been no comment from EPA since, oneofficial from LLNL's Environmental Protection Department (EPD) told DPW.    A second EPD official, Susi Jackson, said, "We have worked hard tocomply with regulatory agenda requirements and have documented ouraccomplishements and plans for the future in this highly detaileddocumentation." She noted that the report "includes a health riskassessment of our existing incinerator and other documents that reflect ourresponse to regulatory agency concerns.    Jackson said LLNL's goal is "to work with EPA and DHS to ensure thatour waste storage and treatment facilities are absolutely in compliancewith existing laws. We have worked closely with the agencies to resolveall outstanding issues related to the permit applications.    The lab has "made a strong effort to meet agency requirements and toassure them of [LLNL's] commitment to operate its facility in anenvironmentally sound manner, consistent with regulatory requirements. Byexpediting our efforts, we have completed all construction and other tasksthat were scheduled for the next several years under regulatoryrequirements.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECKLIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH    A Department of Energy "Tiger Team" will inspect the Lawrence LivermoreNational Laboratory late next month to assess its compliance withenvironmental, health and safety regulations. These 25-person investigativeteams are visiting all 18 major facilities in the nuclear weapons complexplus dozens of other laboratories and installations. They already havebeen to Rocky Flats, Fernald, Mound, Pantex, Y-12 and a civilian nuclearenergy facility in New York State.    Tiger Team members will visit LLNL within a few weeks to makepre-assessments and develop an agenda for the full-scale investigation,tentatively set for Feb.  26, explains John Clatworthy, a hazards controlofficer. Clatworthy has just returned to LLNL after spending a year at DOEheadquarters as technical and science advisor to the director of the Officeof Weapons Safety and Operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense NuclearHOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense NuclearFacilities Panel will visit the Rocky Flats Plant in Golden, Colo., Jan.16 to conduct its own investigation of safety concerns and review plans forrestaring the plutonium trigger manufacturing operations there. Themeeting, requested by Chairman John M. Spratt Jr. (D-S.C.), an ex-officiomember of the panel, follows a Dec. 1, 1989, decision by Energy SecretaryJames D. Watkins to extend the planned Nov. 13 shutdown of activities thereuntil higher environmental and safety standards are imposed, the safetycorrections are verified by an independent group of experts, and a newsafety program implemented.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-ordercontract from the Energy Department for environmental support services atthe Nevada Test Site. The contract, worth up to $5 million over the nextthree years, was awarded by DOE contractor Reynolds Electrical &Engineering Co., Inc. Under the accord, ICF will provide environmentalservices, training programs, laboratory support, and quality assurance andcontol (QA/QC) assistance. ICF has opened a Las Vegas office to support thework. Contact: ICF Kaiser Engineers, Renaissance Executive Suites, 2255-ARenaissance Dr., Suites 22-23, Las Vegas, Nev. 89119, (702) 739-9011, fax:(702) 798-4865.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to directHanford operations for the Energy Department's Environmental ManagementOperations (EMO), created earlier this year. EMO, operated by Battelle,offers environmental restoration services to DOE and other federalagencies. Activities include risk assessment, environmental auditing,regulatory compliance and occupational safety and health. Contact:Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Battelle Blvd., P.O. Box 999,Richland, Wash. 99352, (509) 375-2242.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the17th Environmental Symposium of the American Defense PreparednessAssociation (ADPA), April 18-20 in Atlanta. The conference is designed tobring together DOD officials and private companies, educationalinstitutions, professional societies, and state and federal regulatoryagencies. Contact: Vincent Ciccone, Law Environmental Inc., Woodbridge,Va., (703) 643-1489, or Col. Bruce Holt, ADPA, Arlington, Va., (703)522-1820.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.28-29 to hear testimony from officials with the Centers for Disease Controlin Atlanta, New York University's Institute of Environmental Medicine, thegovernment of the Rongelap Atoll in the Marshall Islands, the New MexicoTumor Registry, the International Commission on Radiological Protection,and several Department of Energy programs. A draft of the panel's report,released last month, called on DOE to revamp its epidemiology program (DPW,Dec. 8, 1989). Contact:  Nona Shepard, Secretarial Panel for theEvaluation of Epidemiologic Research Activities for the Department ofEnergy, 1000 Independence Ave., Rm. GF-209, Washington, D.C. (202)586-3773.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-27IA086-000616-B018-120http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev20.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003444 text/html 37235HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:32:49 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:12 GMTContent-length: 37048Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev20.html Sample Issue Copyright SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS & TRENDS (356 words) MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS (332 words) 'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT (277 words) STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS (695 words) VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES (741 words) EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS (292 words) SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION (316 words) EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING (97 words) BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS (394 words) INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS (305 words) INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE (571 words) HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING (158 words) SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS (292 words) CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SLANTS & TRENDSSUPERFUND TAKES A HIT - EPA shut down the federal Superfundprogram this week because the agency was unable to paynearly 2,000 of its employees in that program along with8,000 contractors who perform remediation work. TheSuperfund was not affected immediately by the shutdown ofthe federal government because most of those employees arepaid directly from the fund, rather than from budgetappropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputy assistantadministrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste and EmergencyResponse.     Although Congress has not reauthorized the program orissued its allotment for the current fiscal year, Superfundhad operated since October from a surplus in last year'sfund, Mathews explained. That money ran out Jan. 2, and theagency began shutting down the program. Only emergencypersonnel will continue working, reducing the agency'sprogram employees from more than 3,000 to 80. SeveralSuperfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,although many will be forced to stop operations, he said.Contact: Jim Mathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.* * *IN ONE POCKET, OUT THE OTHER - EPA has fined the Departmentof Interior's (DOI), National Parks Service for violatingthe Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storinghazardous waste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Thefacility stored hazardous waste without a RCRA permitbetween March and October of last year, EPA said. The wastecontained acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol, arsenicand mercury, EPA contended. EPA also cited DOI for storingwaste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined the DOIfacility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardouswaste management plan.* * *EPA BACKS BACT - Proposed new source review (NSR) rulesunder development by EPA probably will recommend a "topdown" approach for determining the best available controltechnology (BACT) such as technology used to controlemissions from landfills, EPA officials said. The rules alsowill give states some flexibility in determining whichcontrol method to use. The proposal, EPA officials said,will allow states to develop their own BACT determinationcriteria as long as they consider the leading technologiescurrently available.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISEDFOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronouncedgrowth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing69 percent to $2 billion, and that trend should continue,according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, afinancial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.     In general terms, the report said, acquisition growthaccelerated over the past 12 months. The top 13 solid wastecompanies are expected to increase their revenues by 21percent, with a major revenue component driven byacquisitions, the report also said.     The report cited USA Waste's recently announced mergerwith Western Waste for $530 million (SWR, Dec. 21, 1995, p.391). If completed, this transaction would raise USA Wasteto third ranking by size in the U.S. solid waste market,Raymond James noted.     In addition, the report said, considerably improvedfinancing costs over the past year made the financingenvironment for solid waste companies, particularly smallergrowth companies, better than any time in the past.Smaller Companies Cited     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish tostress that the improvement in the cost of financing hasbeen most notable for the smaller waste service companies. Alonger track record leading to enhanced credibility hasenabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs ofcapital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from theaccess to longer term financing and attractively pricedequity."     Those financing options were "very limited" as recentlyas 15 to 18 months ago, Raymond James explained.     However, the document also noted that presently, "Thelow financing costs clearly provide more attractive dynamicsfor public companies to pursue acquisitions."     In general, the analysis said, long term financingrates for all companies, as represented by 30 year Treasurybonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdropfor continued aggressive acquisition.     The report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-Sized Companies LeadIndustry in a Torrid Acquisition Pace, is available fromRaymond James. Contact: William Fisher, (800) 237-5643.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUESSAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT     Communication problems between business andenvironmental staff members can prevent companies fromsuccessfully managing corporate environmental issues,according to a survey of major U.S. firms.     In its primary finding, the survey done by Arthur D.Little Inc. reported a "green wall" that blockscommunication exists in many companies. For example,managers for environment, health and safety programs at the185 corporations Arthur D. Little surveyed often cited theirfailure to convince management that environmental programsare important to their firm's success.     Numerous company officials responded that environment,health, and safety functions are often viewed as an outsideoperation with a sole mission of "keeping the company out oftrouble," Arthur D. Little also reported. More than 70percent of those responding cited either a lack ofacceptance of environmental issues, or a separateenvironmental "culture" as blocking integratingenvironmental functions into their firms' business plans.Contact: Diane Millikan, (617) 498-5896.* * *     Norton Performance Plastics Corp., Wayne, N.J., hasintroduced a line of plastic tubing the company said can beincinerated without creating hazardous by-products. Contact:Jackie Swartzberg, (201) 696-4700.     Oracle Environmental Corp., Houston, is offering abrochure and technical data sheets explaining informationmanagement solutions for environmental compliance issues.Contact: Larry Orecklin, (415) 506-9229.     Scepter Recycling Inc., Bicknell, Ind., has acquiredAlumax Recycling's recycling centers in Houston andArlington, Texas. Scepter also acquired Alumax's interest inMetales Ligas Especiales S.A., C.B., a recycling company inMexico. Contact: Larry Neal, (812) 735-2500.     Solvent Kleene Inc., Peabody, Mass., has introduced its"D-Greeze 1000" non-toxic, non-flammable degreaser/cleanerthat the company claimed is also non-hazardous. Contact: TomKutai, (508) 531-2279.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLYSOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS     Although they are not always the most economicallyviable systems, state and local governments increasingly usematerial recovery facilities (MRFs) for managing municipalsolid waste (MSW), according to a new study (SWR, Dec. 14,1995, p. 383).     "I suspect the reason is [the] public press forrecycling," said Philip Shepherd, coauthor of the report,Environmental, Economic, and Energy Impacts of MaterialRecovery Facilities, in making a personal assessment ofinterest in MRFs.     The report, by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), EPAand the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),evaluates the economic, energy and environmental aspects ofMRFs by studying six facilities.     Although the report found nothing revolutionary, saidShepherd of NREL, it is designed to be a decision-makingtool that helps solid waste managers weigh the outcomes ofdifferent management options. The primary objectives of theevaluation were to understand the effects of MRFs'operations on public health and the environment along withoccupational health and safety functions, the documentexplained.     If the study found anything noteworthy, Shepherd said,it was that MRFs do not use a significant amount of energywhen compared to other components of an integrated solidwaste management system (ISWMS). The fuel use associatedwith collecting various recyclables, however, dominates theoverall energy consumption of MRF operations, the governmentstudy also reported.Environmental Effects     The document details the six MRFs' effects on ambientair quality, receiving waters and community noise levels.The health and safety evaluation section addressed exposureto chemicals, biological and energy aspects of MRFs based inSouth Holbrook, N.Y.; Montgomery County, Md.; Albuquerque,N.M.; Hartford, Conn.; Rice County, Minn.; and OrangeCounty, Fla.     MRFs do not pose significant threats to either publichealth or the environment, according to the study. Nuisanceconditions, such as fugitive dust and excessive noise, canbe easily mitigated through roadway maintenance andenclosing equipment. Potential health and safety hazards forworkers can be controlled by implementing the OccupationalSafety and Health Administration's (OSHA) worker protectionprograms, the study also concluded.     The agencies also did a case study of the multi-purposerecycling facility in South Holbrook owned and operated bythe Islip (N.Y.) Resource Recovery Agency. That facility hasthe capacity to handle 240 tons of recyclables during aneight-hour shift, including newspapers, corrugatedcardboard, mixed paper, metals, tin cans, plastics, flintglass and aluminum. On alternate Wednesdays, vehiclesdeliver either newspapers or mixed recyclables to the MRF.The recyclables are then hand-sorted from conveyor belts.     The federal evaluators found no air pollution levelsexceeding the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)at the Islip MRF. Values for carbon monoxide and mercuryvapor were considerably lower than the applicable OSHAlimits, the report also said. Measurements of volatileorganic compounds (VOCs) resulted in concentrations nogreater than 10 ug/m3, with the exception of three compoundsin the range of 1 to 60 ug/m3 range at a site upwind of thefacility.Worker Exposure Low     OSHA's portion of the evaluation there measuredworkers' exposure to nuisance dusts, silica, and metals bycollecting breathing zone samples from selected workerstaken periodically over their eight-hour shifts. The highesttotal of respirable dust levels were found on the tippingfloor, a total of 3.39 mg/m3 for all dust and 0.55 mg/m3 forrespirable dust. All exposure levels, however, wereconsiderably lower than the federal permissible exposurelimits (PELs), according to the report.     Airborne and surface bacteria and fungi samples werecollected inside the building. Levels were relativelyconsistent among locations inside the facility, with nospecific areas exhibiting unusually high or low levels.However, OSHA has not yet established PELs for either fungior bacteria, the study noted. To determine the ergonomicsfactors involved in the facility, the evaluators videotapedseveral operations in the facility's picking booth.     They found only one potential ergonomics risk factor:the work station's configuration, which required workers toreach across the full width of the conveyor for picking andsorting various recyclable items. The report is availablefrom the National Technical Information Service, U.S.Department of Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA22161. Contact: (703) 487-4650.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTEVOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES     Several local governments in North Carolina havelowered the amount of solid waste generated by up to 30percent through charging customers for the volume of wastethey generate, rather than assessing a fixed fee, accordingto the North Carolina Recycling Association (NCRA).     The association surveyed several local governments inthat state that have converted to charging customersvariable rates based on the volume of waste they generate.However, NCRA also reports there are several problems withcharging by the weight of solid waste generated.     For example, Yadkin County, N.C., adopted a sticker-based program in 1994 in which customers deliver trash intheir own 30-gallon bags to one of seven sites, NCRA said.For additional trash, they can buy a 50-cent sticker foreach bag, and recyclables are accepted without charge.     Yadkin County officials reported 30-percent reductionin solid waste. Motine Kenney, solid waste coordinator forthat local government, said, "We did a countywide survey,and people in the county said they'd rather go with a unitprice program than pay for someone else's garbage."Wilmington Reports Waste Reduction     In another example, the city of Wilmington, N.C.,charges $12.90 per week to pick up a 90-gallon can of refuseand $9.90 weekly for picking up a 40-gallon can. Excesswaste can be disposed of in 33-gallon bags that each cost$1, and residents also can get twice weekly pickup of the90-gallon can for $27.50.     Wilmington officials reported a 10 percent reduction insolid waste going to landfills, and a 42 percent increase inboth recycling and yard waste, NCRA said. However, NCRA alsoreported the system there has created administrativeproblems. In areas near low-income housing projects,residents often dumped excess garbage in streets and intocommercial dumpsters, they said.     Even after dropping the program for those low-incomehousing projects, illegal dumping has increased inWilmington, according to Bill Reed, superintendent foroperations for Wilmington's solid waste department. "If youinstitute a variable-rate program, be sure you have anadequate enforcement mechanism set up," Reed cautions otherlocal governments.     In another case cited by the state association, JonesCounty in eastern North Carolina has operated a variable-rate program based on volume since 1972. Under that system,bags are sold wholesale to area businesses and then resoldto residential consumers for $1.25 each.     The county has since added pickup of recyclables, whichare collected along with residential waste and stored in aseparate trailer towed by the refuse truck. Then, crews takeall materials collected to a transfer station, where thewaste is sent to a landfill and recyclables are sold.     "It's been a good system for us," according to CountyManager Larry Matthews. "It's clean and it's well acceptedby our citizens. This was our first solid waste system, andour first recycling system, so we can't really do acomparison. But I'm sure it's an incentive to reduce andrecycle."     However, those successful systems are based on thevolume of waste, rather than on its weight, NCRA stressed.In addition, the association noted, there are severaldrawbacks to charging residents by the weight of waste, sothere has been little interest in using that method.     A primary obstacle to weight-based pricing has beendeveloping truck-mounted scales that can meet standardsdeveloped by the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST), NCRA explained. For a typical residentialrefuse can, NIST requires scales accurate to within a halfpound to two pounds, which can be difficult standard forsome local operations.     Using those scales also adds to the processing time forhandling refuse, NCRA noted. In addition, those units costapproximately $16,000 to retrofit per processor, NCRA said.High Interest Level     Despite some problems local governments have reportedwith variable-rate systems, interest in those systemsremains high, the association also reported. Beth Graves, ofthe North Carolina Office of Waste Reduction, said shefrequently gets calls from local governments interested inpursuing  variable-rate programs and 80 North Carolinaofficials participated in a satellite conference held onthose systems by EPA, NCRA noted.     In addition, more local governments will consider usingvariable-rate disposal fees as cost-cutting moves continue,NCRA predicted. "I believe that unearthing the costs fromthe general tax fund will provide tremendous incentives forpeople to reduce their wastes," according to Craig Barry,NCRA's Executive Director. Contact: NCRA, (919) 851-8444.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONSCOULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS     Up to one-fourth of EPA's staff may be laid off byspring unless congressional Republicans substantiallyincrease the agency's long-term funding that is independentof the current federal shutdown, according to EPAAdministrator Carol Browner. That means it may take longerfor the agency to act on solid waste issues.     About one-third of the employees who promulgateregulations, issue permits and perform inspections could belaid off if Congress eventually prevails on the EPAappropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, agencyofficials also said.     Researchers and employees involved in environmentalcleanups would not be cut. The statement is a break fromprevious announcements, where EPA said it could not predictthe depth of the personnel reductions.Bond Defends Cuts     At a press conference, President Clinton said he vetoedthe $5.7 billion spending bill - that called for a 21percent decrease from fiscal 1995 allocations - becauseenvironmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safedrinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45percent and the air would become more polluted. The cutsalso would condemn "10 million children under the age of 12to living near toxic waste sites that might not be cleanedup for years," Clinton said.     The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policyriders designed to prevent EPA from acting in several areas,along with a 50 percent cut in funding to implement theMontreal treaty for protection of the ozone layer.     In response to earlier attacks by Democrats on EPAfunding cuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), chairman of theappropriations subcommittee that handles the agency'sfunding, said cuts in the agency's funding were based onrecommendations from several organizations, including theNational Academy of Public Administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATIONFOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION     Key Senators on the Environment Committee support fine-tuning the Clean Water Act (CWA) - and not the majorrollback of the law approved last year by the House.     In the first of a series of hearings on reauthorizingthe CWA, Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.) said he favors amodest bill with a limited agenda. The Senate would be hardpressed, he said, to pass a more ambitious package forchanging the CWA, such as H.R. 961, which the House approvedMay 16, 1995.     The CWA is a "major success story," said the panel'sranking Democrat Max Baucus of Montana. House efforts to"gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected and wrongheaded,"he said. "No CWA reauthorization would be better than theone the House suggested."     A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen.Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), said the CWA helped rehabilitatethe Mississippi River. Water quality has improved over thepast two decades, Bond said. Bond said he plans, however, to"fix" CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken." Localentities and states should not be forced to spend exorbitantsums, Bond added.     "We have cities spending upwards of $650,000 to obtain[stormwater discharge] permits. This expenditure does notresult in cleaner waters...Assessing humungous [CWA] finesagainst small communities with limited resources is probablythe dumbest thing you can do if you want to improve theenvironment," Bond said.     Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urged the committee toconsider his bill, S. 1390, that would allow CWA fines to beinvested in local pollution prevention and remediation.     In order to make $2 billion in loans to states annuallyfor the next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested inthe wastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the nextseven years, said Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's wateroffice. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal1996 to support the SRF program.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARDFOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING     Actress Joanne Woodward will appear in a televisiondocumentary and in radio and television public serviceannouncements (PSAs) to urge consumers to buy products madefrom recycled materials and save landfill space, accordingto the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF).     EDF said Woodward has made a half-hour documentarydescribing for consumers the life cycle of recycled productsand how to find recycled goods in their local supermarkets.     EDF said it will make the documentary and PSAsavailable to broadcasters, and also will provide thedocumentary to schools and community groups. Contact: EDF,(202) 387-3500.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGEENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS     Both political parties share the blame for Congressfailing to pass meaningful reform of the nation'senvironmental laws last year, including those that regulatesolid waste, according to an analysis done by Paul Portney,president of Resources for the Future (RFF).     Writing in the organization's publication, Resources,Portney said the national debate over reform to require morerisk assessment and cost-benefit analysis for major federalenvironmental statutes, including key parts of the safeDrinking Water Act and the Clean Water Act, was framedinaccurately. One side claimed the effort to require thoselaws was an "heroic attempt to rescue the U.S. economy froma welter of rules" made by unelected bureaucrats, Portneysaid.     The other side, led by congressional Democrats, arguedthat the Republicans were making "thinly veiled effort" toundo 25 years of environmental gains "just to benefit fat-cat corporations," Portney's analysis said.Both Sides Seen At Fault     Portney contended that the Republicans "underminedtheir own efforts" at regulatory reform by cutting EPA'sbudget and tacking riders onto an appropriations bill toprohibit the agency from enforcing some air and waterquality regulations.     "If Congress thinks that particular regulations areill-advised, it can and should openly debate and change thelaws that gave rise to those regulations - not use theappropriations process to make 'stealth' amendments," hewrote.     The Democrats, Portney added, also "bear responsibilityfor the failure of regulatory reform" because they opposedother measures backed by Republicans in the Senate and Housethat would not have eliminated environmental regulations.     Actually, he said, only the Senate bill would havesubjected existing regulations to any review at all, and"even then, it would direct regulatory officials to undoregulations only when they could not satisfy themselves thattheir rules did more harm than good."     Portney also wrote, "With the many possible advantagesof and reasonable concerns about the use of cost-benefitanalysis in regulation, the congressional debate ought to beclear and focused."     "Rather," he said, "the debate has been dominated byfalse claims that regulation is strangling the economy orthat popular safeguards will be wiped off the books byreform legislation."     "We deserve and should insist upon more, though thesmart money is probably best wagered on more cartooncaricatures," Portney concluded. Contact: RFF, (202) 328-5025.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLEOF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS     Wastes generated by one company could become useful rawmaterials for a nearby firm under the concept of an "Eco-Industrial Park" (EIP) now in the planning stages inBaltimore.     According to the Cornell Center for the Environment,the concept being developed in an industrial area ofBaltimore would allow one firm to acquire a new source ofprofit while reducing its waste disposal and transportationcosts, while a nearby company gets a convenient source ofraw materials with the additional benefit of reducing itscosts for transporting those materials.     The area has been designated as a demonstration site bythe President's Council for Sustainable Development.Cornell's environment center proposed the project and isinvolved in its planning and implementation through its Workand Environment Initiative (WEI).     According to a study done by WEI, petroleum-basedindustries in Fairfield must dispose of a waste mixture ofoil and water, which then could be separated into usable oiland water. In addition, construction and demolition debrisfrom industries there could be reprocessed into aggregatefor asphalt production, or refining landscape mulch fromwood.     In turn, WEI said, those waste materials could be usedby new industries as part of their production process. WEIsaid the project could attract more than $1 billion in newinvestments and thousands of new jobs to the area. Theincentives for that investment, WEI said, would beinherently high-performance companies, several modes oftransportation, and skilled workers. WEI said the projectcould provide "a high return on assets for employers, animproved local eco-system for the community and sustainablehigh quality jobs."     Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI's director, said theproject had the potential of "marrying high workplace andenvironmental practices" and increasing profits while alsodecreasing waste and pollution." Contact: Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI, (607) 255-8160.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVALAFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE     Environmental officials in Indiana anticipate full EPAapproval of the state's solid waste program under Subtitle Dthis summer, after years of delay.     When severe budget cuts hit Indiana's solid wasteprogram in 1993, the U.S. EPA notified the IndianaDepartment of Environmental Management (IDEM) officials thatapproval of their state's Subtitle D program was contingenton the Indiana agency finding sufficient funds to supportthe program (SWR, Nov. 18, 1993).     Funding dried up that year after IDEM ended the statesolid waste division's permit application and operation feeprograms because they resembled a water management programfee structure that had been invalidated by a state court.     Having straightened out funding problems, IDEM plans tosubmit the application for complete approval of the SubtitleD program this spring, and hopes for approval by summer,according to Scott Dinwiddie, an official of the IndianaOffice of Solid and Hazardous Waste (OSHW).     Meanwhile, OSHW has done considerable work to preparefor that approval. Since 1994, the state has closed 10municipal solid waste landfills (MSWLs), leaving the totalat 50.     At the same time, the number of transfer stations hasgrown to 48, according to the 1995 edition of the OSHW'sSummary of Indiana Solid Waste Facility Data. The state has10 construction-demolition landfills, 17 restricted-wastelandfills, two incinerators and 49 composting facilities,according to the government report. Except for a sharpincrease in 1992, the combined total annual disposal for alllandfill types remained fairly stable from 1991 through1994, the document added.     Despite the closing of several landfills, the totalremaining capacity at MSWLs has stayed fairly stable since1991 because of landfill expansions, according to thereport. Indiana should have another decade of adequatedisposal at current facilities, OSHW predicted.     Long-haul imports of trash, primarily from New York,New Jersey and Pennsylvania, have declined since 1991, thesummary explained. However, OSHW said, total waste importsfrom the bordering states of Illinois, Michigan, Ohio andKentucky have remained fairly steady, and exceed long-haulimports. Waste shipments from Illinois comprise 75 percentof Indiana's total waste imports. By 1994, 97 percent of thewaste imported to Indiana came from bordering states, thestate document also explained.Recycling     Indiana's laws require reducing materials going intolandfills through waste diversion, source reduction, reuse,recycling and composting.     The laws also require Indiana to reach an overall recy-cling goal of 35 percent of the waste stream by Jan. 1,1996, and they establish a goal of 50 percent due beforeJan. 1, 2001.     OSHW's Dinwiddie said figures from 1995 are notavailable on whether Indiana has met its recycling goal of35 percent. By 1994's end, the state reached a 19 percentwaste reduction rate, he said.     Copies of the report may be obtained from IDEM's Officeof Solid Waste Management, P.O. Box 6015, Indianapolis, IN46206-6015, (317) 233-5156, or (317) 232-8885.Profiles in Solid Waste Management, Volume III, acompilation of all 50 state profiles - that provides acomprehensive report on the most pressing problems faced andmost innovative programs developed in 1995 - can bepurchased by subscribers for only $77. You'll save $21 offthe regular Price Of $98. Let Swr Do The Job. Save ValuableTime While Staying Up-to-date On Other States' Solid WasteManagement PraCtices. Order Your Copy Today! Call (800) 274-6737.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASERECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING     Recycling aseptic packaging, or those "drink boxes," isincreasing as the paper recycling process of hydrapulpinggrows in use, according to reports from the AsepticPackaging Council (APC) (SWR, Dec. 14, p. 383).     Since a pilot drink box recycling program began in1990, the number of U.S. households recycling thosecontainers through curbside programs has grown to 5 million,according to APC. Drink boxes are collected along with otherpolyethylene-coated (laminated) paper products such as milkcartons. Those products are then recycled using thehydrapulping process.     Hydrapulping separates the paper, which makes up 70percent of the packaging, from the plastic and the aluminum.The hydrapulper operates much like a large householdblender, says APC. The machinery is filled with water,aseptic packages and milk and juice cartons, and large rotorblades stir the water. The motion beats the paper fibersaway from the layers of polyethylene and aluminum foil.Contact: APC, (703) 351-5062.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLESTO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS     Huffy Sports (HS), manufacturer of home basketballsystems, is the first backboard producer to include post-consumer materials in its products, according to thecompany.     Composite Technologies Corporation (CTC) of Dayton,Ohio, produces the Polymer Fiber Matrix - a compression-molded thermoplastics recycled resin - used in the boards.CTC also manufacturers highway signs and walls for soundbarriers from Polymer Fiber Matrix.     Recycled products used in the Polymer Fiber Matrixinclude: PET soda bottles, milk jugs and industrialplastics. HS plans to produce the majority of its backboardsfrom recycled materials by the end of 1996. Contact: WendeePuccetti, Celtic Advertising, (414) 789-7630.* * *     CALIFORNIA - The Alameda County Waste ManagementAuthority (ACMA) has approved about $400,000 in grants toseven local cities and a waste district for waste reduction,recycling and public education programs. Allocationsinclude: $50,000 for a Garden Patch Greening Resource Centerin Berkeley; $12,500 for an enhanced green waste publicationcampaign in Dublin; $80,770 for a yard-waste publiceducation program in Oakland; and $63,633 for thedevelopment of a multi-material recovery facility in UnionCity. Contact: Bruce Goddard, ACWMA, (510) 614-1699.     NEW JERSEY - Environmental Resources Management (ERM)recently completed its first full-scale installation of asystem based on its patented Advanced Fluidized Composting(AFC) technology at a remediation site in Trenton, N.J. AFCis a process technology used to treat high-strength organicor biodegradable inorganic waste streams, or sludges. Thetechnology combines autothermal biological treatment ofhigh-strength organic waste streams with a proprietaryoxidation step. The result is a highly efficient rate oforganic destruction with little or no generation of wastesludges commonly associated with most biological processes,the company also explained. Contact: ERM, (800) 544-3117.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-28IA086-000616-B018-142http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003516 text/html 51014HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:33:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:12 GMTContent-length: 50827Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev22.html Sample Issue Copyright SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 19, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap (236 words) Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix (163 words) C&D Recycling pre-design starts (191 words) AT&SF source removal eyed (194 words) California Gulch capping eyed (187 words) More studies near at Valleycrest (201 words) Bloomington cleanup plans near (213 words) North Bronson to get summer ROD (205 words) A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed (198 words) Nature to clean up Chevron g.w. (188 words) Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat (519 words) Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer (428 words) Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way (350 words) Raymark cap construction subs needed (366 words) American Creosote design underway (249 words) Lexington cap to get summer bid (192 words) EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal (173 words) NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring (488 words) Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed (344 words) Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work (359 words) EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap (344 words) Correction (68 words) Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill (405 words) Senate mulls liability deal (207 words) N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding (164 words) CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap      PRPs are expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the construction of an $11.3 million capping and leachate collection project at the Waste Inc. NPL site in Michigan City, Ind.     A group of 16 PRPs known as the Waste Inc. Remedial Action Organization Group (WIROG) agreed last week to comply with an EPA unilateral order to design and build the remedy.      The 1994 ROD calls for capping most of the 32-acre landfill with two to four feet of compacted clay and one foot of topsoil. The cap will be graded and vegetated.      A leachate collection trench also will be needed at the southwest end of the landfill. Groundwater, which has polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and PCBs, will be monitored.     Also, an on-site well will need to be abandoned, an underground fuel storage tank removed and a sewer system rerouted.     Capital costs were estimated at $11.3 million under the ROD, with another $290,000 needed for annual operation and maintenance.     Montgomery Watson's Addison, Ill., office is managing the site for the PRPs and will do the design. A design work plan is due Feb. 5. The consultant also is expected to handle the construction bid solicitations.     The design is expected to be completed this spring or summer. Pre-construction work could begin as early as April.     Contact: Dion Novak, EPA project manager, 312-886-4737; Maureen Grimmer, PRP Steering Committee attorney, 219-931-0560; Joe Adams, Montgomery Watson project manager, 303-938-8818.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring for the construction of a groundwater treatment plant at the CryoChem Inc. NPL site in Worman, Pa.     CH2M Hill Inc.'s Reston, Va., office is managing the fund-lead site as the agency's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor. The design is at the 30% phase and is scheduled for completion in the spring. Construction is slated to begin this summer.     Groundwater at the site will be extracted and treated with air stripping. Extraction and monitoring wells were installed last fall, and bids will be solicited for the construction of the on-site treatment building only.      Groundwater will be extracted at a maximum rate of 100 gallons per minute and discharged to an on-site creek.     Groundwater samples taken between 1981 and 1985 at the 19-acre metal fabricating plant site revealed on-site and off-site contamination. The primary contaminants are TCA, DCA, TCE, DCE and PCE.      Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manger, 215-597-8240; Sunil Pereira, CH2M Hill project manager, 703-471-1441.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996C&D Recycling pre-design starts     PRPs have begun sampling as part of pre-design work for a $12 million soil and sediment cleanup at the C&D Recycling NPL site in Foster Township, Pa.     ERM Northeast will design the remedy for AT&T, which is paying for the work under a unilateral administrative order. Other PRPs were identified by EPA but AT&T is the only one that complied with the order.     Under the September 1992 ROD, about 30,000 cubic yards of soil and sediment will be excavated, stabilized and hauled off-site for disposal.     The prime contaminants are heavy metals, primarily lead and copper.     Design work is scheduled for completion in July 1997.     The 45-acre site operated as metals reclamation plant from the 1960s until the early 1980s. Lead- and plastic-cased telephone cables were burned in pits to melt off the lead and reclaim the remaining copper wire. Plastic coverings were mechanically stripped prior to the burning and stored in piles at the site.     The state found high concentrations of lead and copper in ash piles, the burn pit and drainage pathways.      Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; Joe Chikowski, AT&T, 908-204-8249; Jim Perazzo, ERM Northeast project manager, 516-921-4300.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996AT&SF source removal eyed       EPA received a draft engineering evaluation/cost analysis (EE/CA) report Jan. 16 from PRPs at the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad Co. (AT&SF) NPL site in Albuquerque, N.M., where a source soil and sludge removal likely is needed.     The EE/CA is part of an RI/FS by Radian Corp. of Houston. Radian is doing the work for AT&SF, the only PRP identified by EPA.     Possible removal options include excavation with off-site treatment of sludge and excavation, storage and on-site treatment of sludge with the rest of the site's contaminated soil. Contaminated soil extends to depths of about 40 feet, and the contamination has reached the bedrock aquifer.     Sludge extends to depths of 1.5 feet to two feet. Earlier studies estimated about 1,000 cubic yards of sludge had to be addressed.     The New Mexico Environment Dept. has the oversight lead at the site, which is an abandoned wood-preserving plant in the South Valley area of Albuquerque. Except for a waste water impoundment and sump, the plant was dismantled in 1972.      Contact: Mary Ann Menetrey, state project manager, 505-827-2944; David Clark, AT&SF project manger, 913-435-2210; Monica Smith, EPA project manager, 214-665-6780; Riaz Ahmad, Radian project manager, 713-556-1888.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996California Gulch capping eyed     As expected, Asarco Inc. last week submitted a feasibility study for the Apache tailings operable unit at the California Gulch NPL site in Leadville, Colo., where about 600,000 cubic yards of tailings likely will need to be capped.     The tailings could be capped with either soil or an impermeable clay layer at an estimated cost of between $1 million and $2 million, depending on which material is selected. The nature of the cap will be delineated during design.     Asarco has not decided whether it will keep on Golder Associates Ltd., which did the RI/FS, to do the design or bid out the work. A decision is expected once the ROD is signed this spring. Asarco hopes to complete the work this summer.     Community protection measures, such as blood lead screening, are expected for the residential soils operable unit. An FS for the unit is expected by the end of next month.     Other operable units at the site are being addressed by Resurrection Mining Co. and Denver and Rio Grande Railroad (Superfund Week 1/12).     Contact: Rebecca Thomas, EPA project manager, 303-312-6229; Margaret "Poppy" Staub, Asarco project manager, 303-296-5104.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996More studies near at Valleycrest     PRPs have completed sampling under the first phase of an RI at the North Sanitary Landfill NPL site (also called the Valleycrest Landfill) in Dayton, Ohio. The results are due next month.     Phase two RI work will begin soon thereafter. During the first phase of the RI, about 10 groundwater monitoring wells were installed, along with 18 soil gas probes. Landfill gas and geophysical surveys also were taken.      The geophysical surveys detected off-site burial areas, and much of second round of studies will focus on delineating those areas.     The prime contaminants are volatile organic compounds, metals and semi-volatiles.     TreaTek-Conestoga Rovers & Associates is doing the RI for a group of PRPs that agreed to an RI/FS last spring (Superfund Week 4/14/95). Parties agreeing to the investigations include General Motors Corp., AT&T Global Information Solutions, Cargill Inc., Duriron Co., Standard Register, Dayton Walther Co. and Peerless Transportation Co. Another 38 PRPs have been identified but have so far refused to step forward.     de maximis inc. of Livonia, Mich., is managing the cleanup for the PRPs.     Contact: Kurt Kollar, state site coordinator, 513-285-6052; Ramon Torres, EPA project manager, 312-886-3010; Roy Dane, de maximis project manager, 313-261-0280; Mark Klimin, Conestoga Rovers project manager, 513-326-7600.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bloomington cleanup plans near     EPA, the Indiana Dept. of Environmental Management and PRP Westinghouse Electric Corp. are expected to give a U.S. District Court a schedule next month for the cleanup of up to five PCB sites in Bloomington, Ind.     Alternatives to incineration, which was selected for the sites in a 1985 ROD, are expected to be proposed  at at least two of the five sites this year.     The five sites are: Lemon Lane Landfill, Neal's Landfill, Neal's Dump, Bennett's Stone Quarry Dump and the Winston Thomas site. The Lemon Lane Landfill and Winston Thomas sites should be addressed in 1996. A review of each site's history, new studies and a draft cleanup schedule are due Feb. 13.     The studies are being done in compliance with a state law requiring them before an on-site incineration permit can be issued. Westinghouse is about mid-way through the collection the data, which will supplement earlier RI/FS reports.     The state hired PRC Environmental Management Co. to study solvent extraction, chemical dechlorination, biological remediation, quick lime treatment, low temperature thermal desorption, desorption with vaporization extraction and plasma torch technology.     Contact: Dan Hopkins, EPA project manager, 312-886-5994; Resa Ramsey, state project manager, 317-233-0645; Jim Patrick, Westinghouse Waste Technologies Service Div. site manager, 812-334-0030; Michael Johnson and Robert Foster, PRC Environmental, 312-856-8796.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996North Bronson to get summer ROD     EPA expects to sign a ROD in June for a soil and groundwater cleanup at the North Bronson Industrial Area NPL site in Bronson, Mich., where a less stringent cleanup than originally anticipated might be allowed because of changes in state cleanup level requirements.     The state is reevaluating Montgomery Watson's fund-lead FS because the studies were conducted before changes in the state law with regard to cancer risks. Last summer the state changed its cancer risk level from 10 -6 to 10 -5.     A ROD originally was scheduled for last summer. Another factor in the delay is that an industrial sewer system, which  connected two wastewater lagoons, was not evaluated as part of the RI/FS. Additional investigations might be required to further delineate the definition of the site. If more investigations are needed, the state likely will use Montgomery Watson of Novine, Mich.     Two former industrial waste lagoon areas constructed by the City of Bronson around 1940 need to be cleaned up, along with groundwater contaminated by the lagoons and at least one other source area (Superfund Week 9/1/95).      Contact: Bill Harmon, state project manager, 517-373-4951; Rosita Clarke-Moreno, EPA project manager, 312-886-7251; David O'Rouke, Bronson city manager, 517-369-7334; Donna Courington, Montgomery Watson project manager, 810-344-0205.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed     EPA is expected to begin negotiations this month for the design and construction of a portion of a $10.9 million soil and groundwater cleanup at the A.I.W. Frank/Mid-County Mustang NPL site in Exton, Pa. The talks were delayed by the recent federal furlough.     Under the ROD signed in September, a groundwater pump-and-treatment system with air stripping will be needed to treated solvents-contaminated groundwater.      About a half-dozen wells will extract contaminated groundwater from a fractured bedrock aquifer. Treatment will continue for about 30 years.     The only apparent discharge point for treated groundwater is a nearby river, but since the river is a trout stream EPA has left flexibility in the plan and is evaluating other options.     Also, about 230 cubic yards of contaminated source soil needs to be excavated and disposed off-site. The soil is located at a former waste solvent tank storage area.     A building demolition project and a small drum removal also is required.     The entire cleanup will cost about $10.9 million, most of which (about $6 million) will be required for the groundwater cleanup. Design work is expected to begin in 1997.     Contact: Charles Root, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; David Garrison, PRP attorney, 610-293-4975.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Nature to clean up Chevron g.w.     EPA proposed natural attenuation and monitoring for pesticide-contaminated groundwater at the Chevron Chemical Co. site in Orlando, Fla., where a ROD should be signed this spring.     The plan contains a contingency for a barrier wall and air sparging if contamination levels do not decrease quickly enough. Samples will be taken quarterly to see if levels of xylene and alpha-BHC are dropping by 10% to 15%.     If levels do not decrease, a permeable filter wall will be used with limited air sparging or a hydraulic containment system. Monitoring is expected to last eight to ten years.     The proposed plan is expected to cost $247,700 if natural attenuation works. The contingency will cost about $1.3 million.     Chevron completed two removal actions to address soil contamination at the site. In 1991, the company removed 18,000 tons of pesticide-contaminated soil at the plant property, and in 1994 230 tons of soil were removed from an adjacent trailer park.     A pesticide formation plant operated at the site between 1950 and 1976. The contaminants of concern were chlordane, DDT, parathion and petroleum hydrocarbons.       Contact: Randy Bryant, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, ext. 6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the construction of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the Vineland Chemical Co. Inc. NPL site in Vineland, N.J.     Under the September 1989 ROD, about a dozen wells will be needed to extract contaminated groundwater at a rate of about two million gallons per day. Metals precipitation will be the primary treatment, and treated groundwater will be reinjected back into the aquifer as much as possible and/or discharged to a nearby river.       The cleanup is estimated at $34 million, including operation and maintenance costs.     Arsenic is the primary contaminant of concern.     The Army Corps of Engineers' Kansas City Dist. is handling the design for EPA and will solicit the construction bids. After a contract award, management of the cleanup will be deferred to the Corps' Philadelphia Dist.      Malcolm Pirnie Inc.'s White Plains, N.Y., office is designing the remedy under contract with the Corps. The design now stands at about 65% complete. Construction bids are scheduled to go out in May or June and will be advertised in the Commerce Business Daily, EPA said.Soil cleanup takes back burner     The cleanup of about 126,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil will be addressed after the groundwater cleanup, which EPA decided to make a priority to halt the off-site migration of arsenic.     The ROD called for the ex-situ soil flushing of about 126,000 cubic yards of arsenic-contaminated soil. But last spring design work for a soil washing cleanup was put on hold at about the 65% stage so other potentially more cost-effective technologies could be evaluated (Superfund Week 4/7/95).     EPA treatability studies showed ex-situ soil washing will be more effective than soil flushing. Malcolm Pirnie did bench-scale column leaching tests on soil flushing and determined that due to chemical properties in the soil, flushing will not achieve the agency's surface cleanup goal of 20 parts per million (ppm) for arsenic in the top two feet of soil. The subsurface cleanup goal is 120 ppm.      Therefore the plan was to excavate the soil and run it through a portable soil washing agitator, or hydroclone, to break the weak ferrous oxide bond of arsenic on soil particles and have the arsenic come off in the rinse water. But this would require much more money than the agency expected when the ROD was signed. The ROD estimated the soil and groundwater cleanups at $66 million.     EPA will make a soil cleanup decision after the groundwater is addressed.     The ROD also calls for the soil washing of contaminated river sediments. That cleanup also will take place after the groundwater is remediated.     Arsenic salts were stored in open piles and in chicken coops at the 20-acre herbicide plant site at 1611 W. Wheat Rd. in Cumberland County. Untreated process wastes were discharged into lagoons. About 38 miles of watershed was contaminated with arsenic. The site made the NPL in September 1984.     Contact: Matthew Westgate, EPA project manager, 212-637-4422; John Bartholomeo, Corps project manager, Philadelphia Dist., 215-656-6927; Peter Latimer, New Jersey Dept. of Environmental Protection, 609-984-2990; Tom Simmons, Corps project manager, Kansas City Dist., 816-426-2296.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer     EPA is expected to solicit bids this summer for the construction of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the Ottati & Goss/Great Lakes Container Corp. NPL site in Kingston, N.H., pending resolution of the Superfund budget.     Another issue to be resolved before any bids are solicited is whether to pump-and-treat groundwater below a wetlands area at the site.     Arthur D. Little Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., is designing the cleanup as EPA's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor. The 90% design was reached in October 1995 but has since been stalled due to the budget and wetlands issues.     The January 1987 ROD called for the installation of extraction wells in the wetlands area, but EPA's hopes a planned source soil cleanup will allow for the natural attenuation of groundwater there.     Additional soil and sediment sampling was completed last month, and the agency expects to make a determination on the wetlands issue by mid-February. Contaminated wetlands sediments also need to be addressed, and EPA indicated it wants to synchronize a sediment cleanup with any installation of groundwater extraction wells to avoid having to disturb the wetlands more than once.     In any case, wells will be needed in the plant site area. Design of the cleanup is scheduled to be completed late this spring. The ROD estimates the remedy at between $4 million and $6 million.     The overburden aquifer is contaminated with volatile organic compounds and metals. The plume starts about 30 feet below the surface and stretches some 800 feet, flowing west to east. Although the plume has migrated off-site, contamination has diluted and the migration of contaminants has leveled off.     After treatment, groundwater will be reinjected into the overburden aquifer via recharge trenching. A leach field similar to that of a septic system will be used.Innovative soil technology still needed     Between 10,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil need to be addressed. The ROD originally called for the incineration of all contaminated soil and sediment, but the burn was shelved last spring due to community opposition (Superfund Week 4/21/95).      At about that time EPA indicated it was open to any technology that treats PCBs and volatile organics in soil. No technology has been selected, however, and the agency said it is still open to proposals. Depending on the technology eventually chosen, treatability tests might be needed.     EPA repeatedly has pulled back on incineration plans at Superfund sites around the nation, but generally appears willing to go with thermal desorption.     Contact: Richard Goehlert, EPA project manager, 617-573-5742; Dave Langseth, Arthur D. Little project manager, 617-498-5878.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way     EPA has begun preliminary negotiations with PRPs for a cap, constructed wetlands and french drain cleanup at the Buckeye Reclamation NPL site in St. Clairsville, Ohio, where the PRPs want to make some changes to the design.     Neither EPA or a PRP representative would elaborate on the potential changes.      Under the $48.6 million August 1991 ROD, a solid waste cap is needed to cover a 66-acre waste disposal area. The cap will need to have a permeability of no less than 10 -7 centimeters/second and will consist of topsoil, a drainage layer, two feet of clay and a grading layer. No liner will be needed.     The wetlands will have curves to slow the flow of water through them. Cattails will be planted on a compost carpet and an underlying plastic liner to keep contaminated water from seeping below ground.     Environmental Strategies Corp. of Pittsburgh and Baker & Associates of Corapolis, Pa., designed the remedy for about 15 PRPs on the Buckeye Steering Committee. The steering committee is headed by Consol Inc., a Pittsburgh-based coal mining company. Most of the PRPs were hazardous waste generators, including a number of steel makers.     Volatile organic compounds and heavy metals are the prime contaminants of concern.     The design estimates the cleanup at only about $21 million, but EPA said the design did not address some aspects of the cleanup, such as groundwater monitoring.     Construction of the remedy was scheduled to begin this spring or summer but EPA indicated the work is not likely to get under way this construction season.     The site was used for the disposal of coal mine spoils. In 1971 the Ohio Dept. of Health licensed the site as a sanitary landfill. Between 1976 and 1979, the site also received industrial wastes including sludges and liquids. Industrial and asbestos wastes were dumped in the waste disposal area, where high levels of volatiles and heavy metals have been detected. The site made the NPL in September 1983.     Contact: Debbie Siebers, EPA project manager, 312-353-9299; George Gleich, PRP coordinator and Consol Inc.'s director of environmental services, 412-831-4528; Mike Berman, EPA attorney, 312-886-6837.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Raymark cap construction subs needed     Design is under way for a cap, gas collection and non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) cleanup at the Raymark Industries Inc. NPL site in Stratford, Conn., where subcontractors will be needed as construction of the remedy nears this spring.     Foster Wheeler Environmental Corp. is doing the design under a Total Environmental Restoration Contract (TERC) with the Army Corps of Engineers. The Corps is managing the $60 million cleanup for EPA.     Foster Wheeler will construct the cap under the TERC, but subcontractors will be needed to install NAPL extraction wells and to provide capping materials and site stabilization.     The cap will cover 33 acres at a capital cost of about $25 million. The cover will consist of a one-foot sand layer with perforated piping to vent gas, a geosynthetic clay liner, a flexible membrane liner, a geonet drainage layer and some select fill. Gas will be treated on-site in two treatment buildings. Cap construction should be complete by September.     Bids for six- to eight-inch extraction wells screened at various depths likely will be solicited in March. The NAPL will be collected in tanks and taken off-site for treatment. The number of NAPL extraction wells needed has yet to be determined.     Also still to be determined is the stabilization technology for the landfill. The Corps is considering pilings, surcharging peat and deep dynamic compaction and is expected to make a determination by the end of this month. Stabilization work could cost up to $5 million.      The cleanup was outlined in a July 1995 ROD.           The cleanup of 37 residential properties was completed in September, and the wastes were stored on-site. About 100,000 cubic yards of contaminated material from the residential cleanup needs to be treated to reduce moisture before it is placed under the cap (Superfund Week 7/21/95).      Foster Wheeler is about one-third done with the demolition of buildings at the 15-acre site. That work is scheduled for completion in March.     Raymark Industries Inc. manufactured asbestos-based products at the site and used PCB- and heavy metals-laden waste as yard fill throughout the town.     Contact: Michael Hill, EPA project manager, 617-573-9653; Robert Hunt, Corps project manager, 617-647-8893; Mike Jasinski, EPA on-scene coordinator, 617-573-5786; Rick Gleason, Foster Wheeler project manager, 617-457-8200.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996American Creosote design underway     EPA has begun design of a dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) recovery system at the American Creosote Works (Pensacola Pit) NPL site in Pensacola, Fla.      The 1994 ROD called for enhanced DNAPL recovery via water injection, but preliminary groundwater design studies determined direct pumping was the most effective treatment. About 2 million gallons of DNAPL need to be addressed. The ROD estimated the remedy at $5.8 million.           The ROD also called for groundwater treatment via in-situ and ex-situ biological treatment, but EPA is expected to amend the ROD to allow scrapping biological treatment if the discharged groundwater meets alternative concentration limits. Groundwater will be surface discharged and monitored.      Bechtel Environmental is working on the fund-lead design, which is due late this spring. EPA does not yet have funds to do the work.     For the source control operable unit, EPA is developing an amendment to a 1989 ROD, which selected biological treatment for 100,000 cubic yards of surface soil and sediment.     Treatability studies indicated biological treatment was not effective on PAHs, and EPA likely will propose thermal desorption as an alternative. Along with PAHs, the soil and sediment also have PCP and dioxin.     A creosote plant operated at the 18-acre site from 1902 to 1981. Process wastewater was discharged into two unlined, on-surface impoundments. Under an emergency cleanup in 1983, EPA dewatered the two ponds, treated the water with coagulation and filtration and discharged treated water to the city sewer system.     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-2543, ext. 6263.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Lexington cap to get summer bid     Design is complete for a landfill cap at the Lexington County Landfill Area NPL site in Cayce, S.C., and the county is expected to solicit bids for construction of the remedy this summer.     Lexington County agreed to pay for the cleanup, which is estimated at $3.5 million in capital costs. Bids will go out once the county completes its fiscal year 1997 (which begins in July) budget.     The 20- to 30-acre cap will consist of 18 inches of cover material -- six inches of shredded tires and 12 inches of soil. Also, one portion of the landfill needs to be relocated and some garbage removal services will be needed.     An existing gas recovery system not now in use might be converted to a passive methane gas collection system.     The design was completed by G.N. Richardson of Raleigh, N.C.     Two groundwater extraction wells have been installed at the site and will be used to treat about 25,000 gallons of water per day. Groundwater will be shipped to either a publicly owned treatment plant or used for irrigation.      Contact: John Fechtel, Lexington County director of public works, 803-359-8201; Terry Tanner, EPA project manager, 404-347-7791.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal     CH2M Hill's Milwaukee office is expected to solicit bids next month from a pool of 16 pre-qualified contractors for the removal of lead-contaminated soil at the Arrowhead Refinery NPL site near Duluth, Minn.      About 27,000 cubic yards of visually-contaminated soil,  sediment and buried refuse will be excavated and taken off-site for disposal.     EPA had expected to bid out the work last year, but the project was stalled because of budget cuts (Superfund Week 8/25/95).     In November 1995, EPA approved $3 million in fund money to clean up the site. Another $2.39 million left over from previous site cleanup work will be used for the project.      A contract will be awarded in April and the work should be completed this summer. The work originally was estimated at between $4 million and $8 million.     The Arrowhead Remedial Action Group has nearly completed the cleanup of a sludge lagoon area. Demobilization is scheduled for February or March.     Contact: Ted Smith, EPA project manager, 312-353-6571; Beth Aschinger, state project manager, 612-282-2383; Bill Hubbard, CH2M Hill, 414-272-1052.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring     EPA has gone ahead with the design of a capping and groundwater containment cleanup at the NL Industries/Taracorp NPL site in Granite City, Ill., as PRP negotiations continue.     Woodward Clyde Consultants is designing the remedy for EPA. Design work should be completed this spring.     The cleanup will include the installation of a series of on-site extraction wells to contain metals-contaminated groundwater. Groundwater will be treated, if necessary, and discharged to a local sewer system.      Additional monitoring wells would be installed downgradient from the existing wells, where high lead or cadmium levels have been found. Additional monitoring wells would be installed in the remote fill areas, also.     The groundwater fix will cost about $3 million and take between two and four months to implement.     EPA also considered installing a slurry wall on the perimeter of the main industrial area to prevent off-site groundwater migration, but that would cost more than $18 million.     Groundwater monitoring to detect any off-site migration will also be required, along with long-term air monitoring.     No groundwater contamination had been identified when the ROD was signed (Superfund Week 10/21/94). But additional sampling in late 1992 confirmed site groundwater to be contaminated with lead.     The 1990 ROD also requires the excavation of a slag pile and combining it with the main Taracorp pile. Soil from the main industrial area with lead concentrations above 1,000 parts per million and any soil containing hard rubber battery casings will be excavated and added to the new lined section of the main Taracorp pile.      The slag will then be covered with a multi-layer cap. A three-foot layer of compacted clay would be used as a liner for the cap. The excavated area will be backfilled and topped with sod or asphalt.     The source removal will cost about $4.8 million and take nine to 15 months to conduct.     Under criticism from town residents and officials for proposing to dispose of contaminated materials on an existing slag pile near City Hall, EPA changed the ROD in 1993 and 1994.     The agency also considered excavating the slag and sending it to an off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility, but that would have cost more than $64 million. Also considered was building a landfill on-site to dispose of the slag, but that option would have cost about $29 million.     Meanwhile, cleanups at remote fill residential areas have nearly been completed. Fill containing hard rubber battery casings is being excavated and segregated into hazardous and non-hazardous groups. Hazardous materials are being stabilized and disposed at an off-site landfill. Non-hazardous materials are being taken directly to an off-site landfill. The excavated areas will be backfilled with soil or clean fill and capped. Contaminated fill in driveways or alleys is being capped with asphalt.      That work will end up costing between $1.3 and $1.4 million.     Contact: Brad Bradley, EPA project manager, 312-886-4742; Dennis Reis, PRP attorney at Sidley & Austin in Chicago, 312-853-7000.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed      A second round of RI sampling is set to begin this month at the Escambia Wood Treating Co. NPL site in Pensacola, Fla., where EPA is considering permanently relocating nearby residents as part of an interim action.     EPA is evaluating relocation options for 300 households with contaminated soil. The agency might propose a relocation plan this spring. Four areas are being targeted as part of a fast track relocation investigation. Permanent relocation of all the residents has been estimated at $23 million.     However, EPA does not have funding for the relocation or any additional remedial action, so any cleanup work might be put on hold until fiscal year 1997.     Meanwhile, a site-wide RI/FS, which began in November, is continuing to determine the nature and extent of soil and groundwater contamination. Thermal treatment and off-site disposal options will be considered.Alternatives to soil burn needed     Contaminants of concern include PCP, creosote, PAHs, dioxin and arsenic.      Also, a pile of 250,000 cubic yards of dioxin-contaminated soil, which was stockpiled during a removal in the early 1990s, needs to be investigated. The stockpile has the worst kind of dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD) at levels as high as 12,000 parts per million. Creosote has been detected in the thousands of parts per million range.      The soil was excavated to stop leaching to groundwater, but no additional action was taken after residents objected to incineration of the stockpile in 1992 (Superfund Week 10/2/92). EPA estimated the cost of incineration at $40 million in 1994.     Dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contamination is suspected in a quarter-mile plume that runs from the site to the downgradient Agrico NPL site.     The RI/FS should be complete by February 1997. CDM Federal Programs Corp. is doing the studies as an EPA Region 4 Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor (Superfund Week 1/27/95).     The 26-acre site is located on the north edge of the Pensacola city limits and is the target of an environmental  justice initiative because a minority neighborhood is on the north side.     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, ext. 6263.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work     Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-N.J., entered a bill in the House last month to give the Army Corps of Engineers contract oversight of all fund-financed Superfund cleanups.     A staffer for Frelinghuysen said the bill has been referred to the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, which is expected to take up the bill shortly after Congress returns on Jan. 22. Frelinghuysen is a member of the Appropriations energy and water development subcommittee, which has heavy oversight of the Corps. He is also a member of the VA-HUD and independent agencies subcommittee, under which CERCLA is funded.     Once EPA selects a remedy at an NPL site, it tasks the Corps to manage the cleanup about 35% of the time. Frelinghuysen wants that percentage upped to 100%, saying giving the Corps management responsibility will "speed cleanups, reduce overhead, and provide better management of Superfund cleanups."Focus is on Corps, EPA strengths     "My bill would mandate that all contracting oversight of site cleanups under the Superfund program be managed by [the Corps]," Frelinghuysen said. He added it will "simply let EPA do what it does best, which is scientific analysis and site characterization. Once a remedy is selected, it then brings in [the Corps] to do what they do best, which is to manage large, complex construction projects."     The House freshman, who served 13 years in the state legislature, represents New Jersey's 11th district, which has 13 Superfund sites -- more than any other congressional district in the nation.     H.R. 2801, the Site Clean-up Improvement and Acceleration Act of 1995, amends Section 104 of CERCLA.     The bill says: "Except in the case of remedial actions carried out by a state or political subdivision ..., contract administration of awarded contracts for design and construction associated with fund-lead remedial actions commenced ... after the date of enactment ... shall be performed by [the Corps.]"     However, any such changes to the program have to make it through the House environment subcommittee, which has jurisdiction over Superfund. Rep. Mike Oxley, R-Ohio, who chairs the subcommittee, previously has said he wants to minimize fund-lead cleanup projects and the Corps' role in Superfund (Superfund Week 3/31/95).Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap     EPA proposed a $1.7 million to $2.3 million soil stabilization and capping project as part of a removal action at the Spokane Junkyard/Associated Properties NPL site in Spokane, Wash.     Under the recommended alternative, all soil above residential cleanup levels (400 parts per million for lead, 1 ppm for PCBs) will be excavated and consolidated on the Spokane Metals property.      Soil above 5,000 ppm lead will be treated with chemical stabilization. The stabilized soil will be consolidated with soil with contamination levels between 400 and 5,000 ppm, which will not be treated, and capped with a geomembrane and soil cover.     The 5,000 ppm standard will require that only about half as much material be stabilized as would be using the industrial lead level of 1,000 ppm.     Other options EPA is considering include excavation and off-site disposal of all contaminated soil; off-site disposal of soil above industrial levels and capping of soil above residential levels; and capping of all soil above residential levels. The most expensive option, at between $6.8 million and $8.1 million, is off-site disposal of all soil above residential cleanup levels.     Lead is found in surface soil on most of the site and PCBs are found sporadically in surface soil. The site has been zoned for residential use with the exception of the former Spokane Metals property. Between 8,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil will need to be addressed.     EPA will make a decision on cleanup options after the comment period closes Feb. 16.     The PRPs agreed to design the removal but another settlement will be needed for construction of the project.     The PRPs at the site, Kaiser Aluminum, Washington Water Power, and Inland Power and Light submitted an EE/CA for the removal in December 1995 (Superfund Week 12/8/95). Alta Geosciences of Battelle, Wash., did the EE/CA.     The 16-acre site is located in a light commercial and residential area. Asbestos and drums of hazardous wastes were removed and taken to an approved hazardous waste facility in 1987.     Contact: Kevin Rochlin, EPA project manager, 206-553-2106; Charles (Bud) Preston, Kaiser Aluminum, 509-468-5402.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Correction     A brief on the Boerke site in Wisconsin in the Jan. 12 edition of Superfund Week incorrectly stated when the site's dye manufacturing plant closed. The plant closed in 1938.     Also, a story in the Dec. 22 issue incorrectly stated who is doing a cleanup design at the Cleveland Mill site in New Mexico. Adrian Brown Consultants' Salt Lake City office is handling all of the design work.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill     EPA has signed a ROD amendment that calls for construction of a near-shore fill and solidification of soil and sediments at the Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor NPL site in Bainbridge Island, Wash.     Under the amendment, hot spot sediments will be placed in a confined disposal facility (CDF) and capped with clean material and asphalt. The one-acre fill will be built adjacent to the former shipyard. EPA proposed the change in September (Superfund Week 9/29/95).     Under the 1992 ROD, heavy metal hot spot soil and sediments were to be disposed in a hazardous waste or municipal landfill.      The amendment came largely in response to community concerns that a private boatyard would be forced to leave the harbor under the original cleanup plan. The fill will create nearly one acre of additional land that the Washington State Dept. of Transportation  (WSDOT) has committed to lease for private water operations.      A drainage system will be needed to prevent surface and groundwater from leaching into the harbor.      Also, a habitat migration plan will be needed. The outer walls of the CDF will be enhanced with gravel to provided a favorable habitat for barnacles and mussels.     The primary contaminants at the site are PAHs and mercury.     Design efforts begun by PRPs PACCAR Inc. and WSDOT will resume now that EPA has agreed to the near-shore fill. Hart-Crowser Inc. is designing the cleanup for the PRPs and has submitted the 35% design. A final design should be complete early this summer, at which time EPA will begin negotiations with the PRPs for construction of the cleanup. In addition to PACCAR and WSDOT, the Washington Dept. of Natural Resources and the U.S. Dept. of Defense are potentially liable parties. The cleanup will cost about $4 million.     Also at the Wyckoff site, building demolition is expected to be completed early in the spring. EPA recently replaced the wells in a groundwater pump-and-treatment system that has been operating since 1990. The system uses physical separation of oil from the water, biological treatment and carbon adsorption to treat about 100 gallons per minute.     CH2M Hill is doing an RI/FS at the facility, which should be completed sometime this year.       The design of an interim groundwater barrier wall to prevent water from reaching the harbor, prescribed in a 1994 ROD, is awaiting funding in addition to the RI results.     Contact: Elly Hale, EPA project manager, 206-553-1215; Larry Sims, PACCAR Inc. project manager, 206-453-4901; Rick Singer, WSDOT, 360-705-7402.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Senate mulls liability deal     Senate Republicans soon could take up a reauthorization proposal freeing PRPs at multi-party sites from the Superfund liability net.     Sources say GOP staff members have recommended the measure as the one for which the most broad-based support could be garnered. The move comes light of the disastrous response to other recently proposed liability exemptions such as the retroactive liability discount (RLD) and tax credits for PRPs. Sources said neither of those provisions are likely to be in a reauthorization bill.   Included in a House proposal issued last fall was a provision for liability shielding at municipal landfill NPL sites (Superfund Week 9/29/95), an idea that has drawn less fiery criticism and is viewed by many as the best compromise.      The move reportedly eliminates about 250 sites from the Superfund liability scheme.     However, even if an agreement can be reached on the multi-party liability exemption, issues such as clearly defining "multi-party sites" and setting a cut-off date for the repeal will remain to be worked out. Sources said the Senate plan most likely will include municipal landfills and other sites at which there are dozens or hundreds of small contributors and have 1981 as the cut-off date.     House leaders are batting around similar liability exemptions (Superfund Week 1/5).Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding     All thirteen New Jersey representatives have signed a letter asking House Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Livingston, R-La., to include Superfund in a targeted appropriations bill and restore Superfund to full 1995 funding.     Under the continuing resolution, EPA is operating at 75% of its 1995 budget, a level the letter calls "unacceptable." New Jersey has 114 Superfund sites, more than any other state.     The delegation calls for Superfund to be included in targeted appropriations bills that will fund selected programs for fiscal 1996 in the absence of a budget agreement.     "The disarray that the Superfund program has been put through in recent weeks, as a direct result of the EPA's appropriations not having been enacted yet, threatens the program's underlying integrity and credibility," the letter stated.     Rep. Marge Roukema, R-N.J., leading the New Jersey move said: "The 104th Congress must take prompt action to remedy the situation by approving legislation that President Clinton will sign into law that provides the EPA with the needed funds."Back to Headline List WT02-B37-29IA086-000616-B018-189http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev42.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003548 text/html 77361HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:33:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:08 GMTContent-length: 77174Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev42.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT (51 words) CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES (162 words) U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL (673 words) CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER (1091 words) EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN CANCER (660 words) ELECTRIC VEHICLES CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES (834 words) EMISSIONS TRADING THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING (612 words) NO (SUBSCRIPT) X CONTROL KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FOR NOX (472 words) SO2 ALLOWANCE OUTLOOK SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS (191 words) B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK (149 words) STATE REGULATION CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS (450 words) PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THAN EPA'S (633 words) ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSED CANCER (471 words) RENEWABLES ISSUES TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION (401 words) RENEWABLE ISSUES MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES (226 words) IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR (253 words) HYDROPOWER STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL (564 words) LEGISLATION WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FOR FARMERS (390 words) GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN (446 words) INTERNATIONAL CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96 (810 words) BRIEFS TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE (177 words) N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES (143 words) PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING (189 words) VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE (117 words) EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED (140 words) CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORTUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORTSO2 Allowance Market Prices*Phase One - $105 - 107/tonPhase Two - $100 - 102/ton* Spot sales prices effective since the week of Dec. 18, 1995. Prices basedon occasional phone surveys with allowance traders, brokers and industryexperts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES      Cantor Fitzgerald EBS SO2 Allowance Prices                 (dollars/ton)                                        MonthlyMonth of        Bids    Offers  Trades  Price IndexDecember        104.00  111.50  111.12  108.87November        108.33  119.50  122.85  116.89October         121.85  126.33  122.25  123.48September       124.00  127.00  126.50  125.83August          126.00  133.10  129.50  129.53July            128.00  132.38  130.11  130.16June            129.00  133.58  131.75  131.44May             129.83  135.50  129.25  131.53April           128.75  137.92  129.53  132.07March           130.15  135.33  134.13  133.21February        133.00  137.00  134.30  134.77January         135.07  140.33  137.27  137.56Bids and offers are weighted averages of the highest and lowest spotprices, respectively, for 1,500 allowances. Trades are weighted average ofactual trade prices determined from consummated trades and settling withinsix months. Larger trades weighted on a maximum of 1,500 allowances;smaller trades weighted normally. Monthly Price Index is average of bids,offers and trades. All values based on trading period beginning with 25thday of previous month and ending with 24th day of month MPI is published.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW ISUNCONSTITUTIONAL   The 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals has affirmed a lower court rulingthat struck down portions of an Indiana law that encourages the state'selectric utilities to find ways to burn high-sulfur coal and still complywith the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.   In a Dec. 22 ruling (Case No. 95-2065), the appeals court said parts ofthe 1991 law, passed in response to the Clean Air Act and stronglysupported by an Indiana high-sulfur coal industry that feared an influx oflow-sulfur Western coal, violate the Interstate Commerce Clause of theConstitution and therefore are unconstitutional.   Under the Indiana Environmental Compliance Plan Act (ECPA), the stateUtility Regulatory Commission can pre-approve a utility's Clean Air Actcompliance plan, but only if several criteria are met. One of the keyprovisions is whether the utility will continue or increase its use ofIndiana high-sulfur coal.   In challenging the legality of the law, the Alliance for Clean Coal(ACC), a coalition of Western coal producers and railroads, has argued thatsuch a provision amounts to illegal protectionism and violates theConstitution.   Last March, U.S. District Judge John Tinder found that portions of theIndiana law violate the Interstate Commerce Clause and should beinvalidated (UER, 14 April '95, 3).   The appeals court concurred, saying a utility compliance plan that has anegative impact on Indiana coal is ``subject to continuing annualsurveillance'' by the URC under the Indiana law.   As a result, those portions of the ECPA ``discriminate againstinterstate commerce based solely upon geographic origin...the clear intentof the statute is to benefit Indiana coal at the expense of Western coal,''the appeals court said.   The fact that the Indiana law ``merely encourages'' utilities to usehigh-sulfur coal does not make it ``any less discriminatory,'' the appealscourt said. The result, the court added, is ``discriminatory state actionthat is forbidden by the Commerce Clause.''   Concluded the court: ``Despite the fact that low-sulfur Western coal maybe a more efficient compliance option, the ECPA clearly attempts to preventIndiana electrical utilities from switching to low-sulfur coal. Thisamounts to discriminatory state action that is forbidden by the CommerceClause. The defendants have not discharged their burden of demonstratingthat the statute serves a legitimate and compelling interest unrelated toeconomic protectionism.''   A spokesman for the Indiana Coal Council, a major supporter of theIndiana law, said he was not surprised by the ruling. Indiana is notexpected to appeal the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court.   Terry O'Connor, vice president of government relations for ARCO Coal, anACC member, said the group expects to win a similar lawsuit it filed latelast year in Ohio (UER, 29 Sept '95, 1).   Asked what the ACC hopes to gain by the Indiana victory, O'Connor saidthe rewards would not be immediate. ``We recognize that utilities in thevarious Midwestern states have already made their Phase-One [compliance]decisions'' under the acid rain rules, he said.   However, ``to the extent that those decisions may have been skewed bythe Indiana protectionist law, we're hopeful that those utilities will nowfeel free to revisit those fuel decisions and look westward to inexpensive,low-sulfur coal.''   In the long run, the ACC hopes to pick up additional business whenMidwest utilities finalize Phase-Two compliance plans. ``With this decisionnow hopefully behind us, we are optimistic that as Illinois, Indiana andOhio utilities prepare Phase-Two compliance plans for submission [toregulatory agencies] in the next year or so, they will look favorably onWestern coal as a viable option,'' O'Connor said.   A spokeswoman for PSI Energy, which is building a Phase-One scrubber atits 3,149-MW Gibson plant near Princeton, Ind., doubted the appeals courtruling would have much impact on her company.   ``Since we didn't rely on the [ECPA] for Phase One, the ruling probablywon't have a great effect on PSI for Phase-Two plans,'' she said. ``But itmight eliminate some steps in the future that we might have had to gothrough.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER   The California Public Utilities Commission has decided to conduct anenvironmental impact report to assess potential environmental damage fromthe move to a competitive electric power industry.   In issuing its final electric restructuring order last month, the PUCagreed to conduct an EIR under the California Environmental Quality Act.``The magnitude of our proposed electric policy favors reviewing thepossible environmental impacts of a new industry structure,'' the PUCstated.   The PUC responded to a motion filed by the Natural Resources DefenseCouncil in June 1994 for determining whether CEQA applied to thecommission's electric restructuring proceeding. The PUC noted that partiesdisagreed whether electric restructuring fit within the CEQA definition ofa project and thus triggered the CEQA requirements for an EIR.   While the California Supreme Court has interpreted CEQA's definition ofa project as not requiring a finding of a direct physical effect on theenvironment, the courts have not clarified whether policy actions withoutdirect environmental effects are CEQA projects. ``We cannot make a findingat this time about whether electric restructuring constitutes a CEQAproject,'' the PUC conceded. ``However, we can anticipate that there is noharm, and abundant good, in moving forth with analysis under CEQA at thistime.'' The commission cautioned that delaying the preparation of an EIRcould severely hamper restructuring efforts, which it deemed vital to thestate's economy.   In its restructuring order, the PUC adopted president Daniel Fessler'sproposal to create simultaneously an independent system operator to controltransmission, a wholesale power exchange and direct access phased-in overfive years beginning Jan. 1, 1998.   The PUC established a five-year transition period to a competitiveindustry, with a non-bypassable competitive transition charge, or CTC, onall retail customers to ensure utilities full recovery of their strandedinvestments by 2005.   The PUC determined that preparation of an EIR rather than a negativedeclaration was necessary because electric restructuring may potentiallyimpact the environment in several ways. The PUC cited NRDC's concern thatelectric restructuring may reduce energy efficiency incentives and restorethe linkage between utilities' profits and sales volumes, which have beendecoupled by the Electric Revenue Adjustment Mechanism.   The PUC also cited Pacific Gas and Electric's observation that electricrestructuring may result in shifts in energy production, resulting in adifferent mix of energy resources with a potential for creatingenvironmental impacts.   The PUC directed its commission advisory compliance division within 100days to issue a notice of preparation of an EIR and retain the services ofan environmental consultant to be approved by the commission. Theconsultant will work with the commission to prepare an EIR that willanalyze the environmental impacts of electric restructuring, compareenvironmental effects of alternative policies and identify mitigationmeasures for potential significant impacts.   Given the broad restructuring policy, the EIR will contain a moregeneral discussion of impacts, alternatives and migitations than atraditional site-specific environmental assessment, the PUC noted. Hence,it will attempt to anticipate future scenarios that may develop under thecommission's restructuring policy.   Moreover, the EIR may incorporate or refer to the environmental impactstatement the the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is preparing underthe National Environmental Policy Act for its mega-notice of proposedrulemaking on open access, the PUC said.   The PUC also committed itself to maintaining the state's resourcediversity and developing policies that promote development of new renewableenergy resources in a restructured electric services industry. ``Wecontinue to believe that a minimum renewables purchase requirement is thebest approach to meet our resource diversity goals,'' the PUC said.   However, the commission acknowledged that it had not determined whetherthe renewables requirement should be imposed on retail suppliers orgenerators. Accordingly, the PUC delayed consideration of this questionuntil its implementation phase and called upon its working group to providefurther guidance.   The PUC stated its preference for setting the renewables purchaserequirement at the same level for all electric utilities statewide, but itacknowledged that a transitional strategy may be appropriate given theutilities' current resource portfolios.   To provide flexibility in meeting the renewables requirement, renewables``credits'' would be tradable similar to pollution credits under thefederal Clean Air Act Amendments and the South Coast Air Quality ManagementDistrict's Regional Clean Air Incentives Market.   The PUC set a target date of January 1998 for establishing minimumrenewables levels continuing through 2000, at which time the commissionwould review the requirement for possible modification. As with the CleanAir Act and state air quality permit programs, the PUC plans to establish a``meaningful penalty'' for noncompliance.   This market-based approach would eliminate the need for a surcharge tofund renewables development by allowing buyers and sellers to secure thebest bargains on renewables and include the costs in their prices, the PUCsaid.   By contrast, establishing a surcharge to fund renewables developmentwould require the PUC to administer and disperse the funds to ensurecompliance. However, after its disastrous experience with the ill-fatedBiennial Resource Planning Update independent power auction, the commissionstressed that it was extremely reluctant to do so.   ``The minimum renewables requirement approach will allow the market toprovide the most cost-effective renewable resources, without ourintervention,'' the PUC predicted. Moreover, allowing providers to traderenewables requirements could serve to minimize stranded costs fromqualifying facility contracts by providing new markets for QFs' power, thePUC said.   This approach would also likely stimulate research and development ofrenewables as existing renewables are replaced by new resources to meet theincreased demand for electricity, the commission predicted.   The PUC's renewables standard is being welcomed by officials at theAmerican Wind Energy Association, who with the Union of ConcernedScientists and others, helped sell the PUC on the idea.   ``There had been an expectation of a tax on generation, with therevenues used to support the renewables industry,'' AWEA executive directorRandall Swisher said. ``That is one way to go, but from our perspective astandard is less bureaucratic and more market oriented.''   Swisher said the minimum renewable capacity requirement should be placedon sellers, not generators, so that the state--not FERC--would haveoversight authority. The standard should be set at around 11.5% of totalcapacity, the current share of the California market provided byrenewables, Swisher said.   Sellers with no renewable capacity could purchase credits from anothercompany that owned renewables capacity or that had excess renewable energycredits, he said.   With a portfolio standard, ``you just set the minimum standard and sitback and let the market do the rest,'' Swisher said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAINCANCER   A new Electric Power Research Institute study that assessed research onworkplace electromagnetic fields has found that electrical workers areabout 10% to 20% more likely to develop brain cancer than other workers.   But because no clear relationship can be found between the amount ofexposure to EMFs and the level of risk, researchers cannot conclude thatEMFs cause brain cancer, the analysis said. The study found that ``theapparent lack of a clear pattern of exposure and risk substantiallydetracts from the hypothesis that measured magnetic fields in the workenvironment are responsible for the observed excess of risk.''   In other words, according to coauthor Dr. Patricia Buffler, who is deanof the University of California at Berkeley, School of Public Health,``there is something about employment in [the studied] occupations'' thatmay or may not have anything to do with EMFs. She argued that the observedassociation between work in electrical occupations, a broad category thatincludes electricians and power plant operators, and elevated cancer risklikely has more to do with limitations in the studies than any kind of tieto EMF exposure.   The study, published in the December issue of the Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, reexamined more than 50 previousstudies and pools the results of 29 of them for a new statistical analysis.The pooled data showed a slightly elevated risk of brain tumors (10-20%)for workers in the electrical occupations category, a result withsufficient statistical strength to be considered reliable. Higher riskswere seen for some more specific job categories and for one subtype ofbrain cancer, gliomas.   The authors, who in addition to Buffler included Dr. Leeka Kheifets ofEPRI, and Dr. Abdelmonem Afifi and Zhong Zhang of the University ofCalifornia at Los Angeles, School of Public Health, assessed their findingsagainst three possible hypotheses on EMFs and cancer.   First, they concluded that the analysis ``provides some evidence againstthe hypothesis of no association between occupational exposure to EMF andthe risk of cancer.'' On the second possibility--a small but pervasivecancer risk--they found ``some evidence to support the hypothesis.''The third possibility is that ``the true EMF effect is large'' but onlyimpacts individuals who are in some way predisposed to develop cancer orwho are exposed simultaneously to another factor. On this count, theresearchers concede that their study ``provides no clues that could help toidentify a circumstance or condition'' to explain such a risk.   Overall, the researchers found ``it is not possible to conclude that EMFis causally associated with the observed excess of brain cancer in workersemployed in electrical occupations.''   About one-third of the studies reviewed in the EPRI report wereconducted in the United States, another one-third in Scandinavia and theremainder in Canada, Australia, Great Britain, Germany and other countries.The earliest study was published in 1983, while the largest number ofstudies, six, appeared in 1991.   About half of the studies included follow-up before 1984 and werepublished before 1990. Study designs used by the investigators includedproportional mortality, case control analysis of death certificate data,case control and cohort studies.   The U.S. and other studies showed relative risk increases of 40% orhigher compared to those with no occupational exposures to EMFs. TheScandinavian studies, almost all of which were cohort studies based onincident risk, showed the lowest relative risks for brain cancer. Thereasons for the lower relative risk reported in the Scandinavian studies``are not exactly clear,'' the EPRI study said.   A 1994 study of Canadian and French electric utility workers showed adoubling of brain tumor risk by some measures, for example, but the resultwas not statistically significant (UER, 1 April '94, 1).   A large study of U.S. utility workers, funded by EPRI and completedearly last year, found a statistically significant increase in brain cancerrisk for those with the highest exposures (UER, 20 Jan '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES   Massachusetts Gov. William Weld (R) reaffirmed his commitment to thestate's zero-emission vehicle program, which includes a 2% electric vehiclesales mandate beginning in 1998, despite recent action by the CaliforniaAir Resources Board to drop its own EV sales mandate that would have begunin the same year.   Bowing to pressure from the auto industry, CARB Dec. 21 said it willlift the state's landmark mandate requiring auto makers to sell about22,000 EVs in California beginning in 1998. CARB directed its staff tofinalize a plan by March 1996 to lift the mandate requiring that 2% ofvehicles sold in California have zero emissions by 1998 and 5% by 2001.   The air board decided not to impose the mandate until 2003, at whichtime 10% of vehicles sold in California will have to be exhaust-free inorder to achieve a statewide reduction of 14 tons/day of nitrous oxide andhydrocarbons.   In the interim, auto makers must aim to sell up to 3,700 EVs in thesmog-laden Los Angeles and Sacramento basins during the first three yearsof the program--750 in 1998, 1,500 in 1999 and 1,500 in 2000. Based on automakers' reports, CARB estimated a statewide annual production of 5,000 EVsin 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 in 1998.   Massachusetts' EV plan is modeled closely on the California plan, andthat state has also faced tremendous pressure from automakers to drop itsminimum EV sales requirement.   But Weld said Dec. 22 he thought CARB made the wrong decision to weakenits program and noted ``that decision does not bind Massachusetts.''Edison Electric Institute director of electric transportation Rick Tempchincalled the CARB decision ``a significant mistake,'' adding that EVtechnology, consumer readiness and infrastructure are on track to launch EVsales in California in 1998.   ``What is missing is the political will to stand up to automakers, oilcompanies and others who insist that token EV rollouts will ensure thesuccess of this technology,'' Tempchin said.   CARB officials stressed that under the new plan, car makers must stillmeet air pollution reduction goals through production of cleaner cars withreduced exhaust, evaporative and refueling emissions.   The air board adopted the zero-emission vehicle rule in 1990 to reduceair pollution from passenger cars and light trucks. The mandate currentlyapplies to the seven largest auto manufacturers, with sales of more than35,000 vehicles a year in California. By 2003, all auto makers that sellmore than 3,000 vehicles a year in the state will have to comply with themandate.   The air board plans to hold a public hearing and vote on the revisedplan in March. However, CARB chairman John Dunlap said the air board hadreached consensus on lifting the mandate.   CARB directed its staff in November to devise an alternative proposalafter the Battery Technology Assessment Panel reported auto makers'conclusions that existing lead acid battery-powered EVs would have toolimited a sales demand to meet state pollution reduction goals (UER, 24 Nov'95, 1).   The air board received more than 200 comments to three staff proposals:1) a market-based approach; 2) changing the zero-emission vehicle mandatefor early years but maintaining the rules intact for later years; and 3)keeping the same basic format but reducing the 2% mandate for 1998.   CARB agreed with auto makers that advanced lithium and nickel-basedbattery technology for EVs--currently the only zero-emission vehicle--willnot be commercially viable until 2001. The auto industry contends thatexisting lead-acid batteries have limited range and are too costly, makingthem unattractive to consumers.   Forcing manufacturers to introduce unaffordable vehicles that aretechnologically unreliable would poison the fledgling EV market, CARB said.``If you see them sitting in storerooms and no one buys them it sends anegative message,'' said a CARB spokesman. ``No one wants to poison themarket.''   In the interim, automakers will be allowed to build only the number ofzero-emission vehicles they think they can sell, which manufacturersestimate at 2,000 to 3,000 in 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 a year after that,Martin said. The 2% mandate would have amounted to about 22,000 EVs.   Auto makers will be required to sign a memorandum of agreementcommitting to a ``Cal/Big 7 Technology Development Partnership,'' tocontinue research and development of advanced batteries and EVs.Manufacturers would be given a market incentive for early production ofexhaust-free and longer-range vehicles through 2003. The state ofCalifornia would purchase some EVs each year.   The revised mandate will not relieve auto makers from meeting their airpollution reduction requirements based on their percentage of total vehiclesales in California. However, CARB gave each vehicle manufacturerflexibility to design their own individual plan for meeting their emissionreduction requirements.   CARB directed its staff to prepare a proposal by March for meetingstatewide pollution reduction goals in lieu of the zero-emission vehiclemandate. ``There will be absolutely no loss of pollution reduction,''Martin stressed. ``They will individually be held accountable for them.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING   The sulfur dioxide emission allowance market ended the year with itssteepest monthly decline of the year, as prices nosedived in December,oddly enough, due to the presence of a buyer.   Bidding in a request for proposal from Illinois Power seeking 15,0001995 allowances for immediate delivery was ``very aggressive,'' said LyndaClemmons of Enron Capital and Trade Resources. IP passed up prices that``would have been leapt on'' three weeks earlier, said Carlton Bartels, adirector at Cantor Fitzgerald Environmental Brokerage Services. The winningbidder, which was named Dec. 18, 1995, was thought to have offered pricesin the range of $105-110/ton.   As a result, the Utility Environment Report SO2 Allowance Market Priceshave dropped to $105-$107/ton for Phase One and $100-102 for Phase Two (seebox, page 3). This is well below end-of-November prices of $119-121 forPhase One and $118-120 for Phase Two.   One observer noted that, with more than 3 million allowances out there,an enormous supply was ``chasing Illinois Power's demand for 15,000.''   Opinions varied, however, on the relative importance of an RFP the sizeof Illinois Power's. One player argued that trades of 15,000 are ``not allthat large'' anymore. Another countered that a straight-out purchase ofthat amount for the end of the year is still a ``pretty big deal.''   There were few factors that could explain the increased market activitythat has been seen in recent weeks. The end of the year was having, atmost, a psychological effect, some said. There was no indication thatutilities had decided that they needed additional allowances for 1995compliance.   The most common explanation was that buyers are being motivated byprices that are now ``just too good to pass up,'' and sellers may beworrying that prices will continue to fall. One player suggested thatsellers were already anticipating a negative impact on prices from theEPA's next auction in March.   Cantor Fitzgerald's market price index for Phase One allowances was$108.87 at the end of December 1995, down from $116.89 a month earlier.Similarly, Emissions Exchange of Denver moved its value for 1995 allowancesto $105 and for 2000 allowance to $100, also a sharp drop from November1995.   Attention now is focused on how much lower prices will go. The market is``pretty close to the bottom,'' Bartels argues. ``We are getting morefeedback from people who are saying that this is ridiculous, that they'renot going to sell at that price.''   While some pessimistic studies in the past have shown that allowanceswere worth less than they were trading for, Bartels noted that no reliablestudy has put their value below current prices.   Others see no evidence of the slide ending, however. ``Every seller whohas waited has done worse,'' said one player who declined to be named. The$100 mark is a weak psychological barrier that ``is not going to stop thedownward trend,'' he said, and the barrier will likely be breached wheneverthe next significant buyer comes along.   ``It is not clear what would provide support to the market at thispoint,'' said Bill Babcock, a consultant with Putnam, Hayes & Bartlett inCambridge, Mass. The marginal cost of producing these allowances is nearzero, he said, and demand for allowances for near-term use is almostnonexistent.   The partial government shutdown, meanwhile, was drawing complaints fromtraders. With the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency essentially closed,allowance transactions were not being processed. Contracts can still besigned, one trader noted, but deals cannot be completed. The greateruncertainty will come if the impasse drags on closer to the true-updeadline at the end of January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FORNOX   Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas) lined up on the side of natural gas in thatindustry's escalating battle with the coal industry over a proposal by theU.S. Environmental Protection Agency to establish a fuel-neutral new sourceperformance standard (NSPS) for nitrogen oxide emissions.   EPA is pondering a 0.15 lb./million Btu standard for NOx, a standardthat gas-fired power plants could achieve with relative ease but that manycoal-fired units would be hard-pressed to meet.   The coal industry has argued for a standard based on fuel types, whichthe industry said would allow coal to be competitive with gas.   But in a Dec. 21, 1995 letter to his congressional colleagues, Bartoncalled EPA's proposed standard ``welcome news and sound and equitableapproach'' to preventing additional NOx pollution from new sources.   ``Single standards would treat all fuels and technologies equally,''said Barton, who chairs the House Commerce Committee's oversight andinvestigations subcommittee. ``It will focus future industrial and utilityoutput in an efficient and competitive manner while minimizing the impacton our nation's environment..''   Last year, Barton hosted a number of hearings on Clean Air Act issuesand is heading a group of House Republicans expected to introduceamendments to the air statute sometime this spring.   Barton said a fuel-neutral standard ``will enable all combinations offuel (coal, oil, and natural gas) and technologies to effectively competefor new markets. Although reliable technology exists today, thiscompetition will spur the development of more efficient domestictechnologies that will allow operators to meet this standard even more costeffectively in the future.''Barton stressed that EPA should make the new standard apply only to futureplants and not to existing facilities.   ``While we support the fuel-neutral standard, we strongly urge theagency to apply the standard prospectively only,'' he said. ``This `new'standard should not apply to existing equipment. The shift to competitivefuel-neutral standards should not penalize anyone, only invigoratecompetition among suppliers for new boiler markets.''   If a full fledged battle breaks out over the issue, Barton will findhimself pitted against coal industry allies in the Wyoming and WestVirginia delegations, to name a few, who will try to pressure EPA to basethe new NSPS standard for NOx on fuel types.   Barton urged EPA to consider only relevant information, and notpolitics, in determining the form of the new standard.   ``[W]e encourage the agency to determine an appropriate numericalstandard based on a thorough consideration of all available and relevantinformation,'' Barton said. ``The Clean Air Act amendments define theagency's responsibility on this matter, and we trust the agency topromulgate a standard that meets those requirements.''   The new standard, required under a court-ordered schedule, is notexpected to be issued in draft form before September. A final rule is dueby November 1997.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS   The Sierra Club has petitioned the U.S. District Court at Denver to movemore expeditiously in assessing penalties against three utilities foralleged air pollution standards violations at the 446-MW Hayden GeneratingStation in northwest Colorado (UER, 18 Aug '95, 4).   The group asked the court, pending determination of a final ruling, toissue an injunction against the companies to stop ``excessive and illegal''emissions at the plant operated by Public Service of Colorado. PacifiCorpand Salt River Project also own interests in the Hayden facility.   Judge Lewis Babcock found last August, in response to a Sierra Clubcomplaint, that the plant had exceeded Clean Air Act emission standardsmore than 19,000 times in the past five years. The utilities are liable fora total of $493-million in fines. However, the court asked the parties tonegotiate a settlement to correct the excessive emissions.   In its latest filing in the case (No. CV-93-1749), the Sierra Club saidnegotiations with PS Colorado have broken down, and it requested the courtto issue an injunction within 60 days ordering the company to takecorrective action at once.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation has acquired the assets of JoyEnvironmental Technologies (JET) from its parent company, HarnischfegerIndustries, for an undisclosed amount. B&W, based in Barberton, Ohio,expects the acquisition to expand its pollution control work in the powerindustry.   JET, with offices in Houston and Malvern, Pa., specializes inenvironmental technologies used in the utility industry. Product lines thatB&W Power Generation will acquire from JET include acid mist precipitators,electrostatic precipitators, dry flue-gas desulfurization systems andbaghouses. In addition, Diamond Power Specialty, another B&W subsidiary inLancaster, Ohio, will obtain JET's ash handling system business.   B&W, which is a unit of McDermott International, already marketsenvironmental controls, along with steam generation equipment andengineering/construction services. The company also has a 50% stake in fourindependent power projects that produce 160 MW and is building projects inChina and Pakistan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS   Pacific Gas and Electric expects to save $150-million after negotiatingnew rules with three California air quality districts that provide lowcost, short-term solutions for reducing nitrogen oxide emissions at sixpower plants.   The company said by combining its NOx retrofit program with PG&E'sregular maintenance outages, the final NOx rules provide a ``more workablecompliance schedule through 2004.''   At issue, PG&E said, were local and state rules that ``effectivelymandated the use of costly selective catalytic reduction (SCR) technologyto achieve NOx emissions of 10 parts per million. By using front-end,low-NOx combustion systems (LNCs) the company can reduce emissions,previously ranging from 150 ppm to 300 ppm, to as low as 20 ppm to 30 ppm,while future improvements in technology could lower the figure evenmore.''   The new rules apply to the Morro Bay plant in the San Luis Obispo AirPollution Control District; the Moss Landing plant in the Monterey BayUnified Air Pollution District; and the Contra Costa, Hunters Point,Pittsburg and Potrero plants in the Bay Area Air Quality ManagementDistrict.   Bev Alexander, an environmental attorney who serves as NOx strategyproject manager for PG&E, said, ``This was a win-win situation because PG&Ewas able to propose additional amendments that would use pollutionprevention technology to achieve strict air-quality standards with greaterbusiness flexibility and at a lower cost.''   PG&E's NOx team began working in 1994 with state regulators on rulesoriginally scheduled to require significant NOx reductions by 1997. Theywould have forced the company to either retrofit or retire most of itsfossil-fueled units by that year.   SCR is a back-end method that cleans up NOx after it has formed, using achemical reaction involving ammonia. Use of the system requirestransporting ammonia to power plants, storing it on-site and emitting someinto the atmosphere. The system also requires construction of costlyfacilities to house the heavy equipment involved.   LNC is a front-end pollution control that reduces NOx formation byprecise flame control within the boiler. Ammonia is not required. Thecompany said for one of PG&E's generating units in the Bay Area Air QualityManagement District, the cost of retrofitting the boiler would be$5-million to $12-million for LNC compared with $20-million for SCR.   The amendments adopted by the three air districts cover all of PG&E'spower plants except the Humboldt Bay plant, which is in a district thatalready meets air quality standards.   The successful installation of LNC at the Morro Bay plant was a majorreason why the local air districts approved of PG&E's proposal. Emissionfigures from the Morro Bay facility influenced the district boards in theirfavorable decisions, the company said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THANEPA'S   Electric utilities in Pennsylvania are enthusiastically backing aneffort by the state Dept. of Environmental Protection (DEP) to streamlineregulations and ensure that they are no more stringent than federalstandards.   DEP began the ``Regulatory Basics'' initiative in August at thedirection of DEP secretary James Seif, who said he wanted to overhaulregulations that exceeded federal standards, as well as those that imposeddisproportionate economic costs, lacked clarity or were redundant or nolonger necessary.   The department asked for comments to be filed toward the end of 1995,and investor-owned utilities filed jointly through the PennsylvaniaElectric Association (PEA). The initiative is undocketed and no publichearings are planned, though hearings might be scheduled later, a DEPspokesman said.   In its comments, PEA applauded Seif for ``attempting to minimize costson the regulated community, encourage performance-based outcomes and tocreate a level playing field for Pennsylvania businesses.''   The utilities complained that DEP has relied on a ``belts andsuspenders'' approach to environmental regulation, or using multipleassumptions about environmental impacts. ``While this certainly ensuresthat the goal of environmental protection is met, the regulated communityhas incurred tremendous costs, often with little or no attendantenvironmental benefit,'' PEA said. Aside from affecting the utilities, thisapproach has helped drive out industrial firms and repelled new investmentin manufacturing.   Specifically, PEA criticized DEP's water quality-based effluentlimitations as being based on a ``steady state'' model that assumesworst-case scenarios and is far too restrictive. The group noted that eachcondition measured in the model has a low probability of occurrence, whilethe combination of conditions would rarely or never occur. PEA prefers``dynamic'' models, which account for variations of flow, effluent andenvironmental conditions, and which determine the actual probability that awater quality exceedance will occur.   PEA also complained that DEP applies human health criteria at the pointof discharge, instead of at the point of withdrawal for drinking watersupplies. This exceeds the requirements of the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency, as well as Pennsylvania's own written regulations, itpointed out. PEA also contended that DEP applies aquatic life standardswhen there are no substantial populations in streams.   Regarding air pollution issues, PEA said that the state DEP uses abroader definition of pollutants than EPA for requiring Title 5 permitsunder the Clean Air Act. The state also does not follow federal standardsrelating to permit revisions and flexibility, and does not allow an``emergency defense'' for unforeseeable events. The utilities also thinkthe $37/ton permitting fee may be higher than necessary to fund DEPprograms, and they would eliminate the $14/ton fee for actual emissionsbecause it violates the federal Clean Air Act.   The department also forbids the use of emission reduction credits (ERCs)for compliance with nitrogen oxide ``Reasonably Available ControlTechnology'' (RACT) standards, despite EPA efforts to develop emissionstrading, the group said. They also fear that ERCs generated fromover-compliance will not be applicable to future reduction requirements forNOx.   While utilities agree heartily with the direction of the RegulatoryBasics proceeding, the Sierra Club condemned the move to roll back DEPstandards to the federal level. Jeff Schmidt, government liaison in theHarrisburg, Pa. office, told Utility Environment Report, ``The minimumfederal standards are just that--minimums. They are meant to provide asafety net, but states should be able to design more protective standardsbased on specific regional and climactic conditions. Federal standards area floor below which you should not go, but the administration seems to wantto make them a ceiling.''   Schmidt also criticized Seif for developing many of the changes amonghis staff, without allowing public access to records. He estimated that thechanges could take 18 months, and ``the cumbersome regulatory processusually rewards economic interests.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSEDCANCER   A California Superior Court judge has dismissed a lawsuit againstSouthern California Edison brought by three people with cancer who claimthat strong electromagnetic fields from the utility's equipment causedtheir diseases.   In an order last month, Judge Warren Siegel wrote that summary judgmentmust be granted in favor of the defendants because the plaintiffs ``cannotshow causation by any generally accepted scientific principle in themedical community.''   The only witnesses that the plaintiffs offered to address the questionof what caused the cancers, according to the order, were experts onstatistical studies of EMFs and cancer. The judge found that they were notqualified to address the medical issue of whether the particularindividuals' cancers were caused by EMFs.   The judge wrote that the plaintiffs were, therefore, ``relying onstatistical analysis to express a medical opinion that EMF may causecertain types of cancer.'' This, he ruled, was insufficient to allow thecase to go to trial.   The plaintiffs intend to file a motion with Siegel requesting a newtrial, according to their attorney, Annee Della Donna of the Wylie A.Aitken law firm. The decision to dismiss was ``unbelievably erroneous,''Della Donna said. The judge ruled on the sufficiency of the causationwitnesses, Della Donna argued, when he was supposed to be ruling on theadmissibility of the witnesses under various evidentiary rules governingscientific testimony.   If the request for a new trial is rejected, she said, the plaintiffswill seek a writ from the appeals court. ``This is a clear violation of ourdue process rights'' she added, since the judge ruled on something withoutgiving proper notice that the issue was up for consideration.   John Tinker, senior counsel with SoCal Ed, countered that ``the judgehas recognized that there is no sound scientific evidence to bring thisbefore a jury.'' He added, ``The company and the industry are very pleasedwith this result.''   The three plaintiffs with cancer in this case all worked in a realestate office on the ground floor of a 14-story office building in OrangeCounty, Calif. The office had unusually strong EMFs because it is directlyabove a vault containing transformers, switching gear and distributioncircuits for the building. The building owners and the real estate companyare named as defendants in the case in addition to SoCal Ed (Johsz et al.vs Koll Company et al., Case No. 726765).   Two other individuals with cancer who also worked in the office have asimilar lawsuit pending against the same defendants. It is before adifferent judge and was not directly affected by the dismissal of thiscase.   Della Donna, who is handling the second case as well, has said that theexcess incidence of disease among workers in the real estate officeconstitutes a cancer cluster.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it has increased its commitment torenewables and energy conservation in a final version of its integratedresource plan made public in late December.   TVA said the changes were made in part as a response to comments fromconservation and environmental groups, which had called on the federallyowned utility to adopt more aggressive policies in these areas.   Among the short-term actions in the final plan, TVA said it wouldintensify research into the use of wind energy and carry out at least onewind project in its service area during the next two years.   At the same time, TVA will begin tests this year of co-firing of biomasswaste products at its large coal-fired plants and then in 1997 move aheadwith the first commercial biomass co-firing project.   In a third effort, TVA will step up reviews of ways to increase use ofcoalbed methane and landfill methane to produce power in the region. TVAhopes to sponsor an initial test of a fuel cell-landfill methane system.   On energy efficiency programs, TVA said it is now committed to add 650MW of demand-side resources by 2002 and as much as 2,200 MW by 2010. Itsaid this was an increase of 750 MW over previous versions of the plan.   Also as part of the IRP, TVA detailed a longer term research plan forrenewables and conservation that will cover the use of photovoltaics forservice to remote areas and for cutting residential energy costs, electricvehicle infrastructure development and use of communication techniques forenergy load management.   Because TVA took an approach in its IRP that uses a portfolio ofoptions, the plan contained no set estimate of environmental impacts,especially over the long term. But TVA said the need to comply with federaland state regulations would create a ``safety net'' effect againstincreased environmental impacts as different options were implemented.   Outside groups will make one final round of comments on the TVA plan inmid-January, after which it will be approved in final form by the TVA boardin February.   TVA has moved ahead in the last two months to start up two nuclearreactors at its Watts Bar and Browns Ferry sites, over strong protests fromthe environmental community. It remains to be seen whether improvements inthe IRP will bridge the differences over nuclear policy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES   Missouri's investor-owned utilities and the University ofMissouri-Columbia, College of Engineering have formed the Missouri ElectricUtility Renewables Group (MEURG), an organization dedicated to identifying,gathering information, researching and testing the feasibility of renewablegeneration opportunities in the state.   Participating utilities include Empire District Electric, Kansas CityPower & Light, St. Joseph Light & Power, Union Electric and UtiliCorpUnited.   The group will give member utilities a forum to discuss integration ofrenewable energy into the state's electric power generation mix.Technologies will include wind, clean biomass, photovoltaic, solar thermaland low-head hydroelectric.   MEURG will evaluate the potential benefits of renewable energy toutilities and their customers and communicate renewable energy informationto the public. The university may also coordinate workshops, symposia andseminars and seek federal and private funding for renewable energyresearch.   James Thompson, dean of the College of Engineering, said, ``We arepleased to participate in this important initiative to explore renewableenergy resources for the state of Missouri. This collaborative effort hasstrong potential to benefit the environment and conserve energy resourcesby providing an efficient means for exploring renewable energyresources.''   Gary Huber, UE's representative in the group, said the university'sinvolvement offers research advantages. ``It also offers a vehicle forleveraging research dollars and reducing costs associated with developingrenewable energy projects,'' he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR   Indianapolis Power & Light could give final approval this month for arenewable energy project in which an internal combustion engine fired withmethane gas from a landfill would generate 3.5 MW of electricity.   Dan Melvin, IP&L principal engineer in systems planning, said theproject is in the utility's budget for 1996. If final approval comes thismonth, the project is expected to be in operation later in the year. Melvintold Utility Environment Report., ``We looked at using used equipment. Weare now evaluating proposals from vendors.''   IP&L included the landfill gas project as part of its ``short-termaction plan'' in an integrated resource plan it recently filed with theIndiana Utility Regulatory Commission.   In the IRP, the utility said the purpose of the project is to ``utilizethe favorable economics and environmental benefits that are sometimesavailable with renewable energy systems.''   The project would be located at the Southside landfill in Indianapolis.The current landfill operator already burns some methane to heat agreenhouse on the site. Under Indiana law, all landfills that accept leavesand yard waste for disposal must be equipped with methane burners.   Melvin estimated there is enough methane at the Southside landfill tolast for 10 to 15 years.   The Southside landfill could set the stage for similar type projects byIP&L. Melvin said IP&L is negotiating with Allison Engines, one of itscustomers, to purchase an 11-MW gas turbine that could be installed at asite by the late 1990s.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL   A national organization of state environmental officials said theysupport key elements of a proposal by the National Hydropower Associationto revamp the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's project relicensingprocedures, but said the NHA plan needs ``more explicit accommodations forsettlement provisions.''   The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS), a national, non-profitorganization composed of environmental officials from 50 of the 55 U.S.states, territories and the District of Columbia, praised the NHA proposal,filed with FERC in September 1995.   FERC in October called for comment on the proposal (Docket No. RM-16),indicating it planned to undertake a rulemaking on relicensing issues. NHAlast month said a formal negotiated rulemaking would allow for timelyreform of the commission's relicensing procedures.   ECOS praised the NHA proposal's emphasis on reducing the overall timefor reviewing FERC license applications, eliminating redundant reports andinvolving all stakeholders at the earliest time possible in theenvironmental review process.   Nevertheless, ECOS said FERC should include provisions to assist statesin settling disputes among stakeholders.   ``We strongly believe that more explicit accommodations for settlementinitiatives need to be provided by FERC beyond the encouragement given inthe NHA proposal,'' ECOS said, adding that many of its concerns likelycould be resolved by administrative reforms and would not necessarilyrequire additional rulemaking.   ``Specifically, there should be provisions to ensure that formalregulatory positions from involved agencies are not solicited by FERC ondraft [National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)] documents during ongoingsettlement negotiations,'' ECOS said. ``The outcome of negotiations cangreatly accelerate NEPA reviews. Conversely, the quest for reasonablesettlement terms could also be undermined by the continued pursuit offormal regulatory positions that might constrain the flexibility ofparticipants in modifying their positions to work toward agreements.''   FERC could include ``an escape clause'' that would allow the commissionto defer on regulatory steps during ongoing settlement negotiations, ECOSsaid.   ECOS agreed with NHA that the commission's ex parte rules on FERCcommunications with participants in the licensing process are another areain need of reform.   ``Staff interpretations of ex parte constraints can be extreme andresult in a stifling of communications and early resolution of issuesbetween FERC and other agencies and participants,'' ECOS said.   ``Other agencies of government, including our own, are sensitive to exparte concerns and yet are able to find ways to do business withoutincurring these problems. Any reform proposal for hydropower licensing mustdeal with this issue.''   ECOS questioned the NHA provision that strongly encourages FERC to enterinto a memorandum of understanding with other agencies to coordinate inputon relicensing proceedings, saying that NHA makes no clear statement on whysuch an MOU is necessary.   Alternatively, ECOS suggested that regulations could mandate theconsolidation of federal agency input into hydropower relicensing in acoordinated time frame.   In addition, ECOS said the proposal would benefit from ``specificprovisions that facilitate comprehensive river basin planning by providingfinancial and/or technical support.''   ``Such planning is critical to providing a clear and reasonable contextto any cumulative impact assessment in river basins,'' ECOS continued. ``Itis essential to provide a vision of what agencies and the public want in ariver basin and not just the more traditional regulatory view of what theydon't want. This should be extremely valuable to power producers seeking tosecure their future in a given basin.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FORFARMERS   Wisconsin utilities are opposing a move by a state legislator to requireelectric companies to provide spark gap isolators for farm customers whoraise livestock and believe they are experiencing stray voltage problems.   Rep. Don Hasenohrl recently introduced Assembly Bill 725 that mandatesutilities to install spark gap isolators at no charge if a livestock farmerhires an electrician who certifies that the farm electric system is wiredso that installation will not create ``a significant safety hazard'' topersons, livestock or property at the site.   The bill further provides that if the farmer requests it, the electricutility must use spark gap isolators with a minimum breakdown voltage of1,000 volts. A customer may bring action in any court to compel compliancewith these provisions, the bill reads.   Isolation occurs when the physical connection is broken between theneutral conductor of the utility system and the neutral conductor of thefarm's electrical system. The National Electric Safety Code states that ifthis connection is broken, a device must be installed that reconnects theconductors at low resistance to enhance safety if a fault occurs orlightening strikes either the farm or utility system.   According to Chuck DeNardo, senior engineer at Wisconsin Electric,utilities oppose A.B. 725 on two major counts. First, it allows thecustomer to initiate the decision to break the neutral connection withoutevidence that the utility is contributing to the stray voltage problem andwithout an understanding of what isolation means.   Second, the bill eliminates use of lower-voltage reconnection devicesnow used by utilities and replaces them with higher-voltage spark gapisolators. DeNardo explains that the lower the reconnection voltage, thesafer the device. The ``electronic switching'' devices currently used byutilities have reconnection voltages of about 25 volts, while the bill canrequire spark gap isolators with minimum reconnection voltages of 1,000volts.   A spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Utilities Association said utilities inthe state have very serious concerns about the use of spark gap isolatorsand will be opposing the proposed legislation. A.B. 725 was originallyreferred to the Assembly Committee on Agriculture, but an effort is nowunder way to have it transferred to the Committee on Environment andUtilities, whose members are believed to have ``a greater appreciation forthe safety considerations involved,'' the association said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN   Projects developed by Tucson Electric and New World Power to reducegreenhouse gas emissions in developing countries were among eight projectsselected to join the U.S. Initiative on Joint Implementation (USIJI), apilot program aimed at finding cost-effective ways to cut emissions andpromote sustainable development.   Joint implementation, in which companies from developed nations teamwith partners in developing countries to reduce emissions, is seen as a keyweapon in the Clinton administration's program for reducing U.S. emissions.While participating companies may not now claim credit against futurerequirements for emission reductions achieved overseas, U.S. treatynegotiators hope to include amendments that will allow credit for suchprojects.   The eight projects, announced Dec. 19, 1995 in Washington byundersecretary of state for global affairs Tim Wirth, represent privatesector investments that could top $200-million when the projects are fullyimplemented.   They were selected after a technical review and evaluation of how theyconformed with U.S. joint implementation guidelines by a panel of seniorofficials from the Dept. of Energy, U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyand six other federal agencies.   This is the second round of projects to be included in the USIJIprogram, which began in October 1993 as part of President Clinton's climatechange action plan. A first round of projects, representing more than$40-million in private investment, was selected in February 1995 (UER, 17Feb '95, 10).   New World Power and its two Costa Rican partners will build a 16-MWhydropower plant using the Puerto Viejo River and Quebradon Creek innorthern Costa Rica. The project will displace thermal units that burnhigh-sulfur diesel fuels, bunker fuels and other fossil fuels.   New World Power will participate in a second project, also in CostaRica, to develop a 20-MW wind power plant. The project will displacefossil-fuel fired generation, and power will be sold to the Costa RicanInstitute of Electricity.   Nations Energy, a subsidiary of Tucson Electric, will participate in aproject to develop a 10- to 15-MW biomass plant in Guaimaca, Honduras.Sawmill and logging residues, currently burned in an uncontrolled mannerand left to decompose on the forest floor, will serve as the fuel source,making the use of trees for fuel unnecessary and not cost-effective.   The International Utility Partnership, an industrywide initiative, alsowill participate in the Honduras project, whose power will be sold to theEmpresa Nacional de Energia Electrica, the Honduran national utility.   The other projects selected are a carbon sequestration project in CostaRica, a geothermal plant in Nicaragua, a second wind plant in Costa Rica, aforestry management project in Costa Rica, and a project to capturefugitive methane emissions in Russia.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96   Canadian officials have decided to continue using a voluntary program toreduce greenhouse gas emissions, despite a recent plea from the federalDept. of the Environment for more aggressive measures to ensure that Canadastabilizes emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.   Canada's greenhouse gas program, called the Climate Change VoluntaryChallenge and Registry (VCR),was launched in 1994 by the federal andprovincial governments and is operated by Natural Resources Canada.   Resistance to mandatory emission reduction measures is headed by theprovince of Alberta, the heart of Canada's fossil-fuel industry, whichemits 30% of Canada's greenhouse gases. The three major utilities inAlberta strongly favor voluntary approaches over traditional regulatoryplans.   At a meeting late last year of Canada's federal and provincialenvironment and energy ministers in Edmonton, Alberta, officials decided tocontinue Canada's reliance on the VCR until November 1996, when ministerswill reassess the greenhouse gas emission picture. This is even though thefederal National Action Program forecasts that emissions will increase 13%by year 2000 under the VCR.   At the meeting, federal environment minister Sheila Copps argued that``without a stronger plan from provinces like Alberta, we're not going tobe there. Alberta's plan is not going to work.''   But Ty Lund, Alberta's minister of environmental protection, argued thatAlberta was the first province to register a plan with the VCR, and thatfirms responsible for 70% of Alberta's greenhouse gases have either joinedthe VCR or declared their intent to enroll.   Alberta energy minister Anne McLellan added that the VCR is rapidlygaining industry support, including from the Canadian ElectricalAssociation and the trade associations of the petroleum, natural gas andcoal industries. Initial responses to the VCR have been ``veryencouraging,'' she said, noting that over 475 companies and institutionshave expressed a commitment to participate.   In the absence of any mandatory control program, Canada's greenhouse gasemissions have increased by 4.9% from 577 million metric tons in 1990 to605 million metric tons in 1994. The largest increases were in Saskatchewan(24%) and Alberta (15%).   The coal-fired plants of TransAlta Utilities, Alberta Power and EdmontonPower account for 35% of the provincial emission total. TransAlta, Canada'slargest investor-owned utility with 3,676 MW of coal-fired capacity,announced a plan last year to cut greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by 2000.The plan is considered the most advanced in Canada.   Gordon Lambert, TransAlta's director of sustainable development,acknowledged that achieving the stabilization goal will be challenging forTransAlta Corp., the owner of TransAlta and TransAlta Energy. This isbecause greenhouse gas emissions from TransAlta Corp.'s Canadianoperations, which include two natural gas-fired, combined-cyclecogeneration plants in Ontario, are forecasted to increase up to 15% over1990 levels by 2000 to meet growing customer demand.   TransAlta Corp. expects to achieve its stabilization target fromrenewable energy purchases (13%), customer efficiencies (16%), internalefficiencies (32%) and domestic and international offsets (41%).   But Robert Hornung, climate change director of the Alberta-based PembinaInstitute for Appropriate Development, claimed that TransAlta is buyingrenewable energy only because such purchases are required under Alberta'sSmall Power Research and Development Act. Customer demand-side managementprograms are behind schedule and are being scaled back. The agriculturaloffsets planned by TransAlta in Saskatchewan are ``not credible,'' addedHornung.   The utility's Saskatchewan Soil Enhancement Project involves asoil-tilling technique using ``low-disturbance direct seeding'' to increasethe carbon dioxide storage capacity of the soil. TransAlta claims theproject can offset up to 1.1 million metric tons of CO2.   However, Hornung argued that the same logic should apply to TransAlta'sextensive coal mining operations and wetland drainage, which releasegreenhouse gases to the atmosphere but are not included in the utility'sgreenhouse gas inventory. Moreover, no nation has yet quantified thechanges in soil carbon content arising from human activities.   TransAlta also is looking for a 13% contribution from internationaloffsets, which Canada cannot count toward meeting its commitment tostabilize greenhouse gases, Hornung said. International offsets before theyear 2000 are not credited under the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change.   In general, Hornung said the VCR is flawed because governments have notimplemented supportive regulatory and fiscal policies.   Nonetheless, Lambert said that by submitting an action plan, TransAltaCorp. is making a ``visible commitment to Canada's international obligationto address greenhouse gases.''   The Pembina Institute examined 189 VCR submissions by corporations andgovernments and reviewed 73 action plans. The review determined that 80% ofcompanies failed to provide the basic information needed to assess thecredibility of their plans; 37% did not provide a greenhouse gas inventory;and 72% did not project emission levels by 2000.   Saskatchewan Power, also a coal-based utility, emits 35% of theprovince's total greenhouse emissions. SaskPower's system has 1,997 MW ofcoal-fired capacity, but Saskatchewan has not yet developed a CO2stabilization plan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it was able to save $20,000 indisposal fees for polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) wastes under an innovativeexchange agreement with the Dept. of Energy's Oak Ridge weapons plant.   Under the deal, TVA transferred 75,000 gallons of oil with slight PCBcontamination to Oak Ridge's K-25 plant site where it will be used to rinsethree 22,500 gallon tanks that had previously contained PCB wastes and arenow being decontaminated.   Since the PCB level in the TVA oil is much lower than what had been inthe tanks, flushing with the TVA oil will be a useful initial step in thedecontamination process.   According to Oak Ridge officials, without the oil from TVA they wouldhave had to spend up to $80,000 for new oil that would end up becomingcontaminated.   Oak Ridge has a toxic waste incinerator at the K-25 site that islicensed to destroy PCBs. It will eventually dispose of the TVA oil in thefacility at no extra cost to TVA or itself.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES   The New York Dept. of Environmental Conservation has changed two rulesaffecting the use of nitrogen oxide and volatile organic compound``offsets.''The first change, which amends Subpart 231-2 and Part 621 of New York'sTitle 6 regulations, requires applicants for permits to construct aircontamination sources, such as power plants, to identify the source of theNOx and VOC emission offsets prior to issuance of the final permit toconstruct. Previously, applicants had to supply the information at the timethe application was submitted to the department.   The DEC also has proposed extending the deadline for reportingreductions of NOx and VOCs. Reductions prior to Oct. 14, 1994 would have tobe reported by Oct. 14, 1996, instead of 1995, as originally planned.Reductions after Oct. 14, 1994 would have to be reported within two years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING   Public Service Electric & Gas expects significant emission reductionsand water benefits at its 650-MW Bergen Generating Station, which went backinto service with more efficient equipment.   The station, built in 1959 to burn coal, was converted to oil and gas in1970. In the $360-million repowering project, four combustion turbines wereinstalled, along with a waste-heat recovery boiler that uses heat from theturbines to produce more power.   Although the station will produce an additional 40 MW, nitrogen oxideemissions will be reduced by 96%, or 10,000 tons/year, while carbonmonoxide will be cut by 63%, and carbon dioxide by 30%. PSE&G already ismarketing its NOx ``credits'' from this and other projects to businesses inNew Jersey and elsewhere in the region (UER, 9 June, 1).   Along with the air benefits, PSE&G will cut water use and eliminatethermal discharge at Bergen. The station will use treated waste water froma county sewage treatment plant instead of water from Overpeck Creek, andit will recycle the waste water back to the treatment plant instead ofdischarging it into the Hackensack River.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE   Virginia's State Corporation Commission said that as part of its formalinvestigation into electric power industry restructuring, it will examineits environmental policies ``to determine if they are compatible withdesirable competition'' (Case No. TUE950089).   The SCC said its probe, which could lead to a plan for expandingcompetition among utilities and other power suppliers, will include ``ananalysis of whether increased competition will impact a utility'swillingness to take appropriate steps to address environmental concerns.''Environmentalists in other states moving toward competition have expressedconcerns about the impact those changes would have on conservation efforts,the development of renewables and the use of dirtier coal-fired plants togenerate cheap power.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED   The former superintendent of the Stafford Municipal utility in Kansashas been sentenced to six months of home confinement and fined $3,000 inconnection with the illegal dumping of nine capacitors filled withpolychlorinated biphenyls.   William Kirkpatrick originally was indicted on two counts by a federalgrand jury, one involving ordering the illegal disposal and a second offailure to report it (Criminal No. 94-10094-01) (UER, 2 Sept '94, 10). Theformer charge was dropped after he pleaded guilty to the latter, the U.S.Attorney's office in Wichita said.   The original charges carried a maximum penalty of four years in prisonand a $275,000 fine. The revised charges could have cost Kirkpatrick$250,000 and three years in prison.   A spokesman for the U.S. Attorney said Kirkpatrick will beelectronically monitored during his home confinement.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B37-30IA086-000616-B018-224http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev41.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003606 text/html 50390HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:34:10 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:08 GMTContent-length: 50203Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev41.html Sample Issue Copyright WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRM (515 words) HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENT (705 words) ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING. (119 words) MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM (183 words) OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSION (1156 words) BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIES (262 words) EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS (299 words) HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK (203 words) N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALL (482 words) FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLES (441 words) HAZWASTE MONITOR HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR (221 words) SOLID WASTE MONITOR SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR (226 words) FINANCIAL PROJECTION PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER. (214 words) INTERNATIONAL GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE' (143 words) ACQUISITION RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METAL (347 words) RFP MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGER (418 words) RADWASTE DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK (684 words) CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRMBy:By Alexandra Rudenko   The boards of directors of USA Waste Services Inc. and Western WasteIndustries have approved the terms of a merger that would create the thirdlargest waste management firm in North America.   Shareholders will be voting this spring and, pending required approvals,a closing is planned by May 1, 1996.   Officials of the two firms have been ``long-term friends,'' and heldongoing discussions for the past 12 months. During ``due diligence'' overthe past 30 days, senior management from Dallas-based USA Waste has endedup sleeping at the house of Western Waste Chairman Kosti Shirvanian, oneofficial told analysts.   This means there are few surprises in store. The chances are slightthat something might jeopardize the negotiations as happened several yearsago when Browning Ferris Industries considered buying Western Waste andthen changed its mind, USA executives assured the investors.   Following the merger announcement USA Waste Chairman John E. Drury,Shirvanian and other senior management of the two firms attempted to fly toBoston to outline their deal to the investment community. However, awinter storm interfered and the group hurriedly rescheduled meetings fortwo days in New York City. Here again the bad weather caused a cancellationof the second day's activities as the executives rushed back home to moretemperate climates.   The merger agreement provides that the stockholders of Western Wastewill receive 1.5 shares of USA Waste common stock for each Western Wastecommon share. USA Waste has received an irrevocable proxy from Shirvanian,who is Western Waste's largest shareholder, to vote his shares in favor ofthe merger. These shares represent approximately 31% of Western Waste'sshares outstanding.   USA Waste already owns approximately 4.5% of the Western Wasteoutstanding shares, with such shares scheduled to be canceled at theeffective time of the merger.   Based upon Western Waste's approximately 16-million shares andequivalents outstanding and existing indebtedness, the merger would bevalued at about $525-million.   Drury will retain his position as chairman and CEO of USA Waste, andShirvanian will become a vice chairman of the board of USA Waste at thetime of the merger.   The combined companies have annualized revenues of over $800-million andtotal assets in excess of $1-billion.   After the merger, USA Waste will have 61 collection operations, 35landfills, 24 transfer stations and five recycling operations, serving over1-million customers in 23 states.   Drury said, ``We expect the merger to be additive to USA Waste'searnings per share because of cost savings and operational improvementsexpected to be realized by the combination.   ``Savings should come from combining operations and reducingadministrative and staffing cost. There is also potential to grow andexpand in and around Western Waste's existing markets in California, Texas,Florida and in other states,'' said Drury.   At Smith Barney, vice president Leone Young viewed the merger aspositive and upgraded the USA Waste from an ``outperform'' to a ``buy.''It's a good strategic move. They have a very experienced and sizablemanagement team. At worst it will be earnings neutral,'' she said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENTBy:KH   Rep. Jim Saxton (R-N.J.), chairman of the House Resources subcommitteeon Fisheries, Wildlife and Oceans has introduced into the House ofRepresentatives a bill that would create a National Institute for theEnvironment (NIE).   Similar legislation was introduced previously in 1994 in the 103rdCongress, said an official with the Committee for the NIE, an organizationof more than 9,000 scientists, business leaders and environmentalists thatis backing creation of the NIE in its quest to improve the scientific basisfor environmental decision making.   The institute would be an independent, non-regulatory federal entitydesigned to serve as a single source of scientific information and researchon the environment, said the committee official. Its proposed budget forits first year is $130 million, but proponents maintain that no additionalfederal money will be needed because of the elimination of ``duplicative,outdated federal programs'' that would be replaced by the NIE, the officialadded.   Although a definite timetable has not been set, Senate Minority LeaderTom Daschle (D-S.D.) is expected to introduce the Senate version of NIElegislation early this year, possibly in January. House hearings have alsobeen tentatively slated for this month before the Saxton subcommittee.   The committee official was candid in admitting she could not confidentlypredict the likelihood of passage for the NIE. However, she noted that theNIE's ``diverse supporters'' include House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.),who had helped sponsor the legislation in its previous incarnation.   Saxton, meanwhile, said: ``The NIE proposal has been truly close to myheart for over five years. ``There have been changes in the politicalarena which make the atmosphere on Capitol Hill more conducive to a `smartgovernment' initiative such as the NIE. The NIE will make government workbetter, cheaper and more efficiently with smarter regulations and soundscience. It's time to move environmental policy out of the moody politicalspectrum where it is now, and get it back on science where it belongs,''Saxton said.   Dr. Stephen Hubbell, chair of the Committee for the NIE and a professorof ecology at Princeton University, along with Henry Howe of the Universityof Illinois, Chicago, have been credited with the creation of the NIEeffort, which began with a meeting of 50 scientists, environmentalists andpolicy experts in 1989.   ``We have environmental groups with their agendas, industry with theiragendas and regulatory agencies with their agendas, but we don't have acredible, independent science agency where people can go and say, `What dowe really know about this problem?' '' Hubbell said.   The House bill calls for the NIE to assess the state of knowledge onenvironmental issues and competitively award peer-reviewed research grantsat academic institutions, private companies, government laboratories andnon-profit organizations, said the committee official. The NIE willsupport education and training to help prepare future generations ofenvironmental scientists, she added. However, to maintain credible,politically neutral science, the NIE will have no regulatory role, nor willit operate laboratories, she stressed.   The NIE effort does appear to have a large and broad legion ofsupporters in addition to such influential legislators as Gingrich andDaschle. These backers include such leading environmental companies as WMXTechnologies, Browning-Ferris Industries, Safety-Kleen Corp., ENVIRON Corp.and Law Cos. Group; corporate giants such as AT&T, Apple Computer, MonsantoCo., ITT Corp., Amoco Corp. and Chase Manhattan Bank; and environmentalgroups such as the Environmental Defense Fund and the Sierra Club.   Following are some of the programs that have been suggested forinclusion in the NIE:   -- Environmental Protection Agency: Stratospheric Ozone DepletionResearch; Exploratory Grants and Centers; Science to Achieve Results (STAR)program; Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP); EcologicalRisk and Assessment-Reducing Uncertainty in Ecological Risk Assessmentprogram; Education, Outreach and Information.   -- National Biological Service: Ecosystem Research; InformationTransfer.   -- Department of Energy: Bureau of Environmental Research; GlobalChange initiative.   -- National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Coastal OceanProgram (COP); National Sea Grant College Program; National UnderseaResearch Program; Global Learning and Observations to Benefit theEnvironment (GLOBE).   -- Redirection of money: Tennessee Valley Authority EnvironmentalResearch Center; Clean Coal Technology initiative; Federal ConstructionProjects, including the Bay City EPA facility and new EPA laboratories.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING.By:KH   The Lakewood, N.J.-based company said late last week that it had reachedan agreement in principal to acquire an unnamed privately-held firm ``thatwould complement the existing operations'' of ETC.   As Waste Business was going to press, an ETC official would say onlythat the transaction was subject to a number of conditions, includingsatisfactory completion of due diligence, the preparation and execution ofdefinitive agreements and the approval of the stockholders of bothcompanies.   The unnamed acquisition target is projecting about $7 million inrevenues in 1995 and no significant indebtedness, said the ETC official. Its management will be incorporated into the management team ofEnvironmental Technologies, he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM   MFRI has acquired for an undisclosed amount of cash the assets of Kiel,Germany-based SZE Spezial Electronik Hagenuk GmbH, a firm involved in thedevelopment, marketing and servicing of pipeline leak detection systems,said an MFRI spokesman.   SZE, a subsidiary of Hanover, Germany-based Preussag, AG, posts annualsales of about $3.6 million, he said.   Why did Niles, Ill.-based MFRI buy SZE? ``MFRI has been providingprivate label pipeline leak detection systems to the company for four yearsand we have developed an understanding and appreciation of the growthpotential of the European market it serves,'' explained David Unger, MFRIchairman, president and chief executive officer.   ``We will expand the MFRI product line available to European customersand aggressively seek to increase our market penetration. At the sametime, we will make the [SZE proprietary pipeline leak detection system]available to our U.S. customers,'' said Unger.   MFRI is a vertically integrated manufacturer and marketer of filter bagsunder the Midwesco Filter name and specialty piping systems and electronicleak detection and location systems marketed under the Perma-Pipe name.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSIONBy:AR   The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has decided to issue a draftsolid waste permit to American Landfill for its plan to expand byapproximately 20-million cubic yards over 130 acres.   A public information session and hearing is scheduled for January 10. When the expansion permit is issued the landfill will be able to accept8,000 tons per day of waste, and have about 7.8-years of capacity,according to the agency.   The subsidiary of American Waste Systems began seeking permission forthis expansion in January 1991, and triggered a lengthy dispute with theagency over environmental compliance issues. This was resolved in anagreement announced in October 1995 covering all outstanding complianceissues at the facility.   According to the EPA official, the agency determined during a facilitycompliance review that the operators had exceeded the maximum depth, heightand lateral limit for solid waste disposal as authorized in the landfillpermit. These violations increased the capacity of the landfill by atleast 2,424,342 cubic yards.   Also it was observed that American was excavating and removing wastetires from a closed portion of the landfill. These tires were placed onother portions of the landfill and at the tire storage area for themonofill. American failed to obtain prior agency approval or follow therequired rules for such activity, he said.   In addition, American stored tires at the monofill and beganconstruction of the monofill prior to obtaining agency authorization. American Landfill was assessed a fine of $269,755 for environmentalviolations at the landfill and tire monofill facility, he said.   Under the permit granted by the agency to American in October 1995, thecompany agreed to install an explosive gas extraction system. This systemwas not required by the prior permit and will be an environmentallybeneficial project because it will extract potentially explosive gas fromthe existing landfill, said a company official.   As part of this environmental improvement, American was granted a1,639,57 cubic yard increase in waste disposal capacity on top of thenorthern portion of the facility. In addition, the permit allowed Americanto relocate 625,815 cubic yards of waste from the center of the facility tothe northern portion of the landfill, said the state EPA.   According to a statement issued by the Warren, Ohio-based firm, in orderto issue the expansion permit requested in 1991, the Ohio EPA was requiredto perform a review of ALI's operating compliance under its existingpermit issued in 1985. During this review of the original application forthe 1985 permit, the Ohio EPA alleged that ALI was not authorized toexcavate soils at the landfill to the extent it had done and was notrequired to install five feet of additional clay liner to the base of thefacility.   ALI noted that the excavation and liner installation had occurred withthe full knowledge of the Ohio EPA since the issuance of the 1985 permit. However, on November 21, 1994, ALI received a notice from the Ohio EPAalleging violations of its permit and related regulations. And the agencyasserted that ALI had significantly less remaining disposal capacity underits 1985 permit than previously calculated by the firm, and very limitedcapacity immediately available for waste disposal, explained thestatement.   Additionally, ALI received a letter from the Ohio EPA alleging that itsApril 1995 financial assurance deposit of $2.4-million was insufficient. Furthermore, the Ohio EPA said that the expansion permit could not beissued until, among other things, ALI was operating in compliance or was ona legally enforceable schedule that would result in compliance.   During ensuing months, ALI provided information to the Ohio EPA insupport of its position. The subsidiary pointed out that hundreds ofinspections and compliance reviews that had previously been performed didnot allege any violation or raise any concern regarding ALI's excavationactivities. Additionally, it provided an opinion from a third-partyconsultant who reviewed the 1985 permit, the application and other relevantinformation.   In mid-September, ALI recognized that the Ohio EPA would not be willingto change its position, said the statement. It believed that if anagreement with the Ohio EPA could not be reached, years of litigation wouldensue and at a minimum the expansion permit would not be issued until suchlitigation was resolved.   ``Although ALI continues to disagree with the Ohio EPA regardingexcavation depths and remaining capacity at the landfill, in light of thetime, costs and risks inherent in litigation and ALI's confidence in itsreceipt of the expansion permit, ALI proceeded to negotiate so that theexpansion permit could be issued in an expedited manner,'' said thestatement.   This resulted in the October agreement in which ALI agreed to complywith the agency's interpretation of the 1985 permit and therefore hasagreed to excavate to depths consistent with such interpretation. Theagreement also provides for a schedule of compliance with respect tofinancial assurance which ALI estimates to be approximately $10.9-million. The orders also address the management of scrap tires stored at andreceived by ALI at the landfill and its tire monofill, said the statement.   As a result of the agreement, ALI's total capacity is significantly lessthan the 14,900,000 cubic yards ALI believed existed at the facility as ofthe end of 1994, said the statement. Because of such reduced capacity, ALIincurred a charge of approximately $9.2-million during the third quarter toreflect the accrual of closure and post-closure monitoring costs based uponthe remaining capacity of the landfill.   According to AWS's third quarter statement. the company incurred a netloss of $5.6-million, or $0.19 per share, compared with net income of$998,000, or $0.03 per share in the third quarter of 1994. The $9.2million charge was recorded as $6.1-million net of tax or $0.20 per share.   For the first nine months of 1995, the company incurred a net loss of$5.4-million, or $0.18 per share, compared with net income of $1,049,000 or$0.04 per share for the first nine months of 1994.   In comparing the first nine months of 1995 with the first nine months of1994, net operating revenues of the technical environmental services groupsdecreased primarily due to a decrease in the level of environmentalengineering and remediation services performed.   The company's disposal operations, including disposal brokerage,recorded higher net operating revenues for the first nine months of 1995compared with the first nine months of the prior year primarily due to asignificant increase in the disposal brokerage operations, partially offsetby lower disposal revenues resulting from a reduction in average disposalrates and a decline in the volume of waste accepted by the company'slandfills.   AWS, traded on the New York Stock Exchange, provides integrated wastemanagement and environmental services, including disposal, transportationand transportation-related services, disposal brokerage and managementservices, environmental engineering, site assessment, analytical laboratoryand remediation services to industrial, commercial, municipal andgovernmental customers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIESBy:By Steven Lang   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group has bought, for an undisclosedsum, the assets of air services firm Joy Environmental Technologies fromHarnischfeger Industries, a diversified international holding company, saida spokesman. Joy has offices in Houston, Texas and Malvern, Pa. as well asa warehouse facility in Honeybrook, Pa., he said.   The deal expands B&W's line of environmental equipment products,including acid mist precipitators, electrostatic precipitators and dryflue-gas desulfurization systems and baghouses, the spokesman explained. These products will be transferred to B&W's Power Generation Group, whichis based in Barberton, Ohio, he said.   The agreement also calls for responsibility for ash handling systems tobe transferred to Lancaster, Ohio-based Diamond Power Specialty Co., adivision of B&W that supplies boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment andservices to the power generation industry.   ``This acquisition is excellent for B&W. It diversifies ourenvironmental product line and improves our ability to meet the full scopeof our customers demands,'' said Walt Boomer, B&W Power Generation Grouppresident. ``It is a particularly good fit for Diamond Power because Joy'sash handling business gives Diamond an additional product line. We expectthat this will expand Diamond's market potential quite dramatically.''   ``Merging the best of Joy's technology into ours will not only increaseour reach in the environmental equipment industry, it will also help us aswe continue to develop new environmental products for the future,'' hesaid.   The Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group is an operating unit ofenergy services company McDermott International.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS   Ecology and Environment, Inc. (EEI) has been awarded up to $216 millionin five multi-year regional contracts over five years to provide the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency with support for its oil and hazardouswaste spill response, removal and prevention programs, according to companyofficials.   Three of the contracts were awarded in late December and two in themiddle of last month. All five of the ``level-of-effort, cost-plus-fee''contracts, dubbed START for Superfund Technical Assessment and ResponseTeams, are effective Jan. 1, 1996 and will contribute the revenues andearnings of EEI's current fiscal year ending July 31, 1996, said a companyofficial.   In the latest announcement, EEI was selected to provide EPA with2,532,000 technical labor hours for Regions V, VI and VII. With alloptions, the combined contracts could total $158 million, said an EEIofficial.   The Chicago-based Region V contract calls for delivery of up to 1,128,00technical labor hours and totals $68 million with all options; theDallas-based Region VI deal calls for delivery of up to 887,000 technicallabor hours and could total as much as $60 million; and the KansasCity-based Region VII award could involve 517,000 hours and total $30million with all options, said an EEI official.   The other two regional EPA contracts that could be worth as much as $58million to the Buffalo area, N.Y.-based firm, and involve up to 981,000technical labor hours to support the agency's oil and hazwaste spillprograms in Regions IX and X, he said.   The San Francisco-based Region IX contract totals $34 million with alloptions, while the Seattle-based Region X contract totals $24 million withall options. Options amount to about half of the total hours and revenueover the five-year performance period, said the spokesman.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK   Hi-Rise Recycling Systems, with close to 50 employees and $3.25 millionin annual sales, is acquiring Maren Engineering Corp., a company double itssize, according to Brad Hacker, Hi-Rise controller.   Chicago-based Maren--a manufacturer, servicer and distributor of balingand recycling equipment--posts $7.5 million in annual sales and employs 95,Hacker said.   Why did Miami-based Hi-Rise, which provides recycling systems formulti-story buildings, acquire Maren? ``It's a good buy for two reasons,''Hacker told Waste Business. ``It gives us a manufacturing facility for ourproduct--the hi-rise system. And it gives us a distribution network.''   In addition, Maren is now positioned to bring its product line furtherinto the recycling market with Hi-Rise's background, contacts andinternational distribution network, said Floyd Tuominen, Hi-Rise chiefoperating officer.   Maren's client lists includes Coca Cola-USA, Georgia Pacific, KimberlyClark, TRW Automotive and Dunlop Tire Corp.   Hi-Rise anticipates closing the Maren deal during the first quarter of1996.   Meanwhile, the firm is looking for one additional company to acquirethis year in its plans to develop a national presence, said Hacker. If allplanned acquisitions are completed, he expects the company will record 1996billings of about $20 million and have 135 employees.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALLBy:By Anne Magnuson   An $80 million contract to construct 13,000 linear feet of slurry wallat Fresh Kills Landfill, Staten Island, will be let out to bid in Januaryby the New York City Department of Sanitation, city officials said lastweek.   Contractors have been watching for the long-awaited request forproposals for the slurry wall contract, which will include the installationof leachate collection systems at the landfill's two active disposalmounds.   Meanwhile, a $45 million contract won by SCS Engineers, Nyack, N.Y., iscurrently utilizing six million square feet of geocomposite, 10 millionsquare feet of HDPE, and 2 million cubic yards of fill to close 237 acresat Fresh Kills.   As part of these colossal projects at what is believed to be the world'slargest landfill, a gas extraction system is under installation by SCSEngineers. Sixty-five gas wells are being imbedded on the landfill'sclosed 100-foot-high mound and 108 gas wells on the closed 140-foot-highmound, said Duane Seaman, the landfill's project manager and designer from1992 to 1995 when he was with SCS Engineers. Seaman is now senior projectmanager, Roy F. Weston of N.Y., Valhalla.   Closure of the two active mounds, together processing 14,000 t/d ofbarged N.Y.C. waste, is not expected until 2015. These mounds areeventually to stand at 200 feet and 460 feet, the highest point on StatenIsland.   The SCS Engineers closure project began last February and is slated forcompletion in June. The magnitude of the job staggers the imagination whenconsidering the amount of dirt for the cap that is being hauled from NewJersey and the city's five boroughs. Seaman said 700 trucks a day arrive,about one per minute, carrying soil costing $6/cubic yard to $20/cubic yarddepending on its application.   The caps, when completed, will contain smooth HDPE on the flat areas andtextured liner and geocomposite on the slopes, not to exceed 3:1. Atwo-foot barrier protective layer consisting of a variety of soils willoverlay the plastic, to be topped with six inches of top soil seeded laterwith cool seasonal grasses and 4 pounds/acre of wildflowers. ``Somewhereout there are 237 acres of top soil we will have to locate,'' Seaman said.   SCS Engineers has designed a nearly unique gas duct venting system forthe closure mounds that precludes the purchase of expensive sand. Insteadof methane migrating through a costly porous layer, the gas will travelalong interconnected trenches to gas wells and vents. ``Over 380,000 cubicyards of sand would be a lot of sand,'' Seaman noted.   The overall gas extraction system, eventually to collect methane fromthe two closure mounds and the two active mounds, will form networks toflow into one main for use in a manner not yet determined. Selecting aconcessionaire to complete this construction is under negotiation at DOS.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLESBy:By Mary Powers   Design and procurement problems with the vitrification plant at theDepartment of Energy's former uranium enrichment facility at Fernald havedelayed its startup 17 months, but officials said it will not delay the10-year cleanup of the entire site.   The pressure of Superfund-imposed deadlines forced the fast-track designand construction of the $21 million vitrification pilot plant. Pieces ofthe project were designed in parallel that needed to be designed insequence, say DOE and FERMCO officials. ``As a result, we had to retrofitthe melter into the facility,'' said John Reising, DOE associate directorfor environmental restoration.   The decision to vitrify the radioactive materials in four cement siloswas signed last December, which started the CERCLA clock ticking. FERMCOhad 15 months to start remediation. The first glitch came when DOE hadtrouble getting bids for a melter with operating temperatures of up to 1450degrees C for the pilot plant. The RFP was revised down from a five ton/dayto a one ton/day furnace, said Nina Akgunduz, DOE's project manager. Themelter supplier is GTS Durateck Inc., Columbia, Md., with technical supportfrom the Vitreous State Laboratory at Catholic University in Washington,D.C.   The original operating schedule anticipated 100% efficiency from thepilot plant, which could have completed test burns in three months. But theschedule was revised after a team of specialists from Europe that operate asimilar facility there said a more realistic estimate would be 30%efficiency. ``That adds another nine months to the test burn,'' saysMichael Skriba, FERMCO's project manager for the pilot. The pilot isscheduled to begin operations in late February.   Data collected from the pilot will be used to design the $200 millionfull-scale vitrification plant, which will handle up to 30 tons of materiala day. Reising says one lesson learned so far is to include operations andconstruction people early on in the process. ``Design problems would havebeen caught earlier,'' he said.   The design and construction of that plant is also on a fast track, withthe first construction package to be awarded in March. The early design andconstruction will be limited to site preparation, water, power and otherstandard engineering pieces. Parsons is the design contractor for bothvitrification plants.   Complete vitrification of 9,700 tons of contaminated materials in thesilos will take three and a half years.   Meanwhile, a FERMCO spokesman said work on all contaminated areas atFernald have shifted out of the investigation stage.   ``It looks like 1996 will be the year for design. All key remediationdecisions were made in 1995.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITORHAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR   Editor's Note:  As part of our new format, we are updating the hazwastebusiness monitor table. Note that the companies and the unweighted hazwasteaverage are presented just as before. However, for the hazwaste ``equaldollar'' index we are, in effect, ``starting over'' by initially weightingeach company with $1,000 in the index. This will allow easy investmentcomparison over time with the new solid waste business monitor.  Also, toobtain a more representative basis for comparison with the general equitymarkets, we have replaced the Dow Jones Industrial Average with the Russell2000, an index of smaller companies, and the S&P 500.                                         Stock Price                Stock                  Dec.12  Dec.26 Percent Change        1.      Allwaste                4.25    4.62      +8.7        2.      Clean Harbors           2.88    2.82      -2.2        3.      Groundwater Tech.       14.75   13.75     -6.8        4.      Gundle Enviro.          5.50    5.68      +3.3        5.      Int. Tech Corp.         2.38    2.75     +15.5        6.      Molten Metal Tech.      37.25   31.12    -16.4        7.      OHM Corp.               7.12    7.38      +3.7        8.      Rollins Enviro.         2.88    2.88         0        9.      Safety-Kleen            14.75   15.25     +3.4        10.     Smith Env. Tech.        3.62    3.62         0        11.     Versar                  3.57    3.62      +1.4        12.     Roy F. Weston           6.00    5.25     -12.5                Haz Waste                Unweighted Average      104.95  98.74     -5.9                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30    -0.7                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83    +0.4                Hazwaste Equal-Dollar                 Index                  12,000  11,980    -0.2Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR                     SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR   Editor's Note:  As part of our expanded coverage, we are launching a newstock table to monitor the solid waste management industry. Our goal is toprovide a basis for investment comparison with the hazwaste industry andother, broader market averages. The companies have been  selected torepresent geographical diversity and a broad range of industry segments,including collection and disposal, recycling, waste-energy. The solid wasteunweighted average is a simple summation of the stock prices of all thecompanies. The ``equal dollar'' index represents the stock market value atany point in time from an initial investment of $1,000 in each of thetwelve companies.                                         Stock Price                Stock                  Dec. 12 Dec. 26 Percent Change        1.      Browning-Ferris Ind.    30.75   29.00   -5.7        2.      IMCO Recycling          22.75   22.50   -1.1        3.      Laidlaw Ind.            9.62    10.12   +5.2        4.      Mid-American Waste      3.75    3.38    -9.9        5.      Prins Recycling         8.00    7.75    -3.1        6.      Republic Industries     30.25   33.25   +9.9        7.      TransAmerican Waste     1.25    1.43    +14.4        8.      United Waste            39.12   36.50   -6.7        9.      USA Waste               20.00   17.62   -11.9        10.     WMX Technologies        30.75   29.00   -5.7        11.     Wellman Inc.            23.50   22.62   -3.7        12.     Western Waste           23.25   25.38   +9.2                Solid Waste                Unweighted Average      242.99  238.55  -1.8                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30  -0.7                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83  +0.4                Solid Waste Equal-Dollar                Index                   12,000  11,912  -0.7Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER.By:KH   The Fort Lee, N.J. company, due to softness in the markets forwastepaper, is projecting a record loss for the three months ended Dec. 31,1995, said Chairman and CEO Fred Prins.   Prins stock, which is traded on Nasdaq, slipped slightly after theannouncement on Dec. 22 (see Solid Waste Business Monitor on page 5). However, the firm's troubles over the year have brought the stock pricedown into the $7-$8 per share range from a 52-week high of 19 3/4.   ``While we are encouraged with our expected results for the entire 1995fiscal year, we will sustain a loss in the fourth quarter due largely tothe precipitous decline in the markets for wastepaper during the third andinto the fourth quarter,'' said Prins. ``The fourth quarter loss cannot beprecisely quantified at this time, due in part to three evolving situationsconsisting of a municipal contract and the collection of two accountsreceivable. As the fourth quarter draws to a close, however, we are seeinga material increase in the sale price of old corrugated containers,''historically a leading indicator of pricing trends in wastepaper, Prinsnoted.   ``We have, in fact, seen an improvement in prices for our old newspapersrecently,'' he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE'By:By Steven Lang   Geraghty & Miller and parent company Heidemij are ``in an acquisitionmode,'' according to Dee Farrell, Geraghty & Miller marketing coordinator.   Heidemij has begun acquisition talks with Madrid-based Eptisa, ``one ofthe three largest engineering companies in Spain with sales ofapproximately $100 million from infrastructure, water, construction, energyand environmental projects,'' said the official.   In addition, Geraghty & Miller has acquired United Kingdom-basedEnvironmental Strategies, Ltd. The ``small firm'' employs six people andhas offices in Leeds and Chester, said Farrell.   ``Recent growth in both our U.K. and worldwide business sectors requiresmore consultants. By merging with Environmental Strategies, staff will beable to expand our auditing and due diligence work and have a strongpresence in the northwest region of the U.K.,'' said Brian Crook, G & MInternational manager.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METALBy:SL   Recycling Industries has bought for about $4.3 million the business,land, buildings and equipment of San Juan, Tex.-based Anglo Metal, whichdoes business as Anglo Iron & Metal. That purchase price includes cash, anote, a non-compete agreement and 227,693 shares of Recycling Industriescommon stock valued at $925,000, said a spokesman.   The firm was acquired from Robert C. Rome and the Rome family and postedestimated 1995 revenues of about $15 million, said the spokesman. It isamong the largest ferrous and non-ferrous metals recyclers in the SouthTexas Rio Grande Valley with operations in San Juan, McAllen, Harlingen andBrownsville, all in Texas, he said.   ``With the Anglo acquisition, we have doubled the size of ourbusiness,'' said Thomas J. Wiens, Recycling Industries chairman and chiefexecutive officer.   In addition, the company plans to acquire more metals recyclingoperations in 1996, he said. Englewood, Colo.-based Recycling Industriesrecently acquired Las Vegas-based Nevada Recycling Industries and 20% ofThe Loef Co., based in Athens, Ga., said Wiens. With the Angloacquisition, Recycling Industries anticipates annual sales of more than $30million in 1996, he said.   ``The one-time and non-recurring expenses associated with this importantacquisition will negatively impact our earnings in our first quarter whichends December 31, 1995,'' said Wiens. ``We expect to begin recording thepositive impact of these revenues and earnings in the quarter beginningJanuary 1, 1996.''   ``The geographic location of the four plants in south Texas areimportant as they give us the ability to market, to purchase, and to sellin Mexico,'' said Mike Price, metals division president and chief operatingofficer. ``There is a tremendous amount of metals recycling businessoccurring between the U.S. and Mexico.   ``As the largest metals recycler on the South Texas/Mexico border, weplan to expand the operations of Anglo to take advantage of the existingbusiness opportunities and those we expect to see in the next few years asa result of the NAFTA agreement and the strong industrial growth in themarket,'' said Price.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGERBy:AR   The Montgomery-Otsego-Schoharie Solid Waste Management Authority (MOSA)expects to issue a request for proposals for ``the operation and ortake-over of all or some'' of its functions within the next few months,according to an official at headquarters at Howes Cave, New York.   The authority was formed by the three counties in 1987 in response to astate mandate to seek a regional solution to waste management. Since then,however, it has become caught up in the national tumult over flow control,and private haulers have shunned its facilities, which they claim are moreexpensive than hauling trash to other facilities in or out of state.   The last nail in the coffin for MOSA was a decision by the New YorkState Department of Environmental Conservation in early December not torenew a permit for the landfill the authority has been using. Because ofthe uncertainty regarding the entire waste management situation, theauthority would not be able to get financing to build another landfill intime, said the authority official.   This leaves the authority with no place to dump trash by the end of nextyear, he said.   The central New York region is undergoing rapid changes as largenational firms including Resource Recovery Systems of Greenwich,Connecticut and Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, have moved in, takingover smaller locally-run firms and aggressively competing for business(Integrated Waste Management, 6 Dec., 3). The authority has alreadyreceived a number of phone calls asking for details on its operations, saidthe spokesman.   The authority has $28-million in debt outstanding, continued theofficial.   Further details on what infrastructure is in place and the assets of theauthority will be contained in the request for proposals, he added. MOSAhas hired a bond counsel, general counsel and an engineering firm todevelop the RFP.   In 1994, the authority processed 104,000-tons of waste. In 1995 thisvolume was down to 75,000 to 80,000-tons due to loss of flow control, hesaid. When the authority was formed the tipping fee was $85 to $90 perton. I t is currently down to $45 to $50 per ton, he continued.   There are five transfer stations with the trash being landfilled at theEastern landfill northwest of Amsterdam, New York. While the state DEC hasnot yet officially denied the authority's request to continue to operatethe landfill, DEC officials told the authority the landfill must close atthe end of next year, said the official.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK   High-level radioactive residues currently stored at the DOE NiagaraFalls Storage Site (NFSS) pose a potential long-term risk to the public ifthey are left permanently, according to an new analysis by the NationalResearch Council.   The council prepared the report at the request of the Office ofEnvironmental Restoration of the U.S. Department of Energy. It examinedthe existing and proposed modifications of the waste containment structurein Lewiston, New York, which has been used since 1949 to store highlyradioactive residues separated during the processing of very rich uraniumores from Zaire.   The high-level residues remaining after the removal of uranium--used inthe Manhattan Project--along with other, less radioactive residues andwastes, are currently stored at NFSS, buried under an interim cap toprevent influx of moisture from precipitation and outflux of radon gas,said the report.   The report, ``Safety of the High-Level Uranium Ore Residues at theNiagara Falls Storage Site, Lewiston, New York,'' is based uponpresentations from DOE and its contractors, a review of documents, and avisit to the site. The residents of the area and others had theopportunity to express their views and concerns.   Based on available site sampling and monitoring information, there is noimmediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their currentconfiguration, said the report. However, DOE's proposed actions ofreplacing the interim cap with a ``permanent'' cap and of long-term sitemaintenance and monitoring do not address the potential risks to the publicfor the long periods of time commensurate with the duration of thatpotential risk, it concluded.   An important alternative, that of solidifying the high-level residues onsite and shipping the solidified residues to an off-site location, has notbeen considered. This alternative was chosen for managing essentiallyidentical residues of common origin currently stored in silos at theFernald Environmental Management Project site in Ohio, the study said.   If this alternative is considered, the occupational as well as publichealth safety aspects are important. Inputs from waste treatmenttechnology projects, such as the project for handling similar residuescurrently being implemented at the Fernald site, will provide importantinformation for making such assessments, said the report.   Furthermore, the present and potential future interactions between theNFSS and disposal sites adjacent to it, where non-radioactive toxicchemical and landfill wastes are currently disposed, have not beenaddressed adequately, either in the NFSS final environmental impactstatement or in subsequent studies and documentation, said the analysis.   The potential future health hazards posed by non-radiological, toxicmaterials such as lead and barium that are constituents of the buriedhigh-level residues at NFSS have not been adequately assessed, it said. Inaddition, there are substantial uncertainties in the estimates of costs andassociated risks for managing the residues at the Niagara site that havenot been fully assessed, cautioned the study.   Current site monitoring activities are inadequate for the determinationof long-term site integrity and potential future risks to the public andthe environment from the movement off-site of radioactive andnon-radioactive wastes in the NFSS containment structure, as well as thepossible influx of waste materials from the disposal sites adjacent to theNFSS, it said.   The report made recommendations for future action by DOE to provideprotection to the health and safety of the public and the environment, bothin the short and long terms. DOE should complete studies of related orsimilar treatment technologies such as the vitrification demonstration atthe Fernald site (see story on page 10) and related cost-risk-benefitstudies, it advised.   Further, a program should be developed by DOE for removal, treatment,and disposal off-site of the NFSS high-level residues. Because there is noimmediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their presentconfiguration, such studies will help ensure proper handling of theresidues when they are removed for disposal, as well as to provide anexample for future remediation of other sites containing radioactiveresidues. After removal of the high-level residues, remaining wastesshould be buried under a suitable protective cap, counseled the report.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B37-31IA086-000616-B018-257http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev26.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003703 text/html 72744HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:34:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:11 GMTContent-length: 72557Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev26.html Sample Issue Copyright WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUPERCRITICAL FLUIDS Eco Waste License Goes to Sweden (490 words) Catalysts Used to Promote Oxidation (345 words) CHEMICAL TREATMENTS Discarded Medical Materials Disinfected (713 words) Hydrothermal Oxidation of Chemical Weapons (190 words) Iron Curtain Holds Back Contamination (532 words) Waste Stays Behind Wall of Iron Filings (505 words) ADVANCED CONTAINMENT Creative Techniques Help Landfill Problem (482 words) INDUSTRY NEWS Million Dollar Challenge Extended (188 words) Nytest to Acquire GTI Subsidiary (233 words) Decrying Cement Kiln Absolution (587 words) BFI Plans on One-Time Charge (178 words) VECTRA Delays Its EnviroGlass Startup (219 words) Briefly Noted: (299 words) GOVERNMENT Committee Approves EPA's Use of TEFs (106 words) DOI Incurs Rath of EPA (110 words) Lessor Responsible for Sham Operation (203 words) EPA Discovers Something Fishy (376 words) Briefly Noted: (102 words) MICROBIAL TREATMENTS GAC Improves Biofilter Effect (395 words) Essex Team Treats Landfill Leachate (403 words) NUCLEAR/HAZARDOUS Molten Metal, SEG Will Process Resins (187 words) Oak Ridge Technology License Is Available (187 words) PARTICULATE REDUCTION Barrier Coatings Lower Pollution (148 words) Ceramic, Metal Bond for Hot Gas Filters (230 words) NITROGEN OXIDES REDUCTION New and Retrofit Coal Combustor (227 words) Turbine Emissions Are Reduced (145 words) RECYCLING & MINIMIZATION Plastics Council Focuses on Reuse (350 words) Memphis May Achieve Goal (365 words) TESTING BioChem Offers Online Monitor (123 words) Device Will Sample Waterborne Residues (412 words) PUBLICATIONS (74 words) CALENDAR (180 words) CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Eco Waste LicenseGoes to SwedenEco Waste Technologies (EWT, 2305 Donley Dr., Suite 108, Austin, TX78758-4535; Tel: 512/837-9961; Fax: 512/837-9430) has licensedChematur Engineering AB of Karlskoga, Sweden to build a majordemonstration supercritical water oxidation facility with acapacity of 1 gpm. Dick Lyon of Eco Waste says that thedemonstration plant will use the EWT technology that has been inoperation since 1994 at Huntsman Corp. in Austin, Texas.Lyon reports that EWT has completed an advanced version of itsHuntsman plant for the University of Texas at Austin. Thisexperimental facility will replace the original pilot plant andexperiment with the treatment of more complex chemicals and sludgeswith 20-30% solids from wastewater treatment plants. Its capacityis 0.5 to 1 gpm.R.N. McBrayer and J.W. Griffith of EWT disclose that the Huntsmanfacility is treating 5 gpm of wastes from experimental chemicalprocesses and washdowns at Huntsman's Austin Research Labs. Thewaste contains about 70% washwater and a mixture from three primarywaste streams of long-chain alcohols, glycols, and amines. Themixture has a total organic carbon concentration of more than50,000 mg/l and 6,908 mg/l ammonia. Effluent is required to meetthe pretreatment standards of the city of Austin which means amonthly average below 100 mg/l organic carbon and less than 20 mg/lammonia.A positive displacement pump pressures the feed to over 24.8 mPaand passes it through a heat exchanger. The addition of oxygen inthe reactor raises reactor temperatures to 538-650C. Effluentconsisting of water saturated with carbon dioxide passes throughthe heat exchanger, a heat recovery boiler, and an effluent coolerbefore depressurization to atmospheric pressure in a liquid/gasseparator. Excess oxygen level measurements in the liquid/gasseparator are used to control the oxygen injection rate in thereactor.Liquid effluent is held for sampling before discharge. Incontinuous operation, the effluent has less than 50 mg/l TOCconsisting of acetic acid or other simple organic acids, and thechemical oxygen demand is less than 16 mg/l. Ammonia concentrationsare 2.7 to less than 1 mg/l, and nitrate levels are withinacceptable limits at 6.4 mg/l. Dissolved solids consist mostly ofsulfate, chloride, potassium, and sodium salts. Total bicarbonateat 13,900 mg/l is high because the effluent is saturated withcarbon dioxide from the oxidation of organic matter.EWT has determined that the alloy used in the Huntsman facility hasresisted corrosion caused by chlorides in feedwater. The unit isdesigned for operation 24 h/d and 320 d/yr. It is scheduled fordescaling every 3 weeks using a nitric acid solution to removecarbonate scale from the heat exchanger. Some pump seals andpackings have been replaced, but McBrayer and Griffith report nosafety-related incidents or problems with reactor operation andsystem control in the first year of operations. They conclude thatit has demonstrated the ability to routinely treat the basic C-H-O-N compounds in chemical process waters.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Catalysts Used toPromote OxidationThe University of Tulsa (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Tulsa, OK74104) has demonstrated an effective method of destroying organiccompounds contained within an aqueous waste stream.  Catalyticsupercritical water oxidation (SCWO) is effective in thedestruction of the original organic compound. Incomplete conversionto low molecular weight partial oxidation products may be achieved.For years, wet oxidation has been successfully used as adestructive treatment for many organic species.  Increaseddestruction efficiency has been obtained by increasing the reactiontemperature to that above the critical temperature of water orthrough the addition of a catalyst.  During SCWO, advantage isgained in that the organic components and the oxygen are allpresent in a single, dense, fluid phase, minimizing mass transferresistance and providing relatively rapid reaction rates.The oxidation of phenol is of practical interest since it is acommon pollutant in industrial waste streams and is also believedto be an intermediate product in the oxidation pathway of highermolecular weight aromatic hydrocarbons.  Catalytic wet oxidation ofphenol over a CuO catalyst has been previously investigated.  Thereaction kinetics were determined and were thought to proceedthrough a homogeneous-heterogeneous mechanism.  The homogeneousreaction pathway caused an induction period during which freeradicals were accumulated in the aqueous phase.  Numerous reactionintermediates, including benzoquinones, acetic acid, and other lowmolecular weight organic acids, have been identified.Some of the products identified from supercritical water oxidationof phenol represent compounds that are more hazardous than thestarting organic component.  In order to minimize the formation ofthese partial oxidation products and to promote completeconversion, it is feasible to either increase the reactiontemperature or add a catalyst.The University of Tulsa study, published in Environmental Science& Technology [29, 2748-2753, 1995], gives a more detailed analysisof the use of a heterogeneous catalyst to promote the oxidation ofphenol.  Several partial oxidation products have been identified,and a reaction model involving a sequence of parallel and seriesreaction pathways has been developed.  The performance of severalheterogeneous catalysts has been compared.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Discarded MedicalMaterials DisinfectedEngineers at the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI, 6220 CulebraRd., P.O. Drawer 28510, San Antonio, TX 78228-0510; Tel: 210/684-5111) are testing the efficiency of a new medical waste treatmentsystem manufactured by Med Compliance Services (MCS, El Paso Dr.,El Paso, TX 79905; Tel: 915/772-2288).  The Encore-2100 systemfirst shreds the material, reducing its volume, then disinfects thewaste by exposure to a chlorine dioxide solution.  The chemicaltreatment system is an alternative to incineration processes whichhave traditionally been used to dispose of medical waste but havebeen threatened by the scheduled implementation of federalregulations.The EPA estimates that 3.4 million tons of waste are producedannually by U.S. health care facilities.  Hospitals are the singlelargest generator of that waste, contributing some 70% of the totalin the form of contaminated dressings, biopsy specimens, laboratorywastes, needles and syringes, and blood and blood products.  About3,000 hospitals now use incinerators as their primary means ofmedical waste disposal.The problem is that, as required by the Clean Air Act Amendments of1990, the EPA has issued a proposed rule, to be finalized by April15, 1996, that would impose stringent pollution controlrequirements on medical waste incinerator operators to reduce toxicwaste emissions such as dioxins and metals.  Implementation of thecontrol measure is expected to significantly increase equipment andoperating costs, making on-site incineration economicallyimpractical for many hospitals.  Some waste treatment industrysources estimate that the rule could force the closure of 80-90% ofexisting medical waste incinerators.James Scott, senior research engineer, has led the SwRI effort todesign test protocols for and perform third party, independenttesting of the Encore-2100 system to assess its compliance withstandards established by the EPA and the State and TerritorialAssociation of Alternate Treatment Technologies (STAATT), aconsortium of state medical waste regulators.  The Encore-2100,with a maximum production rate of 2,000 lbs./hr., is designed toeffectively and safely treat infectious waste so the processedmaterials can be disposed of in a conventional solid wastelandfill, says Scott.  Two specially configured industrialshredders in series reduce waste volume significantly and enhancecontact between al the waste components and the chlorine dioxidesolution, which is introduced during and after shredding.Chlorine dioxide, the key component in the chemical disinfectingsolution, is commonly used to treat drinking water and wastewater.It can be generated through a reaction involving sodiumhypochlorite, hydrochloric acid, and sodium chlorite solutions, orby mixing gaseous chlorine and sodium chlorite solutions.  Themethod used in the Encore-2100 technology involves a reaction ofthe chemicals under vacuum to create gaseous chlorine dioxide.The key feature of the gas generation system, manufactured by RioLinda Chemical Co. (North 10th St., Sacramento, CA 95814; Tel:916/443-4939), is its single ejector, which creates a vacuum,bringing the premeasured chemicals together to form gaseouschlorine dioxide, and introduces the gas into an aqueous solution.The disinfecting solution is removed from the waste using ahelipress and then recirculated and returned to the desiredconcentration prior to reuse in the treatment process.  Release ofairborne contaminants is controlled by a high efficiencyparticulate air (HEPA) filter and scrubber units.Scott explains the SwRI designated two protocols to measure theeffectiveness of the Encore-2100 system.  One protocol tests thesystem relative to EP requirements for sanitizing inanimate,nonfood contact surfaces.  This part of the study is beingconducted in accordance with EPA Good Laboratory Practices.  Thesecond protocol subjects the Encore-2100 to national standardsdeveloped by STAATT.  To satisfy these standards, the system mustdemonstrate a 99.9999% reduction in selected microorganism speciesrepresenting vegetative bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, andtubercle mycobacteria.  In addition, the process must demonstratea 99.99% reduction in bacterial spores, including highly resistantforms of Bacillus.SwRI incorporated stringent quality assurance controls to encompassall aspects of the study, including sources and culturing of themicroorganisms, processing of waste through the Encore-2100 system,and microbiological analyses of the samples.  Quality assurancedocuments generated during the study validate the sample resultsand allow the complete reproduction of the experimental results.SwRI has collected about 150 samples from the Encore-2100 process. The first commercial unit will be installed at an existing MCSfacility in Albuquerque, NM.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Hydrothermal Oxidationof Chemical WeaponsThe Dept. of Defense (DOD) and General Atomics (3550 GeneralAtomics Ct., San Diego, CA 92121; Tel: 619/455-3000, Fax: 619/455-2263) demonstrated that a hydrothermal oxidation (HTO) technologycan safely destroy chemical weapons and solid rocket propellantswithout incineration. HTO uses water heated to 500F  andpressurized to 4000 psi to mix oxygen or air with organiccontaminants, forming carbon dioxide, water, and sometimes, mineralsalts or acids.  No harmful emissions are produced and all endproducts can be safely disposed of, recycled, or released.According to Jeff Broido of General Atomics, the unit destroys thenerve agents VX, GB and mustard gas beyond the limits of detection.Research is looking into how to deal with the heavy amounts ofchlorine generated, and the corrosion it brings, when destroyingsuch weapons.While water usually repels such materials, the pressure and heatallow it to mix and oxidize.  Broido says that the trick is thatthe water's behavior is reversed.  It behaves like a non-polarsolvent. The bench-scale HTO unit General Atomics operates in SanDiego is being used to test a variety of hazardous materials forcommercial use.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Iron Curtain HoldsBack ContaminationHydrogeologist Robert Gillham of the University of Waterloo Centrefor Groundwater Research (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) continuesresearch on a permeable subsurface treatment wall containing ironfilings and sand to purify contaminated groundwater. Last fallarticles first began appearing in the scientific literature on theuse of iron filing walls to keep out toxic wastes. Since then, thisnew technology has been rapidly attracting attention as aneconomically competitive tool for groundwater remediation andtreatment.Gillham's wall, located at a test site in Waterloo, separates twowater bodieson one side is contaminated groundwateron the other,water almost clean enough to drink.  Goundwater contaminated withvolatile organic compounds flows through the wall naturally, and achemical reaction purifies the water.  The process could be used atthousands of hazardous waste sites needing remediation, accordingto Gillham.Gillham started to develop the method when he noticedirregularities in water samples taken from plastic-lined wells.The plastic absorbed contaminants and biased water qualitymeasurement.  Samples taken from wells with metal casings showedeven lower contaminant levels without absorption into the metal.The reason for this phenomenon was corrosion.  The contaminantreacts with iron, forming harmless byproducts, including chloride,ethene, and ethane.  The reaction leaves no waste material tocontain, transport, and dispose.  With a high enough iron content,contaminated groundwater can be treated to meet drinking waterstandards.Gillham has used a 20% iron concentration for more than four yearsat the test site to treat groundwater contaminated with 250 mg/L oftrichloroethylene (TCE) and 45 mg/L of tetrachloroethylene (PCE)with no detectable deterioration of the medium.  Although thetreated water does not meet drinking water standards, Gillham saysthis could be possible if a higher concentration of iron were used.To use the corrosive reaction for groundwater cleanup, thedirection and depth of the contaminated flow must be known, atrench dug, and the reactive formulation placed in the hole.  Theiron and sand wall has a higher permeability than the surroundingsoil, allowing the contaminated groundwater to flow freely throughthe reactive material.  Residence times, depending on theconcentration of the contaminant, are about two days.During the reaction, pH increases and minerals precipitate out ofthe water to form calcium carbonate, which could clog the media andcause the groundwater to flow around the wall.  To restorepermeability, the iron filings can be stirred to increase porosity.Inorganic mineral precipitates cause 2-15% losses in porosity peryear.  Spent iron can be replaced.  No stirring or mediareplacement is expected to be needed for at least 10 years at thetest site.Capital costs for installing the treatment wall system arecomparable to pump and treat methods.  The only operation andmaintenance costs, other than periodic groundwater sampling, couldinvolve stirring up the media, according to John Vogan, manager ofEnviroMetal Technologies (42 Arrow Rd., Guelph, Ontario N1K 1S6Canada; Tel: 519/824-0432), a company set up by Gillham to marketthe patented technology.  A 180 meter long by 9 meter deep (600' x30') funnel and gate system to treat 50-60 mg/L TCE and 10 mg/L PCEin a high velocity aquifer would cost about $1.5 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Waste Stays BehindWall of Iron FilingsA proposed wall of iron filings to protect four Massachusetts townsfrom contaminated water coming from the former MassachusettsMilitary Reservation was first described in an article in Science[269, 473, 1995]. Unlike slurry walls and similar physicalbarriers, the iron filings will form a permeable but reactivebarrier to break down trichlorethylene, tetrachloroethylene, andother chlorinated contaminants.This proposed iron (Fe) barrier is a product of continuing researchinto methods to treat groundwater contaminants in place without theusual pump-and-treat operations. Engineers in Oklahoma haveconducted lab tests which explain how iron filings can reduceCr(VI) in groundwater to Cr(III).  Robert M. Powell (ManTechEnvironmental Research Services Corp., P.O. Box 1198, Ada, OK74821-1198), Robert W. Puls, Sharon K. Hightower, and David A.Sabatini conducted stirred batch reactor experiments in darkened500 ml reactors with simulated aquifer water, scrap iron filings,and alluvial aquifer material.The competitive desorption of CrO4-2 from surface absorption sitesby excess PO4-3 resulted in nearly full recovery of chromium fromexperiments without iron filings. In experiments with iron filings,chromium was reduced from 109 mg/l to below 0.3 mg/l and there wasno subsequent CrO4-2 recovery by PO4-3 desorption, confirmingreduction by iron. Powell's group found that different forms ofmetallic iron have greatly different abilities to reduce chromate.Impure and partially oxidized iron is the most effective.Powell's observations of changes support the theory that anelectrochemical corrosion cell on the surface of an iron filingcauses the thermodynamic instability that drives oxidation-reduction reactions without external energy input. Iron in thezero-valence state is an electron donor, and chromate ions serve asoxidants in such cells. Powell wrote in Environmental Science &Technology [29-8, 1913-1921, 1995] that the corrosion cell is astable domain with clearly defined anodic and cathodic regions.Differences in the surface potential of impure iron filings due tocomposition or grain structure and orientation result in unstableregions and electron movement. Previously rusted surfaces are sitesof dissolution where potentially unfilled electron shells existnext to filled electron shells, and reaction rates are high. Ananodic region develops where there is an electron deficiency, andit has a positive charge and Fe++ ions at the surface. They are freeto enter the solution.Powell suggests that the positively charged zone electrostaticallyattracts chromate and sulfate ions, promoting formation of theFe2SO4 complex and redox coupling of chromate ions. The negativelycharged cathodic region of the surface is dominated by cations andnon reducible sodium and calcium ions. Aluminosilicates in aquifersare able to provide electron acceptors to maintain the dissolutionof iron surfaces.In the case of the Massachusetts project, Fe++ ions in corrosioncells on iron filings would strip chlorine ions from chlorinatedhydrocarbons in moving groundwater and turn them into harmlessethene and ethane. Summary report EPA542-S-95-001 from the SolidWaste Office of the Environmental Protection Agency states thatfour demonstration projects are using metal-enhanced dehalogenationunder a patent held by the University of Waterloo.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Creative TechniquesHelp Landfill ProblemTrial and error has been the "engineering" method used to developsome of the most effective landfill management techniques.  Thishas also been the case at Florida's Citrus County Landfill, whereerosion control has been aggravating operators since the facilityopened in January 1990.  The landfill is located in west-centralFlorida, approximately 15 miles east of the Gulf of Mexico.The current plan, a 17-acre plastic-lined cell, is the first of sixphases designed to last 30 years.  With a surface elevation of 120ft. above sea level and a depth of 80 ft., the landfill is uniquein Florida, where shallow water tables can limit excavation depths.Side slopes, three of which are lined, are a steep 2:1 (horizontalto vertical) ratio.  The unlined side contains an entrance roadextending down into the cell.Although ditches were used on the unlined slope to control erosion,maintenance was a continuous nightmare.  Attempts to hydroseedmulch were ruined by rainstorms that washed away the seed before ittook root.  The rain also formed gullies which deepened with eachstorm.  The landfill was kept open only by periodicallyreconstructing the slopes using bulldozers to excavate eroded soilsfrom the stormwater pond.After a catastrophic 11 inch rainfall laid waste to slopes that hadbeen restored only months before, stapled sod was installed overburlap cloth on all unlined slopes.  The solution has required onlyminor maintenance since installation two years agohelping to makethe costly $4/sq. yd. installation price palatable.When the price of sod can't be justified, operators use seed andseaweed mulch on slopes that are angled at 4:1 or flatter.  CitrusCounty used hydrilla and water hyacinth removed from nearby canalsto enrich the soil and facilitate seed germination by retainingmoisture.The liners required by law have also contributed to the landfill'serosion problems.  Erosion tends to occur at the edge of liners,since the synthetic liner sheds nearly 100% of contactedstormwater.  Sheet flow concentrates at the bottom of the line anderosion occurs where flows become concentrated on steep slopes.When the soil layer next to the liner is eroded away, solid wastecan become exposed and contaminate the stormwater.  Fortunately,erosion can be controlled at the liner edge by constructing a ditchlined with plastic sheeting.  Costs for manpower and equipment areabout $4.60/linear foot of ditch.Officials at Citrus County landfill prefer a lined ditch to sod orstaked sod with burlap because it will stand up to most any flowvelocity.  Lined ditches also provide a barrier to leachate and donot have to be watered or mowed.  LDPE sheets work well whenapplied in 60 foot sections or longer.  A woven, coated, 3-plygeomembrane of LDPE with carbon black for ultraviolet lightresistance is available for about $1.17/sq. yd. for 16 mils and$1.80/sq. yd. for 20 mils.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Million DollarChallenge ExtendedThe results from Monsanto's (800 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO63141; Tel: 314/694-1000) first One Million Dollar Challenge wereso encouraging, the company is bringing the program out for anencore.  Another one million dollars will be awarded to theindividual or team that develops the most cost-effective andcommercially practical technology for producing a clean sodiumchloride stream while recovering high purity amino acids and bothphosphoric and phosphorous acids from a complex wastewater stream.The initiative supplements Monsanto's ongoing internal program toeliminate waste and strengthen environmental performance.  Anindependent group of experts from the Center for Waste Reductiontechnologies (part of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers)will evaluate the proposals submitted in response to the secondchallenge.From proposals submitted, technology which most effectively meetsthe criteria will be funded with $500,000 for one year ofdevelopment.  A second $500,000 payment will be made followingsuccessful demonstration of this technology in a continuouslaboratory unit.  All proposals must be submitted by March 31. Toobtain more information and an application, call 800/366-0339 orsend a fax request to 314/426-6935 (email: MonChalng@aol.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Nytest to AcquireGTI SubsidiaryNytest Environmental Inc. (60 Seaview Blvd., Port Washington, NY11050-4618; Tel: 516/625-550) has acquired the operatinglaboratories of GTEL Environmental Labs, Inc., previously a wholly-owned subsidiary of Groundwater Technology, Inc. (GWTI, 100 RiverRidge Dr., Norwood, MA 02062; Tel: 800/635-0053 or 617/769-7600,Fax: 617/769-7992).  The transaction took effect December 31, 1995.Nytest acquired the GTEL laboratories in Milford, NH, Wichita, KSand Tampa, FL which employ about 150 people.  This transactionsubstantially increases the assets of Nytest and the companyfurther anticipates that the acquisition will substantiallyincrease the company's revenues and cash flow in the future.John Gaspari, president and CEO of Nytest, said his company isexcited about this acquisition.  In 1995, the GTEL laboratoriesgenerated revenue of more than $11 million.  Gaspari added thatGTEL has a quality reputation and an excellent management and staffof experienced chemists and technicians.  The addition of the GTELstaff and laboratories will enhance Nytest capabilities and expandits facilities' presence to new geographic regions.  The combinedcompanies will offer a broader range of analytical testing andservices than either company individually while servingcomplementary market segments.  The GTEL staff and management willcontinue under the direction of Guy Sylvester.Nytest is a leading provider of specialized analytical services forthe analysis of hazardous waste.  Groundwater Technology, Inc. isone of the world's leading environmental consulting, engineeringand remediation firms.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Decrying CementKiln AbsolutionOne month after the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission(TNRCC) released a study that absolved Midlothian's cement andsteel plants of producing hazardous emissions, activists haveexpressed skepticism over the study results.Sue Pope, leader of the environmental group Downwinders at Risk,was one of about 300 residents who attended the TNRCC's meeting inMidlothian.  State officials at the meeting reviewed results oftheir soil-and-air samples study, which has been conducted in theMidlothian area since 1991.The report summarized the results of over a thousand samplescollected which indicated that exposure to the monitored levels arenot likely to result in adverse health effects. Where relevantcomparison data were available, air and soil concentrationsmeasured in Midlothian were found to be similar to those measuredin other Texas communities.But Pope said her family's deteriorating health is proof enoughthat the emissions from Midlothian's steel and cement industriesare harmful.  Pope said the family had some very unexplainedillnesses that began in 1986.  Pope's own health problems since1986 have included malignant tumors, endometriosis, respiratoryproblems, chronic fatigue and autoimmune disorders.  She said herfamily's livestock has developed mysterious problems as well,including cancer, tumors and high numbers of multiple births.  TheMidlothian area also has a higher-than-normal occurrence ofchildren born with Down's syndrome and adults with cancer andtumors, Pope said.The TNRCC's study detailed how 176 soil samples were conducted at160 sites in and around Midlothian, Center, Carthage, Cleburne,Terrell and Quitman for polychlorinated dibenzodioxin andpolychlorinated dibenzofuran concentrations.  They found nosignificant emissions or high levels of toxins.  Additionally, thestate agency conducted a screening risk analysis for Midlothian'sTexas Industries Inc. (TXI) plant and concluded that based on theestimated emissions and the assumptions made during this analysis,the excess lifetime carcinogenic risks and non-cancer hazards thatresult for exposure to contaminants potentially emitted from theTexas Industries Inc. facility are considered to be within anacceptable range.But Pope and other residents do not believe the TNRCC's study wentfar enough in trying to determine potential health risks fromemissions.  She questioned why a screening analysis, rather than ahealth-risk assessment, was conducted about TXI's emissions.  Popeand others believe that the study's results were released at thistime to hush up the subject and may have been due to politicalpressure from the Republican-led state legislature and governor'soffice.  Downwinders at Risk has asked the EPA to investigateemission levels from Midlothian's industries, and expectpreliminary results of the study within a few weeks.Waste Treatment Stock Watch(At Close, January 2, 1995)                                          Current      Last      Company                 Symbol        Price     Month     ChangeAllwaste Inc.                    ALW        5.125     4.375    +0.750Browning-Ferris                  BFI       29.500    30.500    -1.000Catalytica Inc.                 CTAL        4.375     4.500    -0.125Celgene                         CELG       13.000    10.125    +2.875Dow Chemical Co.                 DOW       71.125    71.375    -0.500Environmental Elements Corp.     EEC        2.000     1.750    +0.250EnviroTest Systems Corp.        ENVI        3.000     2.750    +0.250Groundwater Technology          GWTI       13.750    18.250    -4.500IMCO Recycling                   IMR       23.625    22.875    +0.750Met-Pro Corp.                    MPR       14.250    13.750    +0.500Molten Metal Technology         MLTN       32.750    36.250    -3.500North American Technologies     NATK        0.531     0.781    -0.250Noxso Corp.                     NOXO        5.500     5.875    -0.375Republic Waste                  RWIN       34.000    27.625    +6.375Rohm & Haas Co.                  ROH       64.625    61.250    +3.375Rollins Environmental            REN        2.875     3.125    -0.250Sybron                          SYCM       10.750    12.375    -1.625USA Waste Services Inc.           UW       18.750    21.000    -2.250U.S. Filter                        USF        26.625       22.500      +4.125Vectra Technologies               VCTR         2.000        2.750      -0.750WMX Technologies, Inc.             WMX       30.000        29.875      -0.125Source:  BCC, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BFI Plans onOne-Time ChargeBrowning-Ferris Industries Inc. (BFI, 757 N. Eldridge Pkwy.,Houston, TX 77079; Tel: 713/870-8100 ) announced plans to record aone-time charge of $0.05/share in its second quarter, ending March31, from the redemption of $745 million in debt.   The company saidit called its $400 million of 6-3/4% convertible subordinateddebentures due 2005 and its $345 million of 6-1/4% convertiblesubordinated debentures due 2012 for redemption on February 2,1996.BFI said it believes the redemption will enhance shareholder valuebecause the debentures would have been convertible for about 16million shares of the company's common stock.  The redemption alsoallows the company to refinance the debt at more favorable rates,the company said.The 6-1/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.25% of face valueplus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $41 per share.The 6-3/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.00% of face valueplus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $52.50/share.The announcement comes two weeks after Browning-Ferris filed ashelf registration for $1 billion in debt and equity securities.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996VECTRA Delays ItsEnviroGlass StartupVECTRA Technologies Inc. (1010 S. 336th St., No. 220, Federal Way,WA 98003; Tel: 206/874-2235, Fax: 206/874-2401) said Thursday it istemporarily suspending all construction and startup activitiesassociated with its EnviroGlass vitrification program.VECTRA, which supplies technology and services to the powerindustry, said suspending the vitrification program will have anear-term positive effect on cash flow since the company expectedto spend a considerable amount of money to complete and transportthe unit.The company said that it is too soon to tell if the suspension willhave any serious long-term effects.  VECTRA said suspending thevitrification program was necessary because delays in placing itstransportable vitrification unit at its lead client's site made itimpossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-level waste.  VECTRA is now negotiating to remove and process thewaste on a subcontract basis.   However, if it is not successful inthese negotiations, VECTRA may be forced to accept contractcancellation.The company said it will be actively pursuing new contracts for thevitrification technology and if VECTRA wins another project, theprogram will be reactivated.   VECTRA also said it continues itspreviously announced program to sell assets or raise additionalcapital in an effort to eliminate long-term bank debt by the firstquarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:WMX Technologies Inc. (3003 Butterfield Rd., Oak Brook, IL 60521;Tel: 708/572-8800) will exchange its 28% minority interest inServiceMaster Consumer Services for 18.1 million unregisteredServiceMaster (75th & Lemont Rd., Downers Grove, IL 60516; Tel:708/759-1003) shares.  This represents about 19% of the outstandingshares.Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;Tel: 617/621-1315) announced a letter of intent for a strategicalliance with Uhde GmbH (D-44128 Dortmund, Germany), one of theworld's largest engineering and construction companies.  Thecompanies have agreed to work together to market Molten Metal'sproprietary Catalytic Extraction Processing (CEP) technology toUhde's worldwide customers.Envirotest Systems Corp. (ENVI, 2525 E. Camelback Rd., No. 720,Phoenix, AZ 84016; Tel: 602/912-1110) has reported results for thecompany's fiscal year-end.  Revenues for the year were $104.8million, up from $96.4 million recorded in the fiscal 1994.Reflecting extraordinary factors, including costs associated withits contract dispute with Pennsylvania, charges related to thestart up of its programs in Connecticut and Colorado and a $5.4million valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset,Envirotest had a net loss for the year of $14.9 million, or $0.93per share.IMCO Recycling Inc. (5215 N. O'Connor Blvd., Irving, TX 75039;Tel: 214/869-6575) and Alchem Aluminum Inc. (425 Jay St.,Coldwater, MI 49036; Tel: 517/279-9596) have announced a jointventure to build a new aluminum recycling plant.  IMCO will own 75%of the project and Alchem will own 25%.  A site has not beenselected as of yet, but the companies are looking at Michigan, Ohioand Indiana.  Bill Warshauer of Alchem Aluminum said that the twocompanies hope to begin construction next year.  The planned plantwill have an annual capacity of 150 million pounds and will costabout $10 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Committee ApprovesEPA's Use of TEFsThe Environmental Protection Agencys (EPA) Science Advisory Boardhas supported the agency's use of "toxic equivalency factors"(TEFs) in a draft review of dioxin risk reassessment.  TEFs arecalculations that equate dioxin with several other dioxin-likechemicals (polychlorinated biphenyls, for example) to assess humanhealth risks.Although individual board members questioned the use of TEFs, thecommittee supported the calculations as the best available tool forrisk assessment.  A peer review of TEF that would focus oninteractions between chemicals that affect toxicity was suggestedby the committee, however. The agency is revising the dioxinreassessment and expects to report to the board next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DOI IncursRath of EPAThe Dept. of the Interior (DOI) has incurred the wrath of theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) by operating a hazardouswaste facility without a permit at an Indian reservation.  The DOIstored over 2000 gal. of ignitable hazardous waste containingchromium and lead at its Fort Defiance Navajo Agency facility (FortDefiance, AZ), some of it for more than 10 years.The EPA is recommending a $269,019 fine for this violation of theResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and demanded DOI movethe waste to a treatment, storage or disposal facility within 30days.  The EPA recently cited DOI for a similar violation inanother part of Arizona.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Lessor Responsiblefor Sham OperationIn the late 1980s, Asphalt Recovery Systems (Chicago, IL) beganpiling asphalt debris on a seven-acre site in Chicago leased fromD. Raymond Shane.  The company claimed to be stockpiling thematerial to recycle for road patching work.  In 1989, the city suedAsphalt Recovery for operating a landfill on a site without apermit and won a $4.8 million judgment for cleanup costs.After Asphalt Recovery went out of business in 1993 leaving nousable assets, the city sued Shane, contending that he had a dutyto check up on his tenant.  Having failed to do so, Shane was, inthe city's eyes, responsible for any environmental damage.  Thecity code contains a provision in place that assigns financialresponsibility for environmental cleanups to landlords.A Cook County circuit court judge ruled that, under the city code,Shane was responsible for cleaning up the 300,000 tons of debris onhis property.  Henry Henderson, Chicago's environmentalcommissioner, said that the decision sends a clear message tounscrupulous operators masquerading as recyclers that they areoperating under a false assumption if they believe they can dumptheir trash in Chicago and let taxpayers clean it up. Shane'sattorney has promised an appeal.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EPA DiscoversSomething FishyA 20% increase in the number of fish consumption advisories werereported by state health agencies during fiscal 1994, according toa survey compiled by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).The agency reported that 46 states have issued advisories, andseven have statewide noticesFlorida, Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, and New York.  Since the survey wascompiled, New Hampshire and Vermont have also issued statewideadvisories.Fourteen percent of US lakes, 4% of U.S. rivers, all of the GreatLakes, and most coastline are currently under advisories.  Morethan 60% of the advisories are for mercury, primarily from coal-burning power plants, incinerators, and industrial sites.  Othercontaminants triggering advisories include polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs), the pesticide chlordane, DDT, dioxin, and othertoxic substances that can accumulate in fish tissue.The increase in advisories does not necessarily mean that lakes andrivers are more pollutedit could signal an expansion of statemonitoring and assessment efforts.  Minnesota, for example, listed565 advisories, more than double that of any other state.And simply because a state has more waterbodies under advisory doesnot mean that these states have the worst fish contaminantproblems.  According to Jeff Bigler of the EPA's Office of Water,the high number of advisories more likely characterize both thelevel of effort put into identifying waterbodies of concern and theassessment methods used by the state for developing fishconsumption advisories.Bigler says that the criteria for issuing an advisory often variesfrom one state to another, with different thresholds used as thebasis for issuing advisories.  EPA Administrator Carol Brownerannounced the release of a new EPA database, the National Listingof Fish Consumption Advisories, during a speech at the AmericanFisheries Society in Tampa, FL.  The database includes informationon the types of advisories, the species of fish affected, thechemicals included in the advisory, locations, dates of issue, andcontact names and telephone numbers.  Maps allow users to selectbetween regions, states, chemicals, species, and a number of otherparameters for narrowing an advisory search.The National Listing of Fish Consumption Advisories is available tothe public on five computer disks and will be upgraded annually.The listing also is available on the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/water.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:The European Union will ratify a treaty that protects lakes andwater sources that cross international borders.  The treaty, aimedat establishing pollution prevention and control standards inmember nations, hopes to protect human health, promote prudent useof natural resources, and address regional environmental problems.Carol Browner, EPA administrator, announced a package thatincludes Superfund reforms designed to make cleanups more cost-effective, reduce litigation, and help communities and statesbecome more involved. The EPA reforms will establish a NationalRemedy Review Board to control costs, establish reasonable nationalassessment criteria, and provide stakeholders a role in riskassessment design.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GAC ImprovesBiofilter EffectA team of researchers from the National Tsing Hua University (HsinChu, Taiwan, ROC) and Union Chemical Labs (ITRI, Hsin Chu, Taiwan,ROC) have joined together to systematically investigate thetransient behavior of biofilters during shut down, restartoperations and shock loading.  Toluene was used as the gaspollutant in the study.Biodegradation processes have been validated as a promisingalternative to other conventional air pollution controltechnologies.  Toluene is a toxic air pollutant and a commonconstituent emitted from many industrial processes, such aschemical manufacturing, painting, and petroleum refining.  Aneconomically feasible control method would be advantageous in lightof increasingly stringent regulation for air emissions of volatileorganic compounds (VOCs).With the easily biodegradable nature of toluene, biofiltration ofair emissions containing this pollutant is considered a preferablealternative to other traditional physical and chemical airpollution control methods, including scrubbing, incineration, andactivated carbon adsorption.  Advantages of this process includelow investment and operating costs, high removal efficiency andreliable operational stability.  Furthermore, high destructionefficiency of the pollutant in the biofilter causes no secondarypollution.Biofiltration can be described as a process that utilizes microbialactivity for the aerobic degradation of pollutants.  A biofiltercontains filter materials (mainly compost or peat) on whichmicroorganisms are immobilized to form a biolayer.  When wastegases pass through the reactor, target pollutants diffuse into thebiofilm with subsequent aerobic biodegradation.  In general,natural filter materials provide sufficient inorganic nutrients formicroorganisms, thus the addition of inorganic nutrients is notrequired.In the Taiwan study, experiments were conducted in threelaboratory-scale biofilters with mixtures of chaff/compost,diatomaceous earth (DE)/compost, and granular activated carbon(GAC)/compost, respectively, as the filter materials.  The responseof each biofilter to shock loading was studied by abruptly changingthe concentration or flow rate of the inlet gas.  For eachtransient operation, toluene concentration was continuouslymeasured until a new steady state was achieved.According to their report, published in Hazardous Waste & HazardousMaterials [12, 3, 1995], the researchers found that the biofiltersresponded effectively to the shut down and restart operation andshock loading of toluene concentration or gas flow rate.  Inaddition, the highly adsorptive GAC could improve the biofilterperformance, especially for the treatment of less water solublecompounds.  The GAC/compost biofilter had the highest maximumelimination capacity of 97 (g hr-1m-3).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Essex Team TreatsLandfill LeachateHigh concentrations of sulfate in wastewater streams subjected toanaerobic digestion have been considered undesirable because of theproduction of sulfide during digestion, which can inhibitmethanogenesis.  It has been reported that a >76% removal oforganic COD is possible when high sulfate wastewater (from anedible fat manufacturer) was anaerobically digested, although only21-45% overall COD was removed because of sulfide remaining in theeffluent.Appreciable sulfate may be present normally in effluents, andanaerobic digestion results in low biogas formation and highconcentrations of sulfide in the effluent.  Anaerobic digestion hasalso been successful in removing high sulfate concentrations frommine waters and contaminated groundwater.Scientists at the University of Essex (Dept. of Biology, ColchesterCO4 3SQ, England) have finished a study in which landfill leachatewas treated in upflow hybrid (sludge-bed/fixed-bed) anaerobicreactors by both methanogenic digestion and by sulfate-reducingdigestion (Water Resources; 30, 1, 1996).The University of Essex study achieved steady state removalefficiencies of COD under methanogenic digestion of 81-97%,depending upon organic loading rate; and effective treatmentoccurred up to a volumetric COD loading rate of 3.75 kg COD m-3 d-1.In sulfate-reducing digesters SO24- was converted stoichiometricallyto dissolve H2S, driving organic matter mineralization.  Sulfateconcentrations of 35, 105 and 175 mM in the feed resulted in SO24-removal efficiencies of 92, 52 and 35%, respectively.Steady state removal efficiencies of organic COD in the sulfate-reducing digesters averaged 62% at 35mM, 80% at 105 mM, and 84% at175 mM feed SO24- concentrations.  The ratio of COD:SO24- (g/g)utilized was dependent upon the concentration of SO24- present, andat 35 M SO24- was 0.67.At an organic loading rate <1 kg COD m-3 d-1 the sulfate reducingdigesters offered organic removal efficiencies comparable tomethanogenic digesters, but were less effective at higher loadingrates.  Propionate accounted for the majority of the residual CODin the effluents from the methanogenic digesters, but acetate inthe effluent from the sulfate-reducing digesters.Removal of sulfide from the reactors was achieved by addition ofiron and by off gassing sulfides, but there was no increase in CODremoval after sulfide removal which indicated that sulfide toxicitywas not significant.  Both methanogenic and sulfate-reducingreactors completely removed up to 100 ppm Cu, Mn, Ni and Zn addedin the feed, indicating that even methanogenic reactors producesufficient sulfide to precipitate these metals completely.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Molten Metal, SEGWill Process ResinsScientific Ecology Group, Inc., (SEG, 1560 Bear Creek Rd., OakRidge, TN 37830; Tel: 423/481-0222, Fax: 423/481-0827), asubsidiary of Westinghouse Electric Corp. (11 Stanwix St.,Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1384; Tel: 412/244-2000) and the world'slargest processor of low-level radioactive waste, has teamed withMolten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;Tel: 617/621-1315) to build a Quantum-CEP (Catalytic ExtractionProcessing) facility for processing ion exchange resins.  Thefacility is capable of processing 650 High Integrity Containers or130,000 cu. ft. of ion exchange resins per year, representing 65%of the U.S. market for low level radioactive ion exchange resin.The facility has all required regulatory permits, is mechanicallycomplete, and has been turned over to operations.  Major systemshave been tested and the instrumentation and controls have beencalibrated.  Bud Arrowsmith, SEG president, said he is happy thatthe facility is available on schedulethe facility has alreadyreceived spent ion exchange resins from customers.  William M.Haney, III, president and CEO of Molten Metal, added that thefacility is the largest and most sophisticated system in the worldfor handling this difficult radioactive material.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Oak Ridge TechnologyLicense Is AvailableA method for the destruction of chlorinated volatile organiccompounds (CVOCs), especially trichloroethylene (TCE) andchloroform, using vapor phase off-gas treatment is available forlicensing from the Dept. of Energys (DOE) Oak Ridge National Lab,Earth and Atmospheric Environmental Sciences Division.The process can be used for both groundwater and soil remediation.A basic bench scale proof of principle apparatus has beenconstructed and tested.  The principal advantages of the processare expected to be high efficiency, cost effectiveness, and minimalproduction of secondary waste.  In addition, production systemsbased on this technology are expected to be very compact for arather large capacity of CVOCs, should not be subject to fouling,and are expected to require very minimal maintenance.Commercial firms interested in procuring a license for thistechnology may obtain more detailed technical information about theinvention by requesting and executing a Proprietary InformationAgreement (PIA).  To request a PIA, please contact James R. Palmer,licensing executive at Lockheed Martin Energy Systems, Inc. (Officeof Technology Transfer, Building 701SCA, M/S 8242, P.O. Box 2009,Oak Ridge, TN 37831; Tel: 615/574-7472, Fax: 615/576-8543).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Barrier CoatingsLower PollutionNanostructured thermal barrier coatings for use on high efficiency,low emission, natural gas-fired turbines are the subject of aresearch project at Nanomaterials Research Corp. (NRC, 10960 N.Stallard Place, Tucson, AZ 85737; Tel: 602/575-1354).  The readyavailability of clean natural gas at low prices accelerating theuse of gas turbines.  Over the next 10 years, NRC scientist TapeshYadav projects advanced gas turbines and combined cycles willaccount for about 45% of additions to global power generationcapacity.  In order to operate at minimum emission and highefficiency levels, such equipment will require materials than canwithstand the anticipated high inlet and operating temperatures andcontain the pollutant-laden exhaust.Nanostructured coatings, which are capable of withstanding theadditional heat, are based on powders with nanoscale dimensions inthe 10-7 - 10-9 meter range.  Such materials could be used in turbinecombustor, blades, vanes, and transition pieces.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ceramic, Metal Bondfor Hot Gas FiltersIntumescent materials for joining ceramics to metals at hightemperatures in hot gas filtration systems have been formulated byscientists at CeraMem Corp. (12 Clematis Ave., Waltham, MA 02154-7035; Tel: 617/899-0467).  Other potential applications for thematerials include heat exchangers, high temperature vehicleemissions control systems, and heat protection and control systemsfor new jet engines.The cost effective sealing of ceramic components such asparticulate filters to high temperature metal alloys in advancedcoal-based power systems operating at temperatures of up to 1000Cis extremely difficult, reports Robert J. Higgins.  The problemstems from the large disparity in thermal expansion coefficients ofthese two types of materials.This requirement to seal large gaps between ceramic and metalliccomponents, coupled with the need to maintain appropriate stresslevels on the ceramic components at all temperatures, placesextreme demands on the properties of the material used to seal theceramic-metal gap.  Similar systems operating at lower temperaturesutilize vermiculite-based intumescent mats for this purpose, butsuch materials have limited lifetimes when used at temperatures inexcess of 500C and degrade at temperatures above 800C.CeraMem scientists are investigating the use of multilayer,biceramic composites that can reversibly expand and contractbetween room temperature and 1000C.  These composites will includevarious combinations of high temperature oxides fabricated by thesurface modification treatment of thin, tape cast ceramic sheets.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996New and RetrofitCoal CombustorA new, ultralow nitrogen oxides (NOx) pulverized coal combustor isunder development by engineers at Busek Co., Inc. (19 Kearney Rd.,Needham, MA 02194-2505; Tel: 508/655-5565). The concept, reportsVladimir Hruby, is applicable to both new and retrofit wall- andtangentially-fired utility and industrial boiler systems.The process focuses on a new method of controlling thestoichiometry, kinetics, and fuelbound nitrogen evolution in thefuel devolatilization and initial combustion stages.  An extremelyfuel-rich reaction zone is sustained by the low temperature, highlyoxidizing plasma environment.  The plasma contains highly reactiveoxygen radicals and permits fuel devolatilization atstoichiometries where fuelbound nitrogen conversion to compoundsother than oxides are favored.The power consumption required to create the plasma is less than0.5% of the thermal input of the combustor.  Thermal managementtechniques for primary zone combustion limit the formation ofthermal NOx, which results in NOx emissions several times lowerthan those in commercially available low NOx burners.  The firstpart of the Busek project will involve the expansion of earlierexperience with the plasma ignition and rapid devolatilization ofcoal, followed by the demonstration of the new concept.Experiments will be performed to measure NOx emissions and powerconsumption as a basis for the design of a 6 million Btu/hr.combustor.  Later, the combustor will be built and tested in acommercial boiler.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Turbine EmissionsAre ReducedAn advanced technology catalytic combustor (ATCC) for applicationon ground-base, natural gas-powered turbine engines is underconstruction at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI, 25 Science Park,New Haven, CT 06511-1968; Tel: 203/786-5215).William C. Pfefferle reports that the ATCC will represent anultrahigh efficiency, environmentally superior, cost competitivetechnology.  He predicts that design innovations will overcome thelimits of earlier catalytic combustion designs and result ultralowemissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and carbon monoxide (CO) of oneand five parts per million (ppm), respectively.PCI will first build at least one laboratory prototypes fordemonstration at atmospheric pressure and will then explore designvariations.  Subsequently, a full scale combustor will be built fordemonstration at full pressure in preparation for testing on anengine. High combustion stability, operability without a preburner,high turndown, and durability are said to be other advantages ofthe ATCC.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Plastics CouncilFocuses on ReuseThere are several challenges unique to the recycling of plastics,including the difficulties associated with identification andseparation, high contamination levels, and costly equipment.  In aneffort to reduce the effect of these problems and boost recoveryrates, the American Plastics Council (APC, 1275 K St., NW,Washington, DC 20005; Tel: 800/243-5790) is investing in innovativetechnologies.In 1994, the APC opened the Multi-Products Recycling Facility(MPRF) in Boston, MAthe first large-scale U.S. research anddevelopment facility for plastics recycling.  The facilitytransforms plastic contaminated with materials such as metals andfabric into clean, reusable plastics.  To date, the facility hasprocessed more than 100,000 lbs. of used plastics from automobiles,computers, business equipment, and appliances.Last spring, a new project, operated by MBA Polymers Inc. (829Heinz Ave., Berkeley, CA; Tel: 510/704-7585) and sponsored by theAPC, was started in Berkeley, CAthe Advanced Plastics RecyclingPilot Line Facility.  This 10,000 sq. ft. plant aims to develop anddemonstrate advanced mechanical recycling technologies forplastics.  Specific goals include improving recycling economics byincreasing throughput and reducing capital costs; cleaner post-processed plastics; and investigation of new separation processes.The pilot recycling line is reported to process all types ofplastic materials including those containing foreign materials suchas ferrous and nonferrous metals, labels, foam, and wiring.  Hightemperature, high pressure water is used to remove paints andcoatings.Another goal of the APC is to improve identification methods forused plastics.  For example, the P/ID 28, a near-infraredinstrument developed by Bruker Instruments Inc. (15 Fortune Dr.,Billerica, MA; Tel: 508/667-9580), under APC sponsorship, isreported to classify at least 23 different types of plastic,including black plastics, which are generally difficult toidentify.  The P/ID 28 uses the unique make-up of differentplastics, primarily the long chains of specific chemical specieswhich determine plastic type, as well as its mechanical, chemicaland physical properties.  When infrared light impinges on thevarious chemical species along a polymer chain, they vibrate atdifferent frequencies, absorbing energy at wave lengths that arecharacteristic of specific types of plastic.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Memphis MayAchieve GoalRecycling appears to be a Memphis, TN growth industry.  With threenew initiatives under way, the local recycling business seems to beon the verge of a boom.  Construction of the city's $3 millionrecycling center has just begun, while the community's curbsiderecycling recently spread to another 40,000 homes in the Midtownarea.  Champion Recycling Corp. (4939 Gasmer Dr., Houston, TX77035; Tel: 713/723-6397, Fax: 713/723-3648) has launched a city-wide recycling program in Memphis businesses as well as public andprivate schools, churches and community centers.All this activity is expected to help Memphis achieve and comeclose to the state of Tennessee's mandate to reduce its wastestreamvolume by 25%.  Benny Lendermon, the city's division director ofPublic Works, said that Memphis may miss the end-of-the-yeardeadline, but the city is well ahead of most areas in Tennessee.According to the state's Solid Waste Act of 1992, Tennesseecommunities are required to show that they have reduced their wastestream by 25% by the end of the year.  If a community hasn't metthis mandate, it must explain why and what it plans to do toachieve this waste reduction.  The measure is up for re-authorization before the Tennessee General Assembly during thecoming session.  It appears most communities will have failed tomeet this requirement, so state lawmakers may discuss extending the25% reduction mandate.A contract has been signed between the city of Memphis and FCR Inc.(1373 E. Moorehead St., Charlotte, NC 28204; Tel: 704/347-0312) tobuild a nearly $3 million recycling center on a city-donated six-acre piece of property.  FCR already operates nine recyclingcenters along the Eastern Seaboard and other communities in theSouth.  As part of the 10-year contract with the city, Memphis willreceive $50 per ton for the recyclable materials which public workcrews will deliver to the facility as part of its soon-to-becitywide curbside recycling program.  FCR guarantees Memphis $1million in revenue a year for the estimated 20,000 tons of materialexpected to be generated annually.  The community will save about$400,000 a year in tipping fees by not taking this waste to thelocal landfill.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BioChem OffersOnline MonitorBioChem Technology Inc. (100 Ross Rd., King of Prussia, PA; Tel:610/768-9360) has a new biological technology for monitoringwastewater treatment processes.  BioGuide technology is a real-timeonline monitor of bacteria in activated sludge wastewater treatmentplants that allows more accurate control of the treatment process.Samples are taken and analyzed in the bioreactor and results arefed to a computer system that can control the pumps and valves ofthe treatment process. Jaw Lee, president of BioChem, explains thatthe company monitors the bacteria activity inside the processinstead of the conventional way of monitoring bacteria involvement.The process was developed, Lee says, because BioChem believed thatthe wastewater treatment process needs to be controlled just likeany other biochemistry process.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Device Will SampleWaterborne ResiduesScientists from the Dept. of the Interior (DOI, National BiologicalService, Midwest Science Center, 4200 New Haven Rd., Columbia, MO65201) and the Fish and Wildlife Service (Vicksburg Field Office,Vicksburg, MI 39180) used semipermeable membrane devices (SPMDs) topassively sample aqueous polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in Bayou Meto, AR.  Thetwo sites were upstream and downstream from the confluence with atributary that delivers PCDDs and PCDFs to the Bayou.Bayou Meto is a turbid, low-gradient stream that originates in thehighlands of central Arkansas and empties into the Arkansas River290 km to the southeast.  Near Jacksonville, AR, about 40 kmdownstream from Bayou Meto's source, a tributary joins Bayou Metofrom the North.  This tributary, Rocky Branch Creek, is a pointsource of PCDDs and PCDFs, especially of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) to Bayou Meto.In 1971, the Vertac Co. began manufacturing phenoxy acid herbicidesat a plant in Jacksonville.  Based on extensive contamination withPCDDs and PCDFs, the Vertac site is ranked 18th on the EPA's listof 1301 Superfund sites.Aquatic biota, including fish and amphibians, from Rocky BranchCreek and Bayou Meto have been found to contain elevatedconcentrations of PCDDs and PCDFs.  Wood duck eggs collected fromBayou Meto 9 km downstream from the confluence with Rocky BranchCreek contained concentrations of TCDD as high as 510 pg/g on a wetweight basis.  TCDD exhibits endocrine- and reproduction-disruptingeffects in fish and wildlife.  Laboratory studies indicate thatextremely low concentrations of TCDD can impair reproduction inthese animals.The semipermeable membrane device and its use as a sampler ofaqueous hydrophobic organic contaminants have been extensivelycharacterized.  The SPMDs used in the present work can be brieflydescribed as segments of layflat polyethylene tubing with thinfilms of triolein sealed inside.  The devices function as passive,in situ aquatic samplers that sequester dissolved hydrophobiccontaminants from water.Following dialysis, cleanup, and fractionation, four replicate 17-gSPMD samples from each site were analyzed by GC/MS, and four wereevaluated by H4IIE bioassay.  As reported in Environmental Science& Technology [29, 2886-2892, 1995], traces of only PCDD and PhCDDswere detected in samples from the upstream site. The TCDDequivalents obtained by bioassay of replicate SPMD samples agreedwell with results obtained by GC/MS.  The quantities sequestered bySPMDs at the downstream site were used to estimate the aqueousconcentrations for both compounds as 2 pg/L.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PUBLICATIONSLab DirectoryNow AvailableThe 1996 Directory of Environmental Testing Labs is available fromDynCorp (Directory Dept., 300 N. Lee St., Alexandria, VA 22314;Tel: 703/519-1000).  The directory is aimed at those who requirelaboratories that provide analyses for dioxins, radiochemistry,organics, metals, air, geochemistry, and microbiologicalparameters.Information on the analytical capabilities, instrumentation,certifications and special services performed by over 600environmental testing laboratories in the U.S. and Canada isavailable.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARFebruary 25, 1996, Waste Management '96 will be held in Tucson, AZ.For more information, call 520/624-8573.February 28-March 1, 1996,  Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl will be held in Clearwater, FL.  Contact: A&WMA Registrar,Tel: 412/232-3445, Fax: 412/232-3450.March 3-8, 1996, Pittcon '96 Conference on Analytical Chemistry &applied Spectroscopy, will be held in Chicago, IL.  Contact:Pittsburgh Conference, Tel: 412/687-1113.March 18-21, 1996, The American Defense Preparedness Assn. willhold its Environmental Symposium & Exhibition in Orlando, FL.  Call703/522-1820 for more information.March 19-23, 1996, ENTSORGA, the International Fair for Wastedisposal and Recycling, will be held in Cologne, Germany.  Contactthe conference for more information at (02 21) 821-2494/29 07 orfax (02 21) 821-10/28 26.May 21-23, 1996, The Fourth Annual International EnvironmentalVisualization Exposition (IEVE '96) will be held at ResearchTriangle Park, NC.  Contact: Registrar, Tel: 412/232-3445 or Fax:412/232-3450.June 23-28, 1996, The Air & Waste Management Association AnnualMeeting will be held in Nashville, TN.  Contact: Registrar, Tel:412/232-3445 or Fax: 412/232-3450.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-32IA086-000616-B018-288http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev59.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003728 text/html 68590HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:35:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:05 GMTContent-length: 68403Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev59.html Sample Issue Copyright WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PHYSICAL TREATMENTS Moringa Seeds Remove Turbidity (446 words) Adsorption Power for Separations (218 words) Microfiltration Removes H2S (383 words) Multimedia Filters Remove Oocysts (201 words) Coated Fiber Optic Helps Degrade Phenol (494 words) BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS Anaerobic Breakdown of Some Toxic Organics (373 words) CHEMICAL TREATMENTS Growth Ahead for Treatment Chemicals (315 words) TESTING/MONITORING DNA Test for Live Crypto Oocysts (530 words) Differing Views on Compliance (693 words) Overtones in Budget Stalemate (116 words) Briefly Noted: (168 words) WASTEWATER Regeneration Won't Bog this Absorption (428 words) Champion Closes the Loop for Pulp Mills (261 words) ACTIVATED CARBON Tailoring to Meet Application Specs (293 words) ULTRAPURE WATER Membrane Reactor Purges Dissolved O2 (412 words) INDUSTRY NEWS U.S. Filter Is Dealing Again (237 words) DSI, Osmonics Nearly as One (131 words) European Bank Offers Loans (541 words) Wheelabrator, Betz in Strategic Alliance (171 words) Goodbye Water Meter Readers (113 words) Life Industries Wins Mexican Concession (196 words) French Do Adore the British Water (229 words) Philly Suburban Keeps Growing (128 words) Briefly Noted: (317 words) POTABLE WATER Bone Charcoal, Sand Clear the Water (419 words) Can Structured Water Be Good (284 words) REVERSE OSMOSIS Daicel Increases It's Production (218 words) Countertop System from Premier (212 words) Profit Margins Can Be Slim (362 words) CALENDAR (162 words) CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Moringa SeedsRemove TurbiditySuleyman A. Muyibi and Lilian Evison (Dept. of Civil Engineering,University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, U.K.) havecontinued their tests documenting the usefulness of seeds ofMoringa aptera, the horseradish tree, for water treatment,especially in tropical developing countries.Evison reports that the goals of the lab tests were to determinethe multiple effects of five physical factors: rapid and slowmixing rates, mixing time, dosage of coagulant, and initialturbidity on the coagulation of turbid water with Moringa seeds.The engineers wanted to find the best dosage rate and the optimalvalues for rapid mix velocity and time and slow mix velocity andtime for turbidities of 50-750 NTU.For their tests, the investigators used stock dilute kaolinsuspensions with 5 g kaolin, 500 ml distilled water, and 500 ml of50 mg/l sodium carbonate solution. They prepared samples ofdifferent turbidities by diluting the stock suspension. They grounddry Nigerian Moringa seeds to a powder and blended 5 g of powder in200 ml distilled water to extract the active ingredients. Theyfiltered the suspension and diluted it to make a stock solution of1,000 mg/l.To measure the degree of coagulation achieved, an opticaltachometer was used to measure changes in the speed of rotation ofa glass paddle in the test vessel, a 1 l glass beaker. They carriedout 32 randomized tests to determine the effects of operatingvariables. Each test used 500 ml of turbid water with a dose ofMoringa solution. After different times of slow and fast mixing,the mixtures were left to settle for two hours before measurementof supernatant turbidity.Evison writes in Water Research [29-12, 2689-2695, 1995] that theinitial turbidity and the strength of Moringa dosage were the mostsignificant factors in coagulating kaolin suspensions. Within adosage range of 50-300 mg/l, Muyibi and Evison found optimumdosages of 50 and 100 mg/l for initial turbidities of 50-150 NTUand 250-550 NTU, respectively. An increase in Moringa dosage leadsto a decrease in turbidity up to the optimum dosage, when flocrestabilization begins to increase the residual turbidity.At an initial turbidity of 50 NTU and an optimum dosage of 50 mg/l,the optimal velocity gradient for rapid mix is 432/s and 1 minuteat 50 NTU initial turbidity. At 225-750 NTU, the optimum rapid mixvelocity gradient and time were 443/s and 4 minutes. The residualturbidities at the optimum velocity gradient for rapid mix and timewere <10 NTU at both high and low initial turbidities. It was foundthat the higher the initial turbidity of a sample, the lower itsresidual turbidity.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Adsorption Powerfor SeparationsKent S. Knaebel (Adsorption Research Inc. (6185D Shamrock Ct.,Dublin, OH 43017: Tel: 614/798-9090) writing in ChemicalEngineering [102-11, 92-102, 1995] set out to review the principlesand capabilities of adsorption. Knaebel defines adsorption as aseparation process that selectively transports components of a gasor liquid phase to the surface of a solid adsorbent. Adsorption hasthe power to make separations beyond the limits of distillation,absorption, or membrane systems, and that advances in adsorptiontechnology are opening up new applications in environmentalapplications and industrial processes.Knaebel explains that most adsorption systems consist of a pair offixed beds in parallel so that one is regenerating while the secondis adsorbing. The common adsorbent media are silica gel, activatedalumina, activated carbon, zeolites, mordenites, and carbonmolecular sieves. Many other minerals, organic materials, andsynthetic substances are adsorbents. Their key properties arecapacity, selectivity, regenerability, kinetics, compatibility, andcost. Capacity is a function of surface area, pore sizedistribution, iodine number, and molasses number.Key factors to consider in choosing an adsorbent are adsorptionequilibrium, heat effects, and the dynamics of bed behavior.Equilibrium and heat effects limit adsorption capacity andselectivity, as Knaebel shows at length in a detailed discussion ofheat effects, adsorption isotherms, and adsorption dynamics inrelation to design.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MicrofiltrationRemoves H2SAir stripping by cascade aeration is the usual method of removinghydrogen sulfide from groundwater in central Florida. Air strippingmay be economical, but Mark A. Thompson, Uday G. Kelkar, and JamesC. Vickers (Malcolm Pirnie Inc., 11382 Rock Landing Dr., Suite 400,Newport News, VA 23606-4206; Tel: 804/873-8700, Fax: 804/873-8723)point out that it has many shortcomings. By precipitating elementalsulfur, air stripping raises turbidity and often creates a smellaround treatment plants. Aeration is not efficient over 6.5 pH, buta lower pH increases corrosion in the system. Aeration actuallyremoves about 20% of H2S, and chlorination oxidizes the remainderto S0.As an alternative to aeration, Thompson's group conductedfeasibility studies of microfiltration in combination with H2Schemistry manipulation at Oviedo, FL. Their procedure begins withreducing pH of alkaline groundwater to <6.5 in order to make H2Sthe dominant sulfur specie and make oxidation of H2S to So theprevailing chemical reaction. They did this by oxidation withchlorine.The authors filtered their groundwater supply and pumped itdirectly into a chlorination unit, bypassing aeration. Thisexpedient reduces dissolved oxygen levels. The investigators heldthe oxidation/reduction potential (ORP) of the feedwater near zeroby regulating the chlorine dosage and preventing it from turningpositive when So is oxidized to SO4-2.The goal was to keep the ORP as close to zero as possible in orderto obtain maximum So production. The best dosage was about 6 mg/lCl. Jar tests were made to determine the best chlorine dosage.After chlorination, the authors sent the feedwater through amicrofiltration test unit at a constant flow of 2 gpm or 0.5 g/m2of membrane area for 3 days. The test unit had a membrane area of4 m2 with 0.2 micron average pore size. The authors monitored rawand finished water with a particle counter to observe turbidity.Thompson reports in Desalination [102, 287-291, 1995] that the testunit reduced turbidity to <0.2 NTU without any trace of hydrogensulfide or any flux reduction. They reduced trihalomethane levelsby 40% from 80-90 micrograms/l by adding alum before chlorination.Thompson concludes that microfiltration is technically analternative to aeration. The product water is odorless and lesscorrosive, and the procedure is sensitive and flexible when wellmanaged.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Multimedia FiltersRemove OocystsBecause Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and Giardia lamblia cystsresist disinfection, two Washington engineers have testedcontrolling the cysts by using multimedia filtration. The pilotstudy shows that multimedia filtration is potentially an importantalternative to disinfection.Jerry E. Ongerth and Julie Proctor Pecararo (Environmental HealthSC-34, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105) conducted thestudy with a system consisting of direct filtration with inlineflocculation, multimedia filtration, low turbidity and alkalinityraw water with optimum alum coagulation, and constant rateoperation at 1 gpm or 5 gpm/ft2 of filter. Their feedwater wasSeattle city water seeded with Giardia and Cryptosporidium. Themultimedia filter consisted of a flanged 15.2 cm diameter acrylictubing with 45.7 cm anthracite coal, 22 cm silica sand, 14.7 cmgarnet sand, and three grades of supporting gravel.Ongerth reports in AWAA Journal [87-12, 83-89, 1995] that the pilotmultimedia filter achieved nearly 3 logs (99.9%) removal ofCryptosporidium parvum oocysts and better than three logs removalof Giardia lamblia oocysts. In view of the 5 micron size ofCryptosporidium oocysts, Ongerth concludes that direct filtrationby multimedia is effective and that it can be a practicalalternative to disinfection under consistent, well-regulatedoperating conditions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Coated Fiber OpticHelps Degrade PhenolWhile the effectiveness of titanium oxide in photocatalyzing thedegradation of organic and inorganic pollutants is well known, thedevelopment of a practical photodegradation reactor has not been soeasy because absorption and scattering have limited the efficiencyof light utilization in conventional fixed bed and slurry reactors.Two California engineers believe they have solved this problem byinventing a fixed-bed photocatalytic reactor system which uses aTiO2-coated fiber optic cable to transmit light to thephotocatalyst.Nicola J. Piell and Michael R. Hoffmann (W.M. Keck Labs, CaliforniaInstitute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; Fax: 818/395-3170)used 3 mm quartz rods and 1 mm quartz optical fibers as substratesfor bonding three coats of titanium oxide from concentratedsuspensions. The reactor system consists of a light source, acoated fiber-optic bundle, and a reaction vessel. The UV lightsource is a 1,000 W xenon arc lamp. The fiber bundle consists of 721 mm quartz optical fibers. The reactor is a 227 ml cylindricalPyrex vessel with a glass frit and a bottom inlet for introducingatmospheric oxygen.Fibers at one end of the cable are inserted individually into thevessel through holes drilled concentrically 1.5mm apart in the cap.The vessel has 3 sample ports arranged vertically 1.5 mm apart.Piell and Hoffman used the system to test the degradation of 190 mlof a 0.1 mM solution of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP). They monitoredchloride ion production during oxidation by means of a chloride-selective electrode and ion chromatography. pH changes weremonitored with a pH meter. The disappearance of 4-CP was observedspectrophotometrically and by high performance liquidchromatography (HPLC).Peill reports in Environmental Science & Technology [29-12, 2974-2981, 1995] that complete degradation of 4-CP took 5-13 hrs.,depending on the input light flux and its incident angle.Increasing the minimum incident angle of light input increased themeasured efficiency of degradation. Increasing the concentration oftitania in the suspensions for coating the glass fibers increasedtheir light absorption efficiency.The overall light absorption efficiency of a bundled array appearsto be a function of both the density of fibers in the array and thetitania coating characteristics. Peill reports that the fiber-opticreactor has a maximum quantum efficiency of 0.011 for 4-CPoxidation compared to 0.0065 for a slurry reactor under similarconditions. This is two orders of magnitude better than previousfixed bed reactors. The fiber-optic system appears to have theadvantages of a fixed bed reactor and a higher efficiency than aslurry reactor. There was no heat buildup in the reactor and nodegradation of fiber coatings, except for the heaviest coatings.It was concluded that coated fiber-optic reactors should beadaptable to continuous flow or batch operations for treating gasand liquid streams. The fiber-optic cable frees the photocatalystfrom direct dependence on a light source so that the fiber-reactorsystem could be used for in situ remediation in the subsurface.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Anaerobic Breakdownof Some Toxic OrganicsEngineers at Tulane University have quantitatively determined theanaerobic biodegradability of some toxic organic compounds inpetrochemical wastewaters.Advantages of anaerobic over aerobic systems include lower energyconsumption, less sludge, and potential recovery of energy frombiogenic methane. John M. Stewart (Dept. of Civil & EnvironmentalEngineering, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118) and fourassociates at Tulane and Union Carbide investigated the effects ofdifferent concentrations of ethylene glycol, acrylic acid,acrolein, and allyl alcohol on acetate uptake by methanogenicbacteria. They quantified the biodegradability of each compound andidentified intermediate degradation products.Stewart reports in Water Research [29-12, 2730-2738, 1995] that thegroup used a glucose and acetate fed enrichment culture that wasdeveloped from an anaerobic digester. Anaerobic toxicity assayswere made at 35(C in 150 ml serum bottles filled anaerobically with45 ml of glucose-acetate medium, 3 ml of nutrient medium, and 2 mlof 50 g/l yeast extract. Acetic acid was added daily for 11 daysand daily gas production measured. They spiked the test bottles onthe 12th day with different concentrations of the four selectedtoxic organic compounds and measured inhibition as the decrease inmethane production in comparison with a control.It was found that ethylene glycol in concentrations of 5,000-20,000mg/l completely inhibited acetate utilization by exhaustingalkalinity within 4 days. Lower concentrations are degraded to lessthan 5 mg/l. Acetic acid, ethanol, and possibly acetaldehyde wereintermediate products before inhibition.Acrylic acid inhibited methane production one day after spiking,but slow recovery followed as volatile acids degraded. Acrylic acidconcentrations up to 100 mg/l can be treated to avoid inhibitingmethanogenesis. Concentrations of 500-1,500 mg/l acrylic acidinhibit methane production for longer periods but bacterialdegradation to less than 1 mg/l takes place within 40 days.Acrolein inhibited methane formation at concentrations as low as 10mg/l immediately after spiking. A slow recovery followed. Recoverytime is directly proportional to acrolein concentration up to 150mg/l. Allyl alcohol at concentrations up to 4,000 mg/l slowlyinhibited methane production after about 10 days because of slowbuild up of volatile acids. However, biological methane potentialtests show that anaerobic bacteria degrade on more than 7% of allylalcohol.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Growth Ahead forTreatment ChemicalsAs the nation's water quality proves increasingly inadequate andthe need for clean water becomes more apparent, the U.S. specialtywater treatment chemicals (WTCs) industry continues to offer aviable means of ensuring plentiful pure water supplies. New andincreasingly stringent environmental and pollution/dumping lawsinfluence the development of alternative water treatmenttechnologies (chemistries) that replace existing treatments.According to Business Communications Co., Inc. report RC-002U,Specialty Water Treatment Chemicals, the vast domestic watertreatment industry remains a mature yet profitable market. Of thattotal market, specialty water treatment chemicals represent about84%, or about $2.6 billion, and most of its profit. The specialtywater treatment chemicals market should see an average annualgrowth rate (AAGR) of 5.3% to the year 2000.With 1995 sales estimated at $947 million, corrosion and scaleinhibitors represent the largest segment of the specialty watertreatment chemicals. New toxicity requirements, among otherfactors, contribute to a forecasted market reaching $1.3 billion inthe year 2000, resulting in a 7.3% AAGR.Following close behind are the biocides and disinfectants withprojected 1995 sales of $821 million. Concerns about chlorine gastoxicity and rising prices are making the higher priced yet safer-to-use specialty biocidal and disinfectant chemicals moreattractive to consumers. The market forecast for 2000 is $984million at an AAGR of 3.7%.The coagulants and flocculants segment continues to evolve. With a1995 market value of $270 million, anticipating a 2000 market of$319 million, environmental restrictions on wastewater dischargesand the need for water conservation will fuel the growth of thismarket. The expected AAGR is 3.4%.Sales of filter media and adsorbents come primarily from activatedcarbon. Those sales are estimated at $202 million in 1995, and areexpected to reach $251 million in 2000, with the 4.4% AAGRreflecting demand for granular activated carbon, a versatile andbroad-spectrum absorbent.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DNA Test for LiveCrypto OocystsBecause bacterial culture methods don't work for Cryptosporidiumparvum oocysts, the standard indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA)method for detecting them in environmental samples relies onisolation and identification. Christine Wagner-Wiening and PeterKimmig (Landesgesundheitsant Baden-Wurttemberg, Weiderholdstr. 15,D-70174 Stuttgart, Germany) point out that detection by stainingand counting by immunofluorescence microscopy does not distinguishbetween live and dead oocysts or between C. parvum and otherspecies of Cryptosporidium.Wagner-Weining and Kimmig devised a genetic test which uses apolymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect live C. parvum oocysts.Their excystation protocol before DNA extraction permitsdistinguishing between live and dead oocysts.Kimmig reports in Applied & Environmental Microbiology [61-12,4514-4516, 1995] that they obtained C. parvum sporozoites byincubating concentrated oocysts in phosphate-buffered salinesolution (PBS) containing 0.25% trypsin and 0.75% sodiumtaurocholate at 37(C for 60 min. They removed the trypsin andtaurocholate by washing and centrifugation, and resuspended themixture of oocyst walls, oocysts, and excysted sporozoites in PBS.Total DNA was extracted from excysted sporozoites by incubation at58(C in a digestion buffer solution with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate,0.015 ml of 10 mg/ml proteinase K solution, 0.2 ml of 10 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA and 50 mM NaCl, and 0.07 ml dithiothreitrol inwater. The authors purified the DNA and eluted the dried, pelletedextract in sterile water. They used synthetic oligonucleotideprimers CP 397 and CP 1270 to amplify an 873-bp region of a 2,395-bp DNA fragment which encodes a repetitive oocyst protein.Kimmig reports that PCR gene probe-positive signals occur only whenlive sporozoites are present in the extraction medium afterdigestion times of 5-90 min. DNase digestion after excystationprevented false positive signals from the DNA of dead sporozoites.The authors tested the specificity of the DNA primers for C. parvumDNA by attempting to amplify target sequences from 46 othermicroorganisms that occur in the same environment. They found noamplified DNA products.The sensitivity of their system was determined by direct countingof serially diluted sporozoites before DNA extraction. Kimmigreports that the specific 873-bp fragment is faintly visible whenthe starting material contains as few as 100 sporozoites. A secondround of amplification sometimes increases sensitivity to 10sporozoites, but this step is not always reliable. The specificityand sensitivity of their DNA primers makes it possible to routinelymonitor low numbers of live C. parvum oocysts in environmentalsamples.The shortcomings of IFA are the subject of an editorial article inAnalytical Chemistry [67-12, 731A-734A, 1995] which reviewsalternative methods of detecting C. parvum. These include enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA), flow cytometry withfluorescent cell sorting, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)with confocal microscopy or flow cytometry, microscopy combinedwith imaging by slow-scan charged coupling device, in vitro cellculture, and electrorotation assay.Analytical Chemistry concludes that the best of them takes 24 hoursand none of them yet replaces continuous turbidity measurements byparticle counting as a real-time measure of pathogens. Even thoughparticle counting is an indirect measure, it determines particlesizes and warns of particles in the micron size range of cysts andoocysts.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Differing Viewson ComplianceIts goal of maintaining and protecting surface water quality hasled the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to set some very lowlimits for a variety of toxic pollutants. The demanding EPArequirements for testing and reporting prompt contrasting reactionsfrom the chemical industry and the water treatment industry.While Anna Rule (Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Virginia Beach,VA; Tel: 804/874-1287) exposes the impracticalities andinadequacies of compliance testing, Darrell R. Wilder(Environmental Services Lab, Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, TN37662-5054) sees compliance testing and waste minimization asopportunities for self-directed efforts to eliminate sources ofpollution and reduce the burden of testing.Writing in Water Environment & Technology [7-11, 31-34, 1995] Rulepoints out that the minimum concentration at which a chemical'spresence can be determined by a specific method is an exceedinglyminute but imprecise quantity which has nevertheless become aregulatory goal and performance standard. A method detection limit(MDL) is the minimum concentration of a substance which can beidentified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that itsconcentration is greater than zero. EPA bases MDL on the standarddeviation of a set of replicate determinations.The EPA has set water quality criteria for some substances at orbelow MDLs without considering the limits of analytical technology.Compliance with permit limits set below MDLs or at zero isproblematic because measurement errors, variability, anduncertainty. Measurements at ultradilute levels are consequentlyanything but absolutely true and exact determinations.Rule indicates the flaws in deriving a confidence interval from aset of determinations and suggests that prediction intervals ortolerance intervals are more appropriate for estimating the rangeof future multiple measurements and the probability that a givenpercentage of them attain a given MDL. Rule points out that itintroduces a bias to treat results at or below an MDL as zero ornondetectable while accepting higher values as true and accurate."All measurements, at any level, include defined and unavoidableimprecision. Analytical and sample variance, or relative standarddeviation of measurements (RSD) is not constant throughout theconcentration range but gradually increases as the results approachthe lower or upper end of the analytical range... The practice ofeliminating low-level data by reporting 'less than' or 'zero' iscalled left-censoring and is regarded as an unnecessary loss ofvaluable information." While it is statistically valid to use low-end data, this approach often conflicts with setting regulatorylimits.Rule favors the calibration curve method as an alternative forestimating measurement detection limits. This method findstolerance intervals for assessing future performance and uses themto define uncertainty bands on the calibration curve. The analystmay then compute and define minimum concentrations that have anacceptable level of confidence with a predetermined RSD. Thecalibration curve method is the basis of a proposal presented tothe EPA by a Detection/Quantitation Workgroup representing theregulated community. Other concepts of MDL may be appropriate, butthe problem is the validity of low-end results. Carefully developedand documented protocols should allow a more effective validationand define more appropriate uses although at a higher cost.Working the higher end of compliance testing, Wilder acceptscompliance testing as a fact of life for environmental dischargesin the chemical industry. Now that the NPDES program has entered aphase of diminishing returns, the EPA is encouraging a "front end"approach to pollution control that encourages proactive wasteminimization and pollution prevention.Government initiatives and voluntary programs have createdfinancial incentives for chemical companies to go beyond routinecompliance by developing environmental strategies that reflectenvironmental responsibility. Writing in Analytical Chemistry [25-2, 77-89, 1995] Wilder presents a review of some new measurementtechnologies for preventing pollution and cutting waste.Wilder considers technologies for measurement of wasteloadconcentrations, flow measurements, monitoring specific wastecomponents, monitoring networks, process control of activatedsludge treatment systems, and measurement of air emissions. Wilderbelieves that internal and self-directed efforts by chemicalcompanies in all these areas give analysts scope for ingenuity andcreativity in identifying and eliminating sources of toxiccontaminants. Successful results could reduce the burden ofcompliance testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Overtones inBudget StalemateCongressional action on renewal of the Clean Water Act seems tohave been forgotten during the present confrontation over thefederal budget. Environmental affairs, however, are one of theissues under contention in the battle to balance the budget.Republicans are eager to cut spending on environmental programs intheir quest to trim a trillion dollars from the national spendingplan but they appear to be losing public support for any attempt tolimit the ability of the EPA to protect public health and theenvironment. It is still not clear how the budget battle will end,but it seems unlikely that Congress will be able to reformenvironmental regulation by punitive budget cutting.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:    Rachel Furman of Onset Computer Corp. (P.O. Box 3450,Pocasset, MA 02559-3450; Tel: 508/563-9000, Fax: 508/563-9477)relates that the company's new StowAway TidbiT is the world'ssmallest temperature logger. The TidbiT measures 1.2" wide by 1.6"tall by 0.45" thick and is completely sealed and waterproofed. Itrecords temperatures and times at remote locations and at depths upto 1,000 ft. The logger costs $149 and the base station kit costs$123.    N.J.C. Strahan, F.J. Nicholson, and I.D. Ogden (Food ScienceLab, Torrey, P.O. Box 31, Abbey Rd., Aberdeen AB9 8DG, Scotland,U.K.) have coupled an ion mobility spectrometer to a computer-automated sampling system to detect the volatile gases producedwhen pathogenic bacteria metabolize their substrate. Strahanexplains that IMS uses a 63Ni source to ionize gas particles in anelectrical field. The time of flight of the ions is measured, andthe massive products of bacterial metabolism are identifiable bytheir longer drift times. Results are reported in Analytica ChimicaActa [313-1,2, 63-67, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Regeneration Won'tBog this AbsorptionPeat Technologies Corp. (PTC, 9076 Little Sweden Rd., Cook, MN55723-8814; Tel: 218/666-2962, Fax: 218/666-2963) has received anexclusive, worldwide license from the University of Minnesota tomanufacture and market a new wastewater treatment product based ontechnology developed at the University's Natural Resources ResearchInstitute (NRRI) in Duluth, MN.  The University has applied for apatent, consisting of both composition of matter and processclaims, to protect the new technology.The new material, "MultiSorb 100," is formed into granules ofspecially processed peat and was developed after three years ofresearch at  NRRI.  It has shown outstanding performance inadsorbing a wide variety of organics and heavy metals from variouswastewater streams.  Being granular in form, the peat particlesresist crushing, are dust-free, have high permeability to waterflow, and resist leaking of organic matter, while at the same timehaving good ion exchange capacity.MultiSorb 100 can be recycled and regenerated just as ion exchangeresins.  In contrast to current ion exchange technology, thecomponents of hard water or monovalent cations do not significantlyinterfere with the binding ability of toxic heavy metal ions suchas zinc, copper, lead, cobalt, and chromium.PTC has established and is operating a production facility toproduce the material in pilot quantities at the Leoni Internationalpeat operation located south of Virginia, MN.  This facility, whichcan produce 1/2 ton of product per day, will be upgraded to produce24 tons of product per day by the third quarter of 1996.Roy E. Larson, chairman and CEO of PTC, told WTN that the majorthrust of PTC is to manufacture and market MultiSorb 100 forextracting metals and organic contaminants from wastewaters.  Thenew adsorption material has removed dissolved forms of iron, lead,zinc, barium, nickel, copper, and ethylene glycol from wastewaterat the laboratory-scale level.  Several successful tests have alsobeen made in the field using actual wastewater streams.  In manycases, the effluents met drinking water standards and otherdischarge criteria.Because MultiSorb 100 can best handle wastewaters having pollutionconcentrations of less than 500 ppm, it is most efficiently appliedas a polishing step in an overall wastewater treatment process,following a membrane system for instance.  PTC's short termobjectives are to commercialize the new technology and to identifythe market niches where it is an efficacious and cost-effectivetreatment method for the removal of metals and organics fromwastewaters.  The company is interested in developing variousstrategic relationships to introduce the product and to establisha marketing and sales effort.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Champion Closes theLoop for Pulp MillsChampion International Corp. (1 Champion Plaza, Stamford, CT 06921;Tel: 203/358-7000, Fax: 203/358-2975) has begun commercial-scaletesting of its new Bleach Filtrate Recycle (BFR) Process at itspulp and paper mill in Canton, NC. Champion says the BFR Processhas the potential to reduce the discharges of dissolved organicmatter from bleached-kraft mills and that it is an advance to thegoal of a closed loop system that will eliminate all processeffluents from the bleaching of paper pulp.Champion developed BFR with the technical support of Sterling PulpChemicals (1200 Smith, Suite 1900, Houston, TX 77002-4312; Tel:713/650-3700, Fax: 713/650-9551). BFR is a unified package ofengineering systems that reorganize and redirect the flow of thefluids used to bleach paper pulp. They trap process chemicals forreclamation and reuse in the bleach plant; capture the non-fibrouscomponents of wood that are removed by bleaching and use them asfuel in the pulp mill; and recycle the treated process water to thepulp mill and the bleach plant. Champion says that BFR can reducethe discharge of dissolved organic matter by about 90%, cutdischarges of chlorinated organic compounds to almost zero; andvirtually eliminate any color in effluent from the bleach plant.Champion has licensed the HPD Division of Wheelabrator WaterTechnologies to market BFR worldwide, and Champion and Sterlinghave established The Closed Loop Alliance (10 Pearl St., Kingston,NY 12401; Tel: 914/331-1431) to promote awareness of BFR and theirgoal of making kraft mills environmentally friendly by closing theloop on their waste streams.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Tailoring to MeetApplication SpecsStephen J. Allen (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Queen's Universityof Belfast, Stranmillis Rd, Belfast BT9 5AH, U.K.) foresees ademand for activated carbons which are prepared for specificapplications in water and wastewater treatment. He reports thattechnology now in development will be able to produce carbons withprecisely engineered surface properties and pore sizes. Lignite, inparticular, is a source material that is suitable for activation indifferent ways to produce absorption characteristics for specificpurposes.Allen and a team of four U.S. and British engineers compared thedifferences in absorption of sodium benzoate, 2,4-dichlorophenol,and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol on five activated carbons made from thesame Crumlin lignite. They activated the lignite in a two-stageexperimental process with iron sulfate and steam at 800(C, zincchloride with steam at 600( and 800(C, and iron nitrate with steamat 600( and 800(C.Allen reports in Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology[64, 261-268, 1995] that chemical and steam activation eachimproved the performance of activated carbons from Crumlin lignite,and the two-stage combination gave the best results. The chemicaltreatments that gave the best results on their own, iron nitrateand zinc chloride at 800(C, also gave the best results whencombined with steam treatment.These two carbons showed the poorest agreement with traditionalabsorption theories. Allen suggests that this is because capillarycondensation accounts for significant extra absorption that is notaccounted for by models based on surface absorption. Allen's teamfound a good correlation between surface area measured by nitrogenabsorption and the capacity of the carbons for absorbing benzoicacid. The monolayer benzoic acid capacity also correlated well withtotal absorptive capacity, showing that the dominant mechanism ismore likely to be pure absorption than capillary condensation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Membrane ReactorPurges Dissolved O2Dissolved oxygen is usually purged from ultrapure water by thermaldegassing, vacuum degassing, nitrogen bubble deaeration, or theaddition of hydrazine or sodium sulfite. Engineers in Singaporehave invented a bench-scale membrane reactor that overcomes thedisadvantages of these physical and chemical methods in reducingdissolved oxygen to less than 1.5 ppb.K. Li, Ivy Chua, W.J. Ng, and W.K. Teo (Dept. of ChemicalEngineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent RidgeCrescent, Singapore 0511) used a membrane reactor made from amicroporous polypropylene hollow fiber module packed with acatalyst in the void space. They investigated the simultaneousoperation of both physical and chemical processes in purging thewater of oxygen.The  membranes are hydrophobic with 0.04 cm OD, 0.003 cm wallthickness, and 30 nm pores covering 33% of the hollow fibersurface. The catalysts are beads of palladium-doped anion exchangeresins based on styrene and divinyl benzene. Li reports that theengineers introduced purified hydrogen into the fiber lumens whilethey fed deionized water saturated with air to about 8.3 ppm DOinto the shell side where it flowed through the catalyst packedaround the fibers. Dissolved oxygen (DO) diffuses from the waterthrough the hollow fibers to be purged by hydrogen. At the time,hydrogen diffuses through the fibers into the water and reacts withany remaining oxygen to form water.The authors measured oxygen concentration in the gas phase with aPerkin Elmer gas chromatograph using a thermal conductivitydetector and recorded the detector response on a PC with PerkinElmer software. They used an Orbisphere Model 3600 dissolved gasanalyzer to monitor dissolved oxygen in the feed and effluentstreams.Li writes in Chemical Engineering Science [50-22, 3547-3556, 1995]that the rate of dissolved oxygen removal by both physical andchemical processes was controlled by the liquid film around thehollow fiber membranes and catalyst particles in the shell side. Atlow catalyst loadings, both physical and chemical processescontributed to oxygen removal whereas at high catalyst loadings thechemical reaction was dominant.It was found that mass transfer studies show that the mass transfercoefficient for physical stripping is generally smaller than thecoefficient for the chemical reaction. Both coefficients aredependent on the rate of water flow through the reactor. The groupdeveloped a mass transfer correlation which they expect to beuseful in designing a full-scale membrane reactor that will achievea DO level of 1.2 ppb.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996U.S. Filter IsDealing AgainU.S. Filter Corp. (73-710 Fred Waring Dr., Palm Desert, CA 92260;Tel: 619/340-0098, Fax: 619/341-9368) continues its acquiring ways.This time it is Jet Tech Inc. (Edwardsville, KS) and ContinentalWater Systems Northwest (Auburn, WA). You have to ask, "Is FilmTecnext?"Jet Tech manufactures high efficiency air diffusion equipment whichaccelerate the destruction of organic contaminants in sequencingbatch reactors and autothermal thermophilic aerobic digesters whichtreat sludge and solids for land applications or unrestrictedlandfilling.Continental Northwest supplies water treatment products andservices for high purity industrial water systems for theelectronics industry and operates a facility in Vancouver forregenerating ion exchange resins. U.S. Filter plans to mergeContinental Northwest with its recently acquired Polymetricsoperations in Seattle.U.S. Filter has inaugurated its US$6 million wastewater treatmentplant for the city of Yautepec in the Mexican state of Morelos.Officials from the U.S. and Mexico gathered in Morelos to mark thecompletion of the plant one year after the devaluation of theMexican peso. U.S. Filter designed, built, and operates the plantunder a direct concession agreement. It will treat 5.6 mgd of rawsewage for the city of 48,000 people. Richard J. Heckman of U.S.Filter says the Yautepec project is the company's third in Mexicosince the passage of NAFTA. U.S. Filter has also invested $1million in its pharmaceutical, laboratory, and dialysis watercenter in Mexico City.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DSI, OsmonicsNearly as OneThe transaction requires the final execution of a definitive mergeragreement, approval of the merger agreement both companies,regulatory approvals, and the satisfaction of customary closingconditions, but Osmonics, Inc. (5951 Clearwater Dr., Minnetonka, MN55343; Tel: 612/933-2277, Fax: 612/933-0141) and DesalinationSystems Inc. (DSI, 760 Shadowridge Dr., Vista, CA 92083; Tel:619/598-1800) want to be as one.Outstanding shares of DSI will be exchanged on a share-for-sharebasis for Osmonics common stock.  The transaction is structured toqualify as a tax-free exchange and a "pooling of interests" foraccounting and financial purposes. The value of the transaction isapproximately $30 million.  The merger is expected to add over $20million to Osmonics' 1996 sales. Estimates vary, but DSI probablyhas sales of $18-$19 million at the present time.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996European BankOffers LoansThe European Investment Bank is loaning ECU 70 million, about $92million, to Aguas Argentina to finance the construction of newsewer and wastewater treatment facilities for the northern part ofBuenos Aires. Aguas Argentina is a joint venture of Lyonnaise desEaux, S.G. de Barcelona, Compagnie Generale des Eaux, SociedadComercial de la Plata, Meller S.A., and Banco de Galicia y BuenosAires. The project is part of a $4 billion program to extendwastewater treatment services to 3.5 million people in parts ofBuenos Aires without adequate sewer services.The European Investment Bank has been the long-term financingagency of the European Union since 1958, and it finances capitalinvestments in countries which have cooperation agreements with theunion.The Humanitarian Office of the European Community (ECHO) is backinginternational reconstruction efforts in Haiti by granting ECU 5million, about $6.5 million, in aid for 20 projects which includedeveloping supplies of safe drinking water for urban and ruralareas. This is the third phase of an aid program that ECHO began inJune 1995.The Cohesion Fund of the European has granted ECU 117.7 million,about $153 million, to help Greece in seven water-related projects.They include a water pipeline system from the rivers Aliakmon andAxios to Thessaloniki, enlarging and completing wastewatertreatment facilities at Thessaloniki, reinforcing of the Mornosaqueduct, and biological water treatment and sewage treatmentstations at Agrino, Thiva, Pyrgos, and Yannitsa.French and Chinese officials have signed a 30-year, $200 millionloan agreement to finance four projects in China that use Frenchequipment. The projects include water treatment facilities forrural areas and municipal wastewater treatment facilities for thecity of Xiamen in southeast China. Yves Galland, the FrenchMinister for Foreign Trade, signed the agreement in Beijing onDecember 4. France has granted similar low-interest loans totaling$2.4 billion in the last decade.The North American Development Bank has approved its first twoloans for environmental projects. Alfredo Phillips Olmedo of NADBreports that NADBank directors have authorized funding for a $14.5million  wastewater treatment plant in Ensenada, Baja Californiaand a $25.4 million fresh water system for Brawley, CS. Thebinational bank created under NAFTA to support infrastructuredevelopment will underwrite $6.45 million of the Ensenada projectwhich replaces an obsolete facility. NADBank will fund $17.2million of the Brawley loan where the present water treatment plantfails drinking water standards.Water Stock Watch(At Close, January 2, 1996)                                    Current         LastCompany                   Symbol      Price         Month     ChangeAmerican Water Works      AWK        38.750         32.250    +6.500Aquarion                  WTR        25.375         23.625    +1.750Betz Labs                 BTL        41.250         40.250    +1.000Calgon Carbon             CCC        12.000         12.875    -0.875Connecticut Water         CTWS       27.500         28.000    -0.500Dow Chemical Com.         DOW        71.125         71.375    -0.250Duriron Co.               DURI       25.250         27.750    -2.500FMC Corporation           FMC        67.500         74.000    -6.500W.R. Grace                GRA       59.625          61.875    -2.250Gould Pumps               GULD       25.000         24.375    +0.625Hach Co.                  HACH       17.250         16.125    +1.125Ionics, Inc.              ION        43.375         43.625    -0.250Merck & Co.               MRK        64.375         61.625    +2.750Nalco Chemical            NLC        30.750         30.500    +0.250Osmonics                  OSM        19.875         18.250    +1.625Rohm & Haas Co.           ROH        64.625         61.250    +3.375Sybron Chemical           SYCM       10.750         12.375    -1.625U.S. Filter               USF        26.625         22.500    +4.125Source:  BCC, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Wheelabrator, Betzin Strategic AllianceWheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc. (Liberty Lane, Hampton, NH03842; Tel: 603/929-3129, Fax: 603/629-3129) and Betz WaterManagement Group (4636 Somerton Rd., Trevose, PA 19047;Tel:215/355-3300, Fax: 215/953-5544) have formed a strategicalliance to build, own, and operate water treatment systems atcustomer sites. Betz is responsible for sales, marketing, andsupplying specialty chemicals while Wheelabrator will undertakesystem design, construction, and operations.The alliance proposes to seek new opportunities in the pulp andpaper, petroleum refining, chemical, power, food, and steelindustries. The alliance has also agreed that Ecolochem Inc.(Norfolk, VA) will participate as a preferred supplier of ultrapurewater services and technology.Wheelabrator Water Technologies is a newly-formed subsidiary of WMXTechnologies Inc., and Betz Water Management is the globaltechnology unit of Betz Laboratories, Inc.Wheelabrator Water Technologies reports that its Memtek Div. hassold a third Rinsewater Maintenance System to McAlpin Industries ofRochester, NY. The system will recycle 60-75 gpm for a new platingline which plates steel parts for corrosion protectionBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Goodbye WaterMeter ReadersThe Utility Div. of Badger Meter, Inc. (4545 W. Brown Deer Rd.,Milwaukee, WI 53223; Tel: 414/355-0400, Fax: 414/355-8096) hassigned an agreement with CellNet Data Systems Inc. (San Carlos, CA)to develop an automatic water meter reader for water utilities.CellNet will design radio frequency communication modules to relayinformation from Badger's meters to water utilities.Badger Meter has built water meters since 1905 and is a leader inflow measurement and flow control technologies for utilities andindustry. Badger's Dan Zandron says that automatic meter readingwill enable the 60,000 water utilities in the U.S. to deliverimproved customer billing services at much lower costs than manualmeter reading.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Life Industries WinsMexican ConcessionLife Industries, Inc. (219 Orange Ave., Sarasota, FL 34236; Tel:941/361-2106, Fax: 941/361-2127) has won a 15-year concession todesign and build 6 municipal wastewater treatment plants for sixcities in the Mexican state of Morelos. George L. Hagen of LifeIndustries (Tel: 813/351-8617, Fax: 813/351-2004) says that thecompany is acting in partnership with the firm ICA S.A. de C.V. ofGuadalajara. The concession includes management and maintenance ofthe plants. Hagen expects the concession to generate incometotaling $30 million.Life Industries owns two artesian water wells that supply drinkingwater for an area near Guadalajara. The firm has plans to build aplant to treat and bottle the water for local and internationalsales. Life Industries proposes to use a process invented by DeiterGabor and covered by U.S. Patents 5,292,194 and 5,342,529. Itconsists of a chamber which is under pressure at one end and avacuum at the other.  A high-speed rotor draws feedwater into thehigh pressure end where centrifugal force spins out the impurities.The water is treated by vacuum distillation and withdrawn at thevacuum end. Hagen says the product water is highly pure in quality.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996French Do Adorethe British WaterThe European Commission has approved a takeover bid from Lyonnaisedes Eaux for the Northumbrian Water Group which supplies drinkingwater and sewage treatment services in the northeast of England.Lyonnaise already owns two other British water utilities, NorthEast Water and Suffolk Water. Ian Byatt, regulator of Britishutilities, insisted on price cuts of 15% over the next 6 years whenLyonnaise offered $1.27 billion for Northumbrian.Another French takeover bid is taking shape in southeast England,where Generale des Eaux and SAUR Water Services Plc have joined ina buyout offer for Mid Kent Holdings Plc. The two French companiesalready own 39% of Mid Kent, and they say they plan to split thefirm and merge it into two other companies that they already own.General des Eaux and SAUR own nine other British water utilities,and they say the merger would ease water shortages and improveefficiency of service. They did not propose any reductions in waterrates. Mid Kent management has rejected the French bid asunwelcome.A third British utility is looking to international growth toassure its future. Thames Water Plc has a 35% share in a $860million project to supply drinking water to the Turkish city ofIzmit. Thames is the largest investor in the group which has theconcession for the "build, operate, and transfer" project.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Philly SuburbanKeeps GrowingPhiladelphia Suburban Water Co. (762 Lancaster Ave., Bryn Mawr, PA19010-3489; Fax: 610/645-1061) has completed its fifth acquisitionfor 1995 and has an agreement to begin 1996 with another.PSW bought the Schuylkill Township water franchise fromPhoenixville Borough for $1 million. The franchise serves 1,800residents. PSW has connected the area to its system by a 12 in.main that supplies water from its Pickering Plant on PickeringCreek.PSW had earlier bought the Castle Rock water system in EdgmontTownship, as well as the Ivy Hill, Deerfield Knoll, Chesterdale,and Media Borough water systems. PSW now serves 850,000 residentsin four counties of southeastern Pennsylvania. The company hascompleted an agreement to purchase the Hatboro water authorityserving 15,000 residents in Montgomery County.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:  The Kingdom of Nepal has approved a $185 million project todevelop new water supplies for the Kathmandu Valley. Local andforeign investors will finance the Melamchi Drinking Water Projectto supply 170 million l/d by building a 27 km tunnel to divertwater from the Melamchi River to Kathmandu. The state-owned NepalDrinking Water Corp. will buy water from the Melamchi company andthe Nepal electric authority will buy the electricity it generates.  A.O. Smith Corp. (P.O. Box 23972, Milwaukee, WI 53223-0972; Tel:414/359-4000, Fax: 414/359-4180) is buying the bulk storage tankbusiness of Peabody TecTank from The Pullman Co. for about $18million. TecTank builds epoxy-coated steel and aluminum storagetanks for applications in food processing and water and wastewatertreatment. Its fiscal 1995 sales were $49 million.  Cohesant Technologies, Inc. (1801 E. 9th, Suite 1520, Cleveland,OH 44114; Tel: 216/861-6266, Fax: 216/694-3529) reports that itsAmerican Chemical Co. Unit is buying the business operations ofRaven Lining Systems (Tulsa, OK). Raven manufactures and licensesthe application of high-build epoxy coatings to protect wastewatertreatment systems and similar facilities from corrosion.  Tyco International Ltd. (One Tyco Park, Exeter, NH 03833-1108;Tel: 603/778-9700; Fax 603/778-7700) and Earth Technology Corp.(100 W. Broadway, Suite 5000, Long Beach, CA; Tel: 310/495-4449,Fax: 310/426-0666) have a merger agreement under which Tyco willbuy Earth Tech's outstanding common stock for a total of about $70million. Earth Technology designs and engineers water andwastewater treatment facilities and had sales of $178 million forfiscal 1995.  Core Industries Inc. (P.O. Box 2000, Bloomfield Hills, MI 48304;Tel: 810/642-3400, Fax: 810/642-6816) has purchased CMB Industriesof Fresno, CA, the leading producer of sleeve valves and the secondlargest producer of backflow prevention valves in the world.Backflow prevention valves are used in a wide variety of commercialand industrial applications to protect the quality of drinkingwater.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Bone Charcoal, SandClear the WaterTwenty small springs in northeast England are sources of groundwater that is strongly colored by fulvic and humic acids.Chlorination results in the formation of trihalomethanes at levelswell above the standard allowed by the European Community. J. Lewis(Yorkshire Water plc., U.K.) reports that engineers at YorkshireWater had little success at treating the colored water withadvanced technologies. They have now devised a method of using bonecharcoal in combination with slow sand filters.Lewis explains that bone charcoal upgrades sand filtration byremoving turbidity and absorbing color and metals. Activated carbonis not as good at absorbing metals. The Marsett pilot plant uses acommercial bone char material, Brimac, which is more commonly usedin sugar refining. Brimac consists of 10% activated carbon and 90%hydroxyapatite in a 20/60 mesh size, and it has a structure whichprotects it from rapid erosion. The 8 m3/day pilot plant has 3covered slow sand filters followed by chlorination and storage ina service reservoir.Lewis reports in Water & Environmental Management [9-4, 385-395,1995] on the first six months of monitoring the Marsett pilotplant. Lewis found that pH was initially 11 but stabilized belownine within six weeks. The color of the filtered water and THMlevels were consistently much lower than the EC standards. Bonecharcoal was consistently better than sand in removing turbidityand coliforms, but the level of dissolved metals in the groundwaterwas too low to make any comparison.The success of the Marsett pilot plant convinced Yorkshire Water toconvert five other small treatment works to bone charcoalfiltration. Two have dual-media filters with bone char on sand, andthe others have layers of bone char between sand. Their capacityranges from 3-100 m3/day. The thickness of bone char in most casesis 500 mm. All treated colored water, turbidity, and THMseffectively, though spikes as high as 20 Hazen units mark momentarybreakthroughs during exceptional rains at the Marsett plant. Oneplant reduced Al levels from 0.4 mg/l to less than 0.05 mg/l, andtwo reduced Fe levels from as much as 0.7 mg/l to <0.05-0.1 mg/l.Although bone char costs 35 times more than sand, Lewis found thatit actually produced real savings in labor costs because bonecharcoal filters are easier to clean than sand and the bonechar/sand filtration requires less labor at a small plant than amore complex technology. Bone char filters reduce chlorinationcosts by as much as 70%.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Can StructuredWater Be GoodA new product for the gullible health faddists is "Aqua ResonanceAM" from Quorum International Ltd., a network marketing firm thatalso markets Quorum water filtration and Genesis distillationsystems and Biologics nutrition products over the Internet with ahome page listing at http://www.hk.super.net/~gng/aqua.html.Capitalizing on the peculiar properties of water proceeding fromits polar structure and invoking the perennial appeal of thefountain of youth, its distributors say that "Aqua Resonance AM" iswater that has been clustered "to improve metabolic efficiency andnutrient absorption back into the cells of the human body."Using "sophisticated magnetic resonance, laser and ceramictechnology, Dr. Lorenzen has succeeded in producing micro-clusteredwater with the same properties of youthful biowater." It isLorenzen's thesis that cellular water is not like tap water, rainwater, or mineral water because its molecules share hydrogen atomsand cluster in small bunches, delivering nutrients and removingtoxins as they diffuse through cell walls.The movement of cellular water supposedly slows down as we age andno longer performs its metabolic functions as well. Claiming that"the study of cellular signal transduction has for years pointed tothe need for replacement of biowater as we age," the distributorsof Aqua Resonance AM recommend adding one capful to a 0.75 l bottleof distilled water, shaking well, and refrigerating for 8 hoursbefore drinking.Aqua Resonance is, of course, 100% pure water and so concentratedthat a devotee needs only 2 tablespoons per gallon of distilledwater to prepare the most effective mixture. It is available in 4-oz bottles at $34.95 per bottle plus postage and handling fromAqualogics (Tel: 602/780-5588 or email: Gilbert Ng atgng@hk.super.net).Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Daicel IncreasesIt's ProductionAccording to a report in Separation Membrane Business News in Japan(November 1995), published by CHC Corp. (27-4-205 KoshienguchiKita-machi, Nishinomiya 663, Japan), Daicel (1-Teppo-Cho, Sakai,Osaka Prefecture, 590 Japan) will increase its hollow fibermembrane production capacity from 2,000 bundles a year to 20,000bundles by 1997.  Daicel has marketed Molsep (RO and UF membrane)and Pearlcon since 1975 in its separation systems division.  Thosematerials are applied to preparation of ultrapure water,concentration and clarification of fruit juice, and separation andpurification of enzymes and pharmaceuticals.  Four new productionlines for hollow fiber membrane will be located in the HimejiPlant.Daicel underwent a reorganization last year, and established a newcompany, Daicen, in cooperation with Central Filter to carry outmarketing and maintenance of membrane modules and membrane systems.Daicel continues to produce the membrane in a pilot plant in theirresearch center.The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) has askedmajor water system engineering companies to investigate the use ofnovel technology for recycling wastewater.  The technologiesdeveloped are expected to be composites of various operationsincluding reverse osmosis, biological treatment, ammoniaadsorption, activated carbon adsorption, and oxidation.  Thegovernment will provide a process development budget for the next3-4 years, subject to approval by the Ministry of Finance.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Countertop Systemfrom PremierResearchers at Premier Manufactured Systems, Inc. (17431 N. 25thAve., Phoenix, AZ 85023; Tel: 602/931-1977) have developed acountertop reverse osmosis (RO) unit utilizing a membrane thatpermits operation at abnormally low water pressures, typically aslow as 10 psi (U.S. Patent 5,445,729). Tap water pressure at thefaucet typically is less than 40 psi.The RO unit makes do with only one, small and compact, outlet pump.An optional single, or a dual-channel dual-pass, ultraviolet (UV)light source sterilizes filtered inlet, and/or the purified output.Purified water is stored at atmospheric pressure in a simplestorage bag, and is dispensed on demand by force of the outletpump.The entire RO unit-storage bag, pump, filters, UV sterilizer,membrane and all-is packaged in a compact and aestheticallypleasing, cylindrically-shaped housing. The unit can be kept on ahousehold counter top with flow connected to normal householdplumbing-typically to the faucet and drain of a kitchen sink-whileconnected to normal household power.The RO unit is intended for purification of water in the event ofan emergency or power emergency, and is even operative in thecomplete absence of electrical power, such as after an earthquakeor other emergency, by manual disconnection or bypass of its inletsolenoid valve.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Profit MarginsCan Be SlimCertainly automation and improved fabrication techniques help, butthe profit margins for RO have got to be the slimmest of any of themembrane technologies. Back when RO membranes/modules were sellingfor $7 - $10/sq. ft., that was considered cheap compared to anultrafiltration membrane.  Now we hear about some of the home ROmanufacturers talking about $2.50/sq. ft. for simple flat sheetmembrane.  Those big 8" X 40" modules that we grew up with wereusually in the $1000-$1500 range. Now we hear about 8" X 40"modules going for as little as $550.  Of course that may "depend"on a lot of different things, but price cutting seems to be thenorm.There are about 2,200 million gallons per day of installed ROcapacity worldwide.  Most of this capacity is for brackish feeds.About 14% of installed capacity is in sea water RO.  Life cyclesfor general RO modules have been extended from the 1-3 year timespan of the 1980s to the 3.5-4.5 year time span in 1995. Sea waterRO installations seem to add modules on a continual and on-goingbasis to keep water quality up. The replacement market remainsabout 53% of the global sales of membranes and modules or about$100 million worldwide annually out of a total market of $189million.A lot of ownership changes have taken place in the past few yearsand probably a lot more are in the making.  There seems to be adiversity of players and some of the leaders such as FilmTec/Dowmay be seeing their market share declining. Dow probably had over37% of the world's RO market in 1992. Finishing out 1995, Dowprobably has more like 24-25% of the global RO market.U.S. companies once saw an unrivaled dominance for their ROtechnology.  Interesting that as the profit margins shrink, theU.S. companies seem to be gathering up competitors to share in the$189 million membrane/module global RO market. (see table)Competing in the RO MarketplaceDOMESTICFOREIGNDowMemtec (Australia)DSINitto Denko(Japan)DuPontRoChem (Germany)Fluid Systems/Anglican Water Separem (Italy)Hydranautics/Nitto Denko Toray (Japan)U.S. FilterToyobo (Japan)OsmonicsNWW Acumem (England)TriSepBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARMarch 19-24, 1996, Water Quality Association Convention andExhibition will be held at the Indiana Convention Center inIndianapolis, IN.  Contact: Jeannie Collins at WQA (Tel: 708/505-0160, ext. 210, Fax: 708/505-9637) for more information.May 1-3, 1996, Ultrapure Water Expo '96 will be held in Chicago,IL.  Contact: Miriam Slejko (Tel: 303/973-6700) for additionalinformation.May 20-23, 1996, 7th World Filtration Congress will be held at theTechnical University of Budapest in Budapest, Hungary.  Forinformation, contact: Magyar Kemikusok Egyesulete (Fo u. 68, 1027Budapest, Hungary; Tel: (011) 361/201 6883, Fax: (011) 361/2018056).June 9-12, 1996, Watershed '96 will be held in Baltimore, MD, (Tel:703/684-2400). Call for additional information.July 14-19, 1996, Ion Exchange '96 will be held at ChurchillCollege, Cambridge, England.  Contact: Society of Chemical Industry( Tel: +44(171) 235-3681, Fax: +44(171) 823-1698).July 16-18, 1996, Semicon/West will be held in San Francisco, CA.Contact: Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (Tel:415/940-6961).Back to Headline List WT02-B37-33IA086-000616-B018-314http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003748 text/html 45411HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:35:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:16 GMTContent-length: 45224Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev01.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS & TRENDS *************** (1030 words) ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE (660 words) RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKET TO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY (324 words) UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTS ADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY (273 words) EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTEN ENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS (306 words) JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDING FOR SEABED PROTECTION (138 words) CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRM SETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL (148 words) COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREE ON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS (697 words) UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODS THAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY (2499 words) CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996***************SLANTS & TRENDS***************EMERGING MARKETS: Although political and economicinstability continues to plague many Central and EasternEuropean countries, interest in the environmental goods andservices markets there continues. Initially off to asomewhat rocky start, many states, especially such EasternEuropean countries as the Czech and Slovak Republics,Hungary and Poland, are adopting Western-style environmentalregulations. Further, privatization of state-held industrieshas put environmental concerns in the hands of individualsrather than often unaccountable bureaucracies. Still,creating a sustainable development ethic is difficult amidhard economic times, analysts say. And without adequatestate funding or enforcement of existing environmental lawsand regulations, the pace of remediation and pollutionabatement programs has been slow.     This issue of WER looks at several facets ofenvironmental protection in Central and Eastern Europe,particularly the problems faced by Russia and its nuclearpower industry. Because of the inherent safety problemsposed by radioactive materials, this sector requiresspecialized environmental engineers and relatively highcosts, often beyond the reach of the former Second World'sdeveloping economies.* * *CHINA TARGETED: While the West focuses much attention onCentral and Eastern Europe, funds also are flowing toCommunist China, where rapid industrialization andpopulation growth continues to plague the environment. TheEuropean Investment Bank just issued its first loan to Chinafor environmentally friendly development of clean-burningnatural gas reserves. The project will help the environmentthrough the distribution of natural gas in Pudong, asatellite city of Shanghai, which will reduce the airpollution caused  by the present use of coal and town gas.The EIB is providing roughly $73 million for the developmentof the Ping Hu offshore field. The $1 billion project isbeing co-financed by the Asian Development Bank, the EximBank of Japan and France.Central/Eastern European News Briefs     Events creating possibilities for sales ofenvironmental goods and services in Central and Eastern Eu-rope are routine occurrences. The following is a snapshot ofenvironmental news stories that occurred just before orafter the New Year.Russia Having Trouble With CFCs     Russia is asking for more time to cut ozone-threateningsubstances. At a major international conference ofgovernment representatives convened in Vienna to review the1987 Montreal Protocol on ozone protection, RussianFederation Environment Minister Viktor Danilov-Danilyan saidRussia needs more time and a larger pool of investment aidin order to develop substitutes to ozone-harming substancessuch as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the MontrealProtocol, signed by 150 countries, such industrializedcountries as Russia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 andthe rest of the signatories by 2010.     Minister Danilov-Danilyan said the Russian Federationis now producing only half the ozone-threatening chemicalsit was in 1987, but he added that the drop was a by-productof the fall in industrial output. The minister was quick topoint out that he and his government would have preferred tobe able to meet the deadline, as other governments aredoing, but that the economic conditions prevailing withinhis country are making it impossible for the principalfactories from even paying their workers, let alone theirtaxes and electric bills. It will be impossible for theRussian government to force such enterprises, even if theyare state-owned (and many are not) to comply with theprotocol when the ministry has no financial capacity tosupport the enterprise's change-over to non-CFC productionor usage.German, Swiss, Finnish Waste     Germany and Switzerland have decided not to send spentnuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 for processing, KrasnoyarskKrai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchin was quoted as saying.The waste would have been processed at the RT-2 plant -still under construction - in the formerly secret nuclearcenter in Siberia. The Russian authorities had hoped tofinance the project by accepting foreign waste, enablingthem to process their own stocks. The Swiss and Germanpullout will deal a major blow to the project. The decisionis likely to be hailed by environmental groups, which havestrongly opposed the importation of nuclear materials,arguing that Russia's waste storage sites are alreadyoverflowing.     Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclear fuel from aFinnish nuclear power plant reportedly has arrived in Russiafor processing at the Mayak plant in Chelyabinsk-65. AnEnglish translation of the Komsomolskaya Pravda newspapersays it is not yet clear whether the nuclear residue remain-ing after processing will be shipped back to Finland or keptinside the Russian Federation.Nuclear Safety Threatened     Nuclear safety may be threatened by workers at Russia'snuclear power plants, who say they may shut down thefacilities unless they receive overdue wage payments.Officials say they have scheduled warning protests, but itis not clear what form they will take. Energy consumers owenuclear power plants about 2.5 trillion rubles (US$555million), and on average workers have not been paid forthree months, according to the deputy head of Rosenergoatomin Moscow.Assistance from Germany     A German company has signed a contract with Russia'sKursk nuclear power plant to construct a nuclear wastestorage facility and to provide 240 containers to store theplant's radioactive waste. The German Company for NuclearContainers, a Nukem subsidiary, will control productionquality, train specialists and provide the know-how forproduction. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia's nuclearsafety agency, the solid waste storage facilities at theKursk plant are full.Kazakhstan Troubled     The amount of radioactive waste accumulating at uraniummining and processing plants in Kazakhstan reportedly isreaching alarming proportions. Since this large, very poorCentral Asian country became independent in 1991, thequantity of radioactive waste stored in Kazakhstan has grownto 219 million metric tons. The republic's Ministry ofEcology and Biological Resources claims the aggregateradioactivity from the waste comes to 250,000 curies, whichis "many times more than the accepted norm." Kazakhstan doesnot have the means to deal with the waste because under theSoviet Union's regime disposal was a national responsibilitycarried out by the government in Moscow. Today, there areneither any Kazakh laws nor bilateral agreements with Russiawhich adequately address this type of nuclear waste disposaldilemma.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE     The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problemsrelated to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.     The two-and-a-half-year contract from the DefenseNuclear Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative ThreatReduction (CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation intended to assist the countries of the formerSoviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent theproliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.     Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess the radiation and conventional environmental damageat sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles werebased, transported, operated, or maintained, and help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.     Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.     Potential environmental problems include heavy metaland low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances.     As part of the effort to transfer expertise in theenvironmental restoration field, Arthur D. Little willconduct international conferences co-sponsored by DNA andthe Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around theworld will be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety ofenvironmental restoration experiences, technologies, andmanagement issues.     As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.     Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active groundwater movement,which can exacerbate groundwater pollution.     Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little onthe Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corpsof Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los AlamosTechnical Associates, Technology Management Company, theEnvironmental Chemical Corp., the Environmental HazardsSpecialists International, Environmental CareersOrganizations, the World Environment Center, and CleanSites, Inc.     Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largestenvironmental impact assessment ever conducted in the FormerSoviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.* * *     RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia'sminister of nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclearsmuggling should be the top item on the agenda for the AprilG-7 summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted tonuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" fordealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control overnuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution toRussia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much lessthan the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russiancivilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have aquestionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt onMikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boostedto $2 billion by 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKETTO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY     Arthur D. Little has undertaken a study of the Russianmarket for environmental equipment and services to help U.S.companies determine export potential as that area of theworld rebuilds its economy.     The study, requested by the U.S. Department of Commerceand the American Embassy in Moscow, will determine thepotential for U.S. environmental goods and services inRussia, indicate current and future trends, and highlightthe dominant driving forces and pressing environmentalconcerns in the Russian market.     The information will be used to help U.S. companiesdecide whether and how to compete in the Russianenvironmental services market, and help lay the groundworkfor U.S. government-sponsored trade promotion events.Many Subjects Targeted     Special areas Arthur D. Little consultants will exploreinclude the most pressing environmental needs in air, water,and solid waste pollution control and prevention, and thebarriers that could restrict access to the Russian market byU.S. environmental services firms.     U.S. firms have indicated a growing interest in thepotential for environmental goods and services sales inRussia as more public and private money is invested inrebuilding the economy.Services being assessed include:     l Solid and hazardous waste management;     l Waste site cleanup or construction;     l Pollution abatement in such areas as asbestos, lead,and radon; and     l Environmental consulting and engineering in hazardouswaste, air and water quality, pollution prevention, andenvironmental management.     Equipment markets include:     l Air, water, and solid waste pollution controls;     l Environmental monitoring systems;     l Waste containment, disposal and treatment tech-nologies;     l Thermal technologies;     l Bulk liquid removal; and     l Groundwater collection.     Anthony Montrone, vice president in charge of Arthur D.Little's environmental business strategy practice, and DavidWebb, director of the firm's Moscow office, said Arthur D.Little was chosen because of its long history of helpingcompanies enter international environmental products andservices markets, and its experience addressingenvironmental issues in Russia.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTSADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY     Ukraine has recently produced two technologies that maysignificantly facilitate remediation of industrial wastewaters as well as the recycling of used oil and suchcomposite wastes as grinding swarf and certain sludges.     Marketing of the technologies is being handled throughthe Struten Institute, which promotes access to these andother technology-transfer opportunities.     One Ukrainian research institute has developed methodsto produce a semipermeable membrane made of syntheticdiamond, the Struten Institute says. The material may beplaced on a variety of substrates, including ceramics.     The result is a semipermeable membrane that issimultaneously resistant to heat, abrasion and pressure.     In a separate yet linked development, another Ukrainianinstitute has perfected a method for "scrubbing" the surfaceof semipermeable membranes. From a physical chemistry stand-point, it is now possible to continually and economicallystir-up otherwise sedate layers.     The method has so far been applied to polymericmembranes, speeding reverse osmosis pressures as low as 2-5atmospheres, the Student Institute says.     The Struten Institute is a nonprofit organization basedin the United States and geared toward bringing technicallytrained individuals from Ukraine in contact with Westerncompanies.     "This business level, technical contact, mediatedthrough the Struten Institute, is a dividend some businesseswill realize from the fall of communism," the institute saidin a statement.     Differentiating between Ukraine and the RussianFederation, the Struten Institute says it is keen to helpcompanies economically secure research and developmentpartners and tap Ukraine's emerging market of 52 millionpeople.     Contact: Mike Mychajlonka, executive director, StrutenInstitute, PO Box 162, Saline, MI 48176-0162; e-mail:strutinst@aol.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTENENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS     European Union environment ministers have reached apolitical agreement to extend the range of developmentprojects requiring environmental impact assessments (EIAs)before final approval is granted. Meeting in Brussels inlate December, the ministers endorsed proposal COM(93)575,which expands the EIA requirements under directive85/337/EEC.     The move, termed a decade too late, was hailed by manyin the environment industry for opening the door to newgoods and services sales. The revised rules will come intoeffect in January 1998, but only after parliamentaryapproval.     Spanish Transport and Public Works Minister JoseBorrell, who chaired the meeting as EU environmentpresident, said the union now has a complete series of ruleson which investment projects require EIAs. In recent years,EIAs largely have been conducted on an ad hoc basis, have attimes been poor in quality, and recommendations fromstakeholders sometimes have not been followed, EU sourcessay.     Under the new regime, the EIAs will more accuratelyidentify potential environmental problems associated withproposed development projects and give stakeholders,including developers, authorities and the public, ampleopportunity to discuss them, the ministers said in aconcluding statement. Projects plagued by poor EIAimplementation include Britain's Twyford Down transportationproject and Greece's plan to divert the Acheloos River.     The new rules extend mandatory EIAs to such sectors asroad-widening, nonhazardous waste storage facilities, waterwells and management, oil and gas drilling, petroleumpipelines, dams, intensive hog and poultry farming, pulp andpaper factories, open mines and  quarries, overhead powerlines, and chemical storage facilities exceeding 200,000metric tons. EIAs may also be required, but will not bemandatory, for forestry, mineral extraction, energy, metaland chemical processing, food, textiles and  tourismprojects.     Contact: European Commission Environmental Secretariat,Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium; +32-2-299-11-11; fax: +32-2-295-01-38.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDINGFOR SEABED PROTECTION     Kingston asked the United Nations Dec. 26 to restorefunds for the International Seabed Authority, a group thatwould oversee economic activities in international waters.One of the authority's main responsibilities will be tosupervise seabed mining. The move follows a U.N. decision tocut 1996 funding from $2.6 million to $770,000. The rulingalso would eliminate several of the 17 proposed posts.     Although the authority boasts 170 member countries,participants have not been able to decide on who should siton the council or who should serve as the secretary general.The authority will meet next in Kingston in March. Jamaica,which was chosen two years ago as host to the InternationalSeabed Authority.     Contact: Ministry of Public Service and Environment,Citibank Building, 9F, 63-67 Knutsford Blvd., Kingston 5,Jamaica; +1-809-926-3235; fax: +1-809-929-6616.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRMSETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL     The Canadian firm Epicore Networks Inc. has signed afive-year, $8.75 million contract through its subsidiary PTEnvironmental Network Indonesia Ltd. to supply Sulawesi AgroUtama (SAU) with aquaculture products and technical servicesto support the company's shrimp hatchery and farm operationsin South Sulawesi.     The contract calls on Epicore to help address the manyenvironmental problems that have plagued the Indonesianfacility. Environmental and other problems are said toseriously threaten the $7 billion international aquacultureindustry. "This contract, with a major Indonesian aqua-culture company, confirms the effectiveness of Epicore's"solutions" based strategy," said Chief Executive OfficerIan Fraser.     Epicore uses natural microbes and enzymes that arefriendly to the environment, the company said. Thecorporation's products and services have applications inaquaculture, agriculture and horticulture, cleaning andsanitation and waste water treatment. Contact: Ian Fraser,chief executive officer, Epicore, England, +44-1932-355230.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREEON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS     Multinational companies concerned about the cost ofassessing the environmental and health hazards posed bytheir operations may benefit from a new set of toxicologytest strategies drafted last month. The new methods aredesigned to save time and money, better predict healtheffects of drugs, chemicals, radiation and other substancesand reduce, refine or replace animal use.     The Interagency Coordination Committee on theValidation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) has issued areport viewed as important to the international environmentcommunity because it should enhance global efforts toharmonize toxicity testing methods. Countries are trying toharmonize methods so health regulators around the world canshare data and make comparable risk assessments.Corporations support the effort which would make it easierto conduct tests accepted throughout the global economy.     More than 150 people discussed a draft report by theICCVAM at a National Toxicology Program workshop held inmid-December. ICCVAM represents 15 U.S. federal agenciesincluding National Institutes of Health, the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Centers forDisease Control, the Department of Energy, the Agency forToxic Substances and Disease Registry and the Department ofTransportation.     ICCVAM designed its report to apply to all proposedtoxicological testing methods for health and ecologicaleffects. New tests could supplement or be alternatives tothe traditional two-year rodent bioassay used in riskassessments and regulatory decisionmaking. New tests couldinvolve transgenic animals, mathematical and computermodels, and in vitro methods, such as test tube or petridish experiments with tissue samples. The new methodologiesshould help agencies better protect human health and safety,said ICCVAM co-chair William Stokes.     The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-opment (OECD), which represents 25 nations, approvesguidelines for new test methods. OECD-member nations mustaccept data generated by tests that followed approved guide-lines, said OECD representative Herman Koeter. OECD expertswill review ICCVAM's report Jan. 22-24 at a workshop onalternative test methods.     ICCVAM's report describes eight criteria agencies woulduse to assess a proposed test method's validity. Forexample, researchers or manufacturers should test the newprocedure on agents similar to the substances to which themethod would be applied. The researchers also should giveagencies a detailed protocol describing the method,materials needed, criteria by which data will be evaluatedand the procedure's limitations. The protocol should bereviewed by an independent scientific panel.     Agencies should consider more than a dozen criteria indetermining whether they should accept a new test method,ICCVAM said. For example, the new procedure should: beapproved by the scientific community; adequately predict theendpoint of interest; be readily transferred amonglaboratories; and generate data that is as good or betterfor hazard identification and/or dose-response assessmentthan the test for which it is proposed to be a substitute.     "The report is excellent," said David Brusick, echoingcomments expressed by many participants. Brusick, CorningHazleton's scientific director, co-chaired one of threepanels making recommendations for the report. He suggestedICCVAM define a formal validation process and highlight itand other key recommendations in tables and flow charts.     Companies, agency scientists and other stakeholdersshould be involved early on and throughout the process ofvalidating and accepting new methods, said PatriciaWilliams, vice president of Glycomed, a biopharmaceuticalcompany. Risk assessors also must be involved to help ensuredata will meet their needs.     Lawmakers and/or private industry should fund ICCVAM ora similar committee to educate regulators about new testmethods, coordinate agencies' actions, and work with theinternational community, several speakers said. Sinceindustry will benefit if these tests are accepted, companiesshould consider funding, through a user fee, efforts toapprove the tests, said Steve Niemi, vice president of theGenzyme Transgenics Corp.Harmonizing testing methods may save firms millions ofdollars annually, Senior Scientist David Neuman, of the IlsiRisk Science Institute later said. Currently, to satisfydivergent requirements, companies may conduct severalexpensive tests that vary in only minor details. Duplicatingtests does little to help researchers or regulatorsunderstand the substance being studied, he said. ICCVAMexpects to issue a final report this summer. Contact: AlmaBritton, +1-919-541-0530.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODSTHAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY     Local, regional and global initiatives to preservebiodiversity were lauded Dec. 29 by world leaderscelebrating the International Day for Biological Diversity.     In addition to touting the virtues of biodiversity,leaders said companies looking to market their pollutionabatement and remediation goods and services will benefitfrom helping improve public awareness of environmentalproblems.     Summarizing the day's theme was a statement by theUnited Nations Environment Program (UNEP), which saidbiological diversity constitutes the resource upon whichfamilies, communities, nations and future generationsdepend.     (The Convention on Biological Diversity went intoeffect Dec. 29, 1993. The document was signed by 167countries plus the European Union on June 5 1992 and has todate been ratified by 136 states.)     Describing all living creatures as having its place andfunction, the UNEP believes that through thoughtless action,mankind is eroding the Earth's biological capital at analarming rate.     "The world is being impoverished by the loss of itsrichest resources - of forests, wetlands and seas anddepletion of its most fundamental stock - its species, itsecosystems and its habitats," said UNEP Executive DirectorElizabeth Dowdeswell. Further, the loss of every gene,species or ecosystem means a loss of an available adaptiveoption.     Although many countries and industry sectors take forgranted the Earth's natural bounty and resilience, theability of natural systems to bounce back after disruptionis declining. "If the environment is reaching the limits ofits endurance, what can each one of us do to conserve ourplanet's biological capital?" the statement asks.     An active and well-informed public is the best defencefor the environment, UNEP says. "An education that empowersand enables people to seek collectively ways to overcomecurrent destructive trends is a critical component of anysuccessful strategy for achieving a sustainable future.     Toward this ends, UNEP is eager to enlist the supportof indigenous conservation groups, whose indigenousknowledge and wisdom about the environment may well providethe resilience to adapt to the future environmental changes.And, experience has shown that wherever local people havebeen given greater responsibility for managing their ownresources, they have shown both a capacity and a willingnessto conserve.     Sectors that should become more actively involved inpreserving biodiversity include the pharmaceutical industry,agriculture, tourism, fisheries and industries requiring rawmaterials.     The United Nations Environment Program today works tosupport the Convention on Biological Diversity bystrengthening the national and global base of knowledge onbiodiversity.Industry Reaches Out     The Paris-based Association Valentin Hauy hastranslated the Convention on Biological Diversity intobraille and an initial print run of 1,000 English and 1,000French copies were released Dec. 29. The version will bedistributed free of charge to organizations for blind andpartially sighted people around the world.     The Spanish National Organization of the Blind (ONCE)based in Madrid released 200 copies of the Spanish brailleversion plus 200 copies on cassette. The event representsthe first time industry has joined forces with theSecretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity tofinancially support a braille project.     Contributions were made by a number of internationalpartners including: the European Senior Advisory Group onBiotechnology (SAGB), the US-based Biotechnology IndustryOrganization, the Japan Bioindustry Association, theCanadian Pulp and Paper Association and the European-basedGreen Industry Biotechnology Platform. "These contributionsshow industry's commitment to make available the content ofthe convention to as many people as possible, thus sig-nificantly contributing to increasing public awareness -paramount in our drive to promote balanced economic andsocial approaches for the protection of all life forms," thesecretariat said in a statement.     Contact: Robert Bisset, UNEP, Nairobi, tel: +254-2-62-3084; fax: +254-2-62-3692; e-mail: Robert.Bisset@unep.no; orCalestous Juma, Executive Secretary, European SeniorAdvisory Group on Biotechnology, Geneva, tel: +41-22-979-9360; fax: +41-22-797-2512.News Briefs     l AIR POLLUTION - EUROPEAN UNION: The EuropeanCommission plans to introduce two environmental initiativesand to focus on member states' implementation of existingenvironmental laws in 1996. The new initiatives will take onindustrial emissions of VOCs and the waste problems posed byscrapped vehicles. Proposals to increase compliance with ex-isting rules will include revisions to Directive 70/220 tocut air pollution from "not privately owned" motor vehiclesand amendments to Directive 88/77 on pollution from dieselemissions. Also pending are two initiatives for eco-labelingof packaging and packaging waste.     l CLIMATE - FINLAND: Pekka Kauppi of the Finnish ForestResearch Institute has concluded that the U.N. FrameworkConvention on Climate Change's goal of stabilizinggreenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels is an "unattainable"goal. His warning follows a conclusion by internationalscientists that humans are at least partially responsiblefor climate change.     l ENERGY - AUSTRALIA: Australian Energy Minister TonyMcGrady has announced 49 megawatts of electricity fromburning the sugar industry by-product bagasse will join theQueensland power grid by Jan. 1, 1998. Mills in Invicta,Kalamia, Inkerman, South Johnstone and Maryborough areparticipating. The environmentally friendly technology maybe transferred to the thousands of sugar mills throughoutthe world.     l GROUNDWATER - INTERNET: The International GroundWater Technology magazine can be reached via World Wide Webat http://waternet.com. The company also operates electronicmailing lists for paid subscribers to that publication andanother for subscribers to Water Technology magazine.Contact: Publisher, e-mail: waternet@waternet.com.     Also, a new mailing list named simply Groundwater hasbeen started. To subscribe, send e-mail to:majordomo@ias.champlain.edu. In the body of the e-mail typethe command: subscribe groundwater. To send mail to the listafter you have subscribed, address the mail to: groundwater@ias.champlain.edu. Kenneth Bannister is the list owner.     l MANAGEMENT - INFORMATION: TG International Ltd. ofOttawa, Canada, will conduct a free seminar on improvingcorporate competitiveness through environmental management.The seminar, A Mine From Hell: A Business Approach toEnvironmental Management Issues, will be held Jan. 30 at theOttawa Public Library. The gathering will discuss the CrownButte Mines Inc.'s New World Mine in Montana. The Canadiancompany Noranda Inc. owns controlling interest in the NewWorld Mine. Neither condemning or endorsing the mine, theseminar will present a set of circumstances that will allowparticipants to appraise and discuss a business managementapproach to identifying stakeholders' concerns andoperational environmental issues, organizers say. Contact:Peter Downing, TG International Ltd., PO Box 38120, 1430Prince of Wales Drive, Ottawa, Ontario Canada K2C 1N0;tel/fax: +1-613-225-7204; e-mail: az387@freenet.carleton.ca.     l MARKETING - INTERNET: Companies looking for marketingopportunities in the Eastern and Central Europe may beinterested in a new World Wide Web site established by theSacred Earth Network, a networking service among Western andEurasian Environmental nongovernmental organizations. Thesite is located at http://www.igc.apc.org/sen/."Nongovernmental environmental organizations in the formerSoviet Union play an important role at home and abroad," theorganization said in announcing the site. "Their dedicatedprofessional and volunteer members strive to providereliable information about current conditions and theeffectiveness of remedial or conservation techniques. Asinternational collaboration grows, electronic mail hasbecome vital to the efficient development and implementationof environmental programs." The site includes a directory ofe-mail users.     l MEDICAL WASTE - AUSTRALIA: Too much waste isconsidered infectious, drinking up hospital waste disposalcosts, according to the Australian Medical Association(AMA). The contention was voiced during the Medwaste '95conference sponsored by Griffith University. The AMA saidsurveys show that 60 percent of what is put in hospitalinfectious waste containers, including packaging andflowers, is not infectious. With disposal of infectiouswaste costing three times as much as general waste, the AMAis concerned there is an over-zealous attitude towardinfectious waste. The AMA wants doctors to take the lead indifferentiating truly infectious from ordinary trash. InAustralia, hospitals only generated 0.5 kg of waste perpatient per day 15 years ago and now generate 15 kg. Allhospitals together produce  an  estimated  600,000 kg ofsolidWorld Environment Report wants to provide you with thelatest information on global environmental trends that couldaffect your interests or provide new business opportunities.We welcome your comments and story ideas. Contact theeditor, David Bottorff, at Business Publishers Inc., 951Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, 1-301-587-6300,ext. 3005; fax: 1-301-587-1081; Internet: bottorff@aol.com.waste daily. The buildup is partially due to theintroduction of single-use items, including medication cupsand oxygen masks.     l POPULATION - WORLD: Because population growth and itsdemand on natural resources is one of the leading causes ofenvironmental degradation, countries and internationalinstitutions are looking for ways to integrate familyplanning into long-range sustainable development goals. ThePopulation Institute revealed Dec. 28 that 4.7 billion ofthe world's 5.7 billion residents, or 80 percent, liveoutside the industrialized world. The population innonindustrialized countries will double in between 32 and 36years, compared with 430 years for developed countries,according to the institute's most recent report. Inaggregate, the world's population will double in 40 years.This means that the vast majority of the 100 million newmouths that will enter the world in 1996 will be found incountries least able to meet the demand. As a result, thefragile environment in these countries will suffer greatly,the institute says. Particular problems include excess useof firewood and overfarming of eroding lands.     l PRODUCTS - INTERNET: Magnet Inc. of Seattle, Wash.,has established a World Wide Web site, Better World, topromote environmentally friendly products and informationfor individuals and industry. The site, located athttp://www.betterworld.com, includes a wide range ofenvironmental information, including recycling and wasteminimization. Companies also can post online storefronts fordirect sales, product information, public relationsmaterials, and any other information they wish to convey topotential customers. Contact: MagNet Inc. on the World WideWeb at http://www.magnets.com or Barry HarringtonAssociates, +1-510-376-4109; e-mail: barry.harrington@magnets.com.     l RADIOACTIVE WASTE - ITALY: Italy will receive atleast 7,000 cubic meters of its own radioactive waste,according to the National Agency for the Environment (ANPA).The country had sent it for containment in England in thelate 1960's. Italy is way behind schedule in constructingstorage containers for the waste, said ANPA spokespersonRenata Montesanti. Further, waste in England is the tip ofthe iceberg, says the report, which recommends a creation ofa central government body and national standards tocoordinate radioactive waste management.     l SOLAR ENERGY - ISRAEL: A plan to build a large solarpower facility in Israel is expected to draw a proposal fromAmoco-Enron Solar Power Development Co., in cooperation withIsraeli partners. A report from Israel said Amoco-Enron isworking with the Israeli companies Solel and Ormat Engineson a proposal for a 100-megawatt solar facility for theIsrael Electric Corp. (IEC), but an official of the Houston-based company declined to identify the firms involved. RickBarsky, senior vice president for development at Amoco-EnronSolar Power Development, said he expects a request forproposals for an 80-MW facility to be issued in the firsthalf of 1996. "We intend to look at that RFP and potentiallyto respond to it," he said.     l WASTE - GERMANY: There are at least 240,000 wastesites suspected of polluting the German environment,according to the International Trade Fair for Waste andWaste Water Disposal. The Federal Environment Ministry saidearlier federal and state governments could provide DM24billion to DM30 billion for clean-up in eastern lands by2002. The German Institute for Economic Research in Berlinsaid western Germany needs between 60 billion and DM100billion for cleanups through 2005.     l WATER POLLUTION - GERMANY: A treaty between theGerman Chemical Manufacturers Association (VCI) andRotterdam in The Netherlands aims at reducing industrialpollution of the Rhine River. The agreement affects about 50VCI companies with sites along the Rhine. By 2000, theypromise to cut 1986 levels of zinc by 78 percent, mercury 77percent, chromium 87 percent, copper 69 percent, nickel 64percent, cadmium 58 percent, lead 57 percent and arsenic 2percent. In return, Rotterdam, situated where the Rhineenters the North Sea, will renounce until 2000 any damageclaims against VCI member companies for arsenic, cadmium,chromium, mercury and nickel. The Port of Rotterdam issensitive to pollution of silt, which it must dredge con-tinually.Calendar     Jan. 8-11: Essentia '96: International Technology Forumon the Bridge Between Opportunities in Central and EasternEurope and Partners Worldwide, Prague, Czech Republic. Thisevent will evaluate the current state of technology transferand commercialization, advanced communication andinformation technologies, and environmental protection andrehabilitation. Essentia '96 consists of four parts:research and development market, advanced technology fair,partnership development center, and conferences. Contact:Essentia '96, Technology Park AS CR, Rozvojova 135, 165 02Prague 6, Czech Republic; +42-232-7677, fax: +42-232-5630;e-mail: technopark@icpf.cas.cz.     March 3: CEMP Conference, Workshop & Training Program1995-1996, Aberdeen, Scotland. The programs are organized bythe Center for Environmental Management and Planning (CEMP).The topics to be covered include environmental assessmentand Management, waste management, international courses forthe oil & gas operations, tourism, and environmentalauditing for business. Contact: Center for EnvironmentalManagement and Planning, AURIS Business Center, 23 St.Machar Drive, Old Aberdeen, AB2 1RY, Scotland, UnitedKingdom; +01224-272483; fax: +01224-487658     March 18: International Sustainable DevelopmentResearch Conference, Manchester, United Kingdom. Theconference will examine international dimensions ofsustainable development as well as implementation of Agenda21 at a local level. Contact: The Conference Manager, ERPEnvironment, P.O. Box 75, Shipley, West Yorkshire, BD17 6EZ,United Kigdom; +44-1274-530-408; fax: +44-1274-530-409; e-mail: r.j.welford@hud.ac.uk.     March 19-23: Entsorga, International Trade Fair forRecycling and Waste Disposal, Cologne, Germany. Entsorga '96may appeal to specialists seeking the latest environmentaltechnologies. Contact: Koln Messe, P.O. Box 21 07 60, 50532Koln, Germany; +49-221-8210; fax: +49-221-821-3415.     March 24: Energy & Resources Law '96: 12th AdvancedSeminar, Prague, Czech Republic. Trends in energy, East-Westenergy trade, energy treaties, electricity and theenvironment, recent developments in mining, coalbed methane,and nuclear law will be covered. Contact: International BarAssociation, 2 Harewood Place, Hanover Square, London W1R9HB, England; +44-171-629-1206; fax: +44-171-409-0456.     March 24-27: Environmental Technology, A Course onApplied Technology for Remediation and Purification,Antwerp, Belgium. The objective of this course is to informparticipants with a background in  natural sciences orengineering about the latest scientific developments andlegal issues with respect to the applied techniques forremediation and purification of water, soil, and air.Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO Training Center, P.O. Box182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands; +31-317-482-796;fax: +31-317-484-941.     April 10-13: Environmental Chemistry of InorganicPollutants: A Course on Risk Evaluation, Applied Aspects andFundamentals, Nancy, France. This course may helpscientific, industry or government professionals evaluatingrisk issues. Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO TrainingCenter, P.O. Box 182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands;+31-317-482-796; fax: +31-317-484-941.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-34IA086-000616-B019-3http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi92.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003814 text/html 92397HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:36:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:06 GMTContent-length: 92210Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi92.html Sample Issue Copyright THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITY (568 words) NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGE (316 words) UK: COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZER (351 words) DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICE (294 words) ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBS (569 words) FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULING (480 words) ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURE (562 words) COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODE (471 words) US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUD (496 words) ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONS (487 words) PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEES (218 words) GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRM (301 words) NEWS BRIEF TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACT (137 words) HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPORE (252 words) BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSION (1068 words) INTERVIEW PUSHING FOR CHANGE (1084 words) IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER? (1111 words) FEATURE PROFESSIONAL SURVIVAL (2165 words) SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESS (3130 words) CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITYPRICE WATERHOUSE and Ernst & Young in the UK have announced plans tochange their legal status to limited liability partnerships (LLPs) andto take their businesses off shore to Jersey.The move is designed to protect partners' personal assets in the eventthat a firm is successfully sued for negligence. Currently, like mostother UK accounting practices, the firms trade as unlimited liabilitypartnerships.The move to LLP status, which cannot be done under UK law, would becomepossible due to planned changes to Jersey law by the island'sgovernment. In a statement issued on December 11, Jersey'sParliamentary Finance and Economics Committee said it will propose abill to the island's Parliament permitting the creation of LLPs. Thegovernment is keen to promote Jersey as an offshore financial servicescentre.Under the proposed law, the partnership would remain totally liable forall the firm's debts, but individual partners who are not responsiblefor a particular negligent act would have their personal assetsprotected from debts arising from that negligence.Each LLP would be required to have at least one general partner and allLLP assets would be available to creditors. In addition, the LLP wouldbe required to provide a #5 million financial provision, a sort ofbond, for judgments against the partnership. The draft law will bedebated in Jersey's Parliament, the States of Jersey, during the firstquarter of 1996. If approved, it will then go to the Privy Council forsanctioning and is expected to be operative by year-end."We are actively considering whether adoption of the limited liabilitypartnership structure is appropriate for the UK practice," said E&Ysenior partner Nick Land. "Initial consultation with a small number ofclients and all of our partners has produced a very positive reaction."The firms' partnership culture would continue within the UK and therewould be no change to their UK taxation arrangements. The Jersey optionis claimed to be cheaper than the incorporation route chosen recentlyby KPMG (TA 5902). A senior partner at one of the firms estimates thesaving could be as much as 10 percent of pre-tax profits compared withthe cost of KPMG's chosen route.Accountants are not the only ones who stand to benefit from the new lawin Jersey. Other professionals, including solicitors, architects andsurveyors, will be able to establish partnerships on the island.Practices in other countries could also relocate to Jersey."At the moment, if you are found to be liable for negligence then youare liable for everything, no matter what one's contribution to thatnegligence might have been," said Ian Brindle, senior partner at PW.All the Big Six have been working with the Institute of CharteredAccountants in England and Wales to get the UK Government to change theprinciple of joint and several liability contained in the Companies Actof 1985. "This can't happen overnight," Brindle said. "These thingstake time and time is not necessarily on our side." In the meantime,the firms need a way to protect themselves from "Armageddon", he said.Brindle described the UK's current limited liability law forpartnerships, which was created in 1907, as"not relevant to moderntimes". Like joint and several liability, time-consuming primarylegislation would be needed to change it, he said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGECKL INTERNATIONAL, the network that lost two of its founding members inthe space of a year, has agreed to merge with International AccountingAssociates (IAA) and its US affiliate, the Continental Association ofCPA Firms (CACPA).The agreement was finalised in mid-November and takes effect on January1. The merger is expected to create a network of 130 accounting andconsulting firms, with offices in 58 countries and annual revenues ofover $400 million (#260 million). Total staff is put at 6,700.The new organisation will be known as AGN (Accountants Global Network)International. Its board will be comprised of six representatives fromCKL and six from IAA-CACPA. CKL chief executive Nick Blake will remainin that role at AGN.The network will be divided into four regions: Asia/Pacific,Europe/Africa/Middle East, Latin America and North America, where AGNexpects to have its strongest presence.CKL has been in trouble since its UK firm and founding member ClarkWhitehill quit to join Horwath International (TA 5890) in September1994. It eventually signed up the smaller firm Levy Gee as areplacement (TA 5894).Things got worse earlier this year when another founding member, USfirm Kenneth Leventhal, merged with Ernst & Young, taking with itannual fees of $195 million (TA 5897). CKL firms in Belgium, Israel,Greece and Denmark have also left within the last 18 months.IAA, with headquarters in Engelwood, Colorado, had revenues of $193million in 1994. CACPA, a group of 26 firms in the US, accounted forabout $150 million of that total.Whether all of CKL's members will go along with the merger is still notclear. South African firm Levitt Kirson is known to be considering amove to Nexia International, although no decision had been made as TAwent to press.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UK:  COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZERA #200 MILLION negligence suit brought by investors in the Lloyd's ofLondon insurance market against Littlejohn Frazer has been thrown outof court.Littlejohn was being sued in the High Court over its audits of theGooda Walker syndicates at Lloyd's, which ran up losses of almost #1billion in the late 1980s and early 1990s.In October 1994, 3,000 Lloyd's investors, or Names, won damagesestimated at about #400 million from the agency that managed theirinsurance underwriting (TA 5890).The Names then sued the auditor, claiming that the syndicates' accountshad disguised underwriting losses by overstating the value of theirinvestments. The Names said they would not have invested in later yearshad they known of the losses.The High Court decided that the precedents established in the 1990Caparo case applied. Whether or not Littlejohn was negligent inauditing the syndicate was irrelevant as no duty of care was owed tofuture investors at Lloyd's.The case is a setback to attempts by Lloyd's to organise a market-wideout-of-court settlement of the litigation that has dogged the marketfor the last three years. Names are seeking damages for the estimated#11 billion of losses run up by the market since 1988. There is nowless pressure on the auditors to contribute to the proposed #2.8billion settlement fund (TA 5898).Littlejohn senior partner Alastair Campbell said:"The judgment makesclear the losses were not caused by the auditors, even if there hadbeen negligence by the auditors, which is something we hotly dispute."The case related to losses run up on Gooda Walker syndicates 290 and164's 1989 years of account. Littlejohn now plans to apply to haveanother case struck out in relation to syndicate 387, where a claim forabout #80 million has been made by the Gooda Walker Names. Two othercases, where a total of #8 million is being claimed, will continue to afull hearing.The Names are expected to appeal the High Court decision.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICEMCGRATH & Co, the Republic of Ireland member of accounting network ACPAInternational, has established a formal association with Belfast firmMTF to cope with its growing need for representation in NorthernIreland.McGrath has worked with MTF on a number of projects since the NorthernIrish peace process began 15 months ago. Although McGrath previouslycovered the entire island for ACPA, an increase in outside investmentin the north, particularly from the US, has created the need for arepresentative firm there."The peace process has set it all in motion," said Tom Kavanagh,managing partner at McGrath. "We've already seen a rise in inwardinvestment and this can only increase."McGrath was attracted to MTF because of its specialty in mergers andacquisitions, an area in which the Dublin firm is not particularlystrong. One of MTF's partners, Michael Townsley, already does some M&Awork in the south, and McGrath hopes to develop this.Although MTF is not a member of ACPA it will do any referral work toNorthern Ireland in co-operation with the Dublin firm. According toKavanagh, McGrath gets"regular work" from ACPA, mostly in the taxsector, although this does not make up a large portion of its feeincome.McGrath reported revenues of IR#1.75 million (#1.8 million) in 1995,putting it 17th in the Irish league tables (TA 5902). Kavanaghestimates that MTF's revenues for 1995 were about IR#750,000. Combinedrevenues at both firms are expected to reach IR#2.7 million in 1996.McGrath, which operates out of one office, has five partners and atotal staff of 45. MTF, also a one-office firm, has three partners anda total staff of 25.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBSSOME 130 jobs are expected to go as part of a cost-cutting exercise ifthe proposed merger between the Institute of Chartered Accountants inEngland and Wales (ICAEW) and the Chartered Institute of ManagementAccountants (CIMA) goes ahead.Details of the cost cuts were revealed in the prospectus for themerger, which was published in early December after being approved bythe governing councils of both bodies.The new organisation, to be known simply as the Institute of CharteredAccountants, has budgeted to save 20 percent of the combined costs ofthe two existing bodies, which employ 630 people between them. ICAEWchief executive Andrew Colquhoun said efficiencies will be possible asa result of the inevitable duplication of services currently beingprovided by the two bodies.Colquhoun said the job cuts will be phased in over five years. Heexpects few compulsory redundancies since staff turnover at the ICAEWis currently running at 10 percent to 15 percent.The savings will allow the institute to reduce its #138 annualsubscription fee by #20, bringing it closer into line with the #110currently charged by CIMA.However, Colquhoun denied that cost savings are the main motive behindthe merger. "We are not promoting this on the financial issue," hesaid. "We are promoting this because the environment for the professionis becoming harder and we believe we can serve the interests ofaccountants better by being bigger."The new institute will offer two types of qualification: one aimed atthose training in public practice, who will continue to be known as"chartered accountants"; and the other for those working in industry,who will bear the title "chartered management accountant". The PrivyCouncil granted CIMA members the right to use the "chartered"designation in early December.There will be a four-stage education syllabus, consisting of twofoundation levels, an intermediate and a final level. Students will betime barred if they do not pass their final examinations within sevenyears of starting the foundation course. Students will be able toaccumulate examination credits at all levels except the final level.The "England and Wales" part of the current ICAEW name will be droppedin an attempt to give an international image to the new body. The planinvolves actively marketing the new qualifications abroad incompetition with the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants."This is not marketing for its own sake, but we believe we can offer ahigh quality qualification around the world," Colquhoun said."They willhave to meet the standards we have here in the UK, but we do thinkthere is a market out there for our qualification."The new institute will have nine regions in England and Wales, each ofwhich will be able to elect six members to the new council; three fromindustry and three from practice. The exception will be London whichwill elect 14 members.There will be further elections in Scotland, Ireland and in regionsaround the world such as Malaysia, Hong Kong and South Africa.The merged institute will have 150,000 members - 109,000 from ICAEW and41,000 from CIMA.Members of both institutes are expected to vote on the merger proposalin April or May.(See page 8 for interview with CIMA president Allan McNab)Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULINGFORMER PARTNERS of BDO Binder Hamlyn have been stunned by a High Courtruling which holds them liable for damages, interest and costs of #105million, arising from the 1990 take-over of one of the firm's auditclients.The damages of #65 million are believed to be the highest ever awardedagainst a UK accounting firm and have added new urgency to auditors'search for liability protection.During the court case, counsel for Binder said the firm had insurancecover of #71 million, leaving #34 million of the award to be met fromthe partners' personal assets. With between 120 and 150 partnersbelieved to be involved, the average bill could be as high as #280,000per partner.The suit related to an agreed bid by electronic security company ADTfor Britannia Security Group in 1990. ADT paid #105 million forBritannia, basing the price on accounts for fiscal 1989 which had beenaudited by Binder.Following the acquisition, ADT discovered that Britannia's 1989 profitswere #3.2 million, not #8.7 million as stated, and that its net assetswere less than half the #36.5 million shown in the accounts. ADT waseventually forced to write off its investment and filed suit againstBinder in 1992.The judge in the case found that Binder had been negligent in its auditof Britannia, and that, crucially, the firm owed a duty of care to ADTbecause of remarks made by Martyn Bishop, the partner who signed off onthe accounts, at a meeting with ADT officials in January 1990.At that meeting, held shortly before the bid was announced, Bishop wasasked if he stood by his opinion that Britannia's fiscal 1989 accountsgave a true and fair view of the company's financial health. Bishopreplied that he did.Binder argued that this "off the cuff remark" in no way constituted aduty of care to ADT. It said it had not entered into any agreement,verbal or otherwise, to advise ADT, nor had it been paid for anyadvice. The firm cited the landmark Caparo ruling of 1990, which heldthat auditors do not owe a duty of care to third parties, regardless ofwhether they are negligent.Binder has pledged to appeal against the decision and is confident thatit will succeed in overturning the verdict."The firm is certain thatthe Caparo principles apply," a spokesman said.BDO Binder Hamlyn ceased trading in October 1994, when the bulk of thefirm merged with Arthur Andersen (TA 5887). Other Binder offices mergedwith Stoy Hayward, the current BDO representative in the UK, while someof the partners joined other accounting firms or went into industry.Binder Hamlyn is still trying to determine exactly how many partnersare liable in the Britannia case.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURETHE CHARTERED Association of Certified Accountants (ACCA) looks set tobow to pressure from radical East London University professor PremSikka to reform the way the body is governed.Chief executive Anthea Rose put forward proposals at an ACCA councilmeeting in early December to disband the current London- based counciland replace it with a federal structure. This will take greater accountof the rights of the association's 18,000 overseas members - 40 percentof the total - who Sikka has argued are effectively disenfranchised.The proposed structure devolves power to a number of new regionalcouncils, which will in turn report to an international committee. Adiscussion document outlining the proposals was sent to all ACCAmembers on December 15.An ACCA source said: "It is true the way our council is structuredmakes it very difficult for members to play a meaningful role if theylive on the other side of the world. Instead, we are to propose someform of devolution with a federal structure."The powers to be devolved will be debated in the discussion document.It is thought unlikely that the regional councils will have any controlover the examination syllabus. Powers to be devolved could includedirect dealings with regional governments and the issue of guidance andadvice on local auditing accounting and taxation matters.The changes follow criticism by Sikka that the ACCA is undemocratic.His call for the association's president to be directly elected by themembership received widespread support at an extraordinary generalmeeting in September. Nearly 3,000 of the 10,000 members who votedbacked the proposal (TA 5901).The ACCA is not ruling out direct presidential elections, but a changeto the current practice of having the president elected by the councilis not part of the latest proposals.Sikka has been in a long-running conflict with the association. He hastaken his campaign for reform to Parliament, where he has won thesupport of Labour MP Austin Mitchell.While Sikka said he supports the new federal system, he insisted thatthe proposals do not go far enough. He called for more transparencywithin the ACCA, open council meetings, access to agenda papers andminutes, and repeated his call for direct elections to key positions."Basically, the people who are leading the organisation need to bemandated," he said.Meanwhile, the ACCA's application to change its name to the Associationof Chartered Public Accountants has been turned down by the PrivyCouncil, the body which must approve all changes to an organisation'sRoyal Charter.In a letter to the ACCA, the council said it objected to the use of theword "public" in the proposed name. However, it had no problem with theuse of the term "chartered".In submissions to the council, the Institute of Chartered Accountantsin England and Wales argued that the name change would cause confusionwith the certified public accountant designation used in the US.Mitchell argued that the ACCA did not act sufficiently in the publicinterest for it to merit the title"public".The ACCA has been asked to come up with a new proposal and expects toput forward a new name for its members to vote on in the near future.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODETHREE YEARS after the Cadbury Committee published its landmark code onthe financial aspects of corporate governance in the UK, a new body isto examine how far compliance with the code has progressed and toconsider whether it needs updating.Headed by ICI chairman Ronnie Hampel, the Committee on CorporateGovernance will have 12 members drawn mostly from commerce andindustry. They include David Simon, chairman of British Petroleum, andNorthern Foods' chairman Christopher Haskins. The only representativeof the accountancy profession is Coopers & Lybrand chairman PeterSmith.The committee's sponsors include the Financial Reporting Council, theLondon Stock Exchange, the Confederation of British Industry, and theConsultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies.Apart from reviewing compliance with the Cadbury recommendations,Hampel's committee will also take account of the so-called Greenburyproposals in the controversial area of directors' pay (see page 7).Hampel is anxious that the push to clean up British boardrooms will notlead to a host of new restrictions on business."There is much debate about the pace of change in corporate governanceand it is my intention that the committee will take appropriate time -and consult widely - before reaching any conclusions on all aspects ofits remit," he said."Above all, we must enhance, not inhibit, theprospects for UK business in an increasingly-competitive globalmarketplace."The Cadbury report's recommendations included a proposal that companydirectors should report on the effectiveness of their system ofinternal financial control and on whether the business can continue totrade as a going concern; that audit committees be comprised solely ofexternal directors; and, in effect, that the role of chairman and chiefexecutive should be separated.The establishment of Hampel's committee comes at a time when a spate ofcorporate scandals has led to growing international concern overcorporate governance. In July, France tackled the issue with the VienotReport, which recommended a greater role for independent directors andboard sub-committees to deal with the annual audit and the appointmentand remuneration of directors.On a wider scale, the International Capital Markets Group (ICMG) hascalled for more transparent reporting of corporate governance processesby large listed companies across the globe. Founded as a co-operativeventure by the world's legal and accountancy professions, the ICMG madeits call after analysing the main corporate governance issues arisingin the world's six biggest economies in a report titled, Who holds thereins?.In its review of corporate governance practices in Japan, Germany,France, the US, Canada and the UK, the ICMG found some evidence ofconvergence. But it concluded that entrenched cultural and legaldifferences mean that the world is not yet ready for common rules toimprove corporate governance.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUDUS AUDITORS could be required to report financial irregularities in acompany's employee pension funds, if proposed legislation is approvedby Congress.The Labor Department, which is investigating hundreds of companiessuspected of illegally dipping into their employees' pension funds, isworking closely with the American Institute of Certified PublicAccountants (AICPA) to reach agreement on the language in the bill.The legislation has been around for years in one form or another. But,even though it would increase government regulation of the work ofauditors, "chances for passage are stronger now than ever before",according to Richard Steinberg, a member of the AICPA's employeebenefit plans committee and chairman of its emerging issues task force.The proposed measure was given new life after the Labor Departmentfound evidence of an increase in pension plan fraud. The department hascivil and criminal investigations in progress against 300 companies fordiverting funds from 401(k) plans, tax- deferred savings accounts setup by employers. Its caseload is at least triple what it was one yearago.In some cases, auditors have found that companies failed to make goodon their obligations to match employee contributions as required byfederal law. In other cases, companies not only reneged on theirobligations, but also diverted employee contributions withheld fromweekly pay cheques.In the largest Labor Department case, Coleman American, based inDothan, Alabama, allegedly withheld several months' worth ofcontributions to its 401(k) plan affecting 200 employees. Confronted byregulators last summer, the company's owner paid the $607,893 that wasdue. In another case, a Wisconsin firm diverted $12,354 incontributions from a plan covering 23 employees before closing itsdoors.The 300 Labor Department enforcement cases represent less than 0.5percent of the more than 140,000 active 401(k) pension plans, whichhave become popular because they limit employer obligations to retireesand make it easier for workers to take their benefits with them whenthey switch jobs. Money contributed to such plans is tax deferred.Steinberg, who heads Coopers & Lybrand's benefit plan audit practice inNew York, said the Labor Department began a programme last spring toeducate companies on their responsibilities regarding employee benefitplans. "Only recently has Labor Secretary Robert Reich become veryassertive in emphasising the need for a stronger hand. The emphasisseems to have shifted from education to something much tougher andproactive."According to Steinberg, the Labor Department probe focuses on threekinds of pension cost discrepancies: companies that do not understandthe law; companies that use the benefit funds to solve temporaryfinancial problems; and companies that are committing direct theft ofassets or fraud. "The third group of companies appears to be thesmallest group," he said.If an auditor finds evidence of fraud,"he must identify it on theauditor's schedule or take exception in the auditor's report",Steinberg said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONSACCOUNTANTS MAY be skilled in auditing and tax advice, but they need toacquire a more general knowledge of the world around them to compete inthe global marketplace.That's the view of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC),the worldwide professional body, which has just issued a draft revisionto its guidelines on education. The new guidance is aimed at ensuringthat accountancy students will be able to cope with such issues as theglobalisation of business enterprises, the relaxation of trade rulesand growing regulatory pressures."We're putting greater emphasis on general knowledge rather than stricttechnical knowledge," said Milou Kelley, manager of IFAC's educationcommittee. "We want accountants to develop a broad base of knowledge inthe arts, sciences and humanities that will make them better able tolook at international issues in wider perspective."The issues that face professional accountants have become much morecomplex. They need to be able to look at complex transactions and knowwhat is involved so that they can become good decision-makers andbetter problem-solvers," she said.IFAC is less concerned about accountants' ability to apply accountingrules than about their ability to deal with a situation where nostandards exist. "Once the standards are set, that's the easy part,"Kelley said."We're trying to remove all of the layers surrounding complex issues,such as changes in technology," she explained. "Our standards aredesigned to deal with real life."The new exposure draft revises its International Education Guideline 9,Prequalification Education, Tests of Professional Competence andPractical Experience of Professional Accountants. It recommends thataccounting curriculums place greater emphasis on the development ofintellectual, interpersonal and communication skills, and it stressesthe need for curriculums to help students become committed to highethical values and standards."This draft guideline continues to develop our thinking on educationfor the year 2000 and beyond," said Cecil Donovan, chairman of the IFACeducation committee."Comments and reactions are very important to us atthis stage."The comment period extends to May 31 1996, to give IFAC member bodiesand others sufficient time to comment on the issues raised in thedocument.Since 1977, IFAC has represented accountants on an international level.Its membership is comprised of the American Institute of CertifiedPublic Accountants (AICPA) in the US and more than 100 similar groupsfrom 80 countries.IFAC's education committee has just issued two pronouncements relatingto information technology: International Education Guideline 11,Information Technology in the Accounting Curriculum and the discussionpaper, Integrating Information Technology Across The AccountingCurriculum: The Experience of the Certified General AccountantsAssociation of Canada.Guideline 11 establishes a framework for devising an informationtechnology curriculum, including the skills required by an accountantwho uses information technology, manages information systems, designsbusiness systems or evaluates information systems.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEESKPMG'S AUSTRALIAN firm paid out about 7 percent of total fee income forpractice protection, including professional indemnity insurance, duringfiscal 1995.According to KPMG's 1995 annual report - the first of its kind to bereleased by a major Australian firm - practice protection cost morethan A$21 million (#10.5 million) in the year to June. Total fee incomerose 6 percent to A$301 million.The firm said that since risk management procedures are now takingeffect, practice protection costs have peaked. "One of the board's mainobjectives is to halve this cost but it must be recognised that, givenour past claims record, this will take some years to achieve," thereport said.A breakdown of fees showed that consulting revenues rose 37 percent toA$32 million. Audit and corporate finance, the mainstay of KPMG'sbusiness, grew 3 percent to $120 million, while corporate recoveryrevenues fell 13 percent to A$12 million.The firm's gross contribution percentage - fees less labour costs - was53.1 percent of fee income, compared with 53.5 percent the year before.In the report, which did not reveal profits, KPMG chairman JohnHarkness said revenues are expected to rise 4 percent in the currentfiscal year.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRMGRANT THORNTON in the UK has continued its expansion programme with theaddition of a two-partner firm which has served London's Polishcommunity since 1955.The ten employees at Potworowski Kinast joined Grant Thornton's WestLondon office on December 1. Potworowski's Polish office has been amember of Grant Thornton International since 1993 and will continue topractise as Potworowski Kinast Grant Thornton.The firm has annual revenues of about #500,000. One of the partners,managing partner Tad Potworowski, is based in London, the other inPoland.Grant Thornton country managing partner David McDonnell said his firmhas supplied Potworowski with training and support since the Polish armjoined GTI some years ago. "The intention always was that the [Londonfirm] would join us at some stage," he said.Acquiring Potworowski, with its strong roots in the Polish community,ties in with the West London office's strategy of targeting certainethnic groups in the capital, McDonnell said.The latest deal brings to eight the number of firms which have mergedwith Grant Thornton in the last 18 months. In October, it acquiredVandenburghs, another London firm whose three partners were retiring.That firm had revenues of about #800,000."We are actively seeking further acquisitions over the next year,"McDonnell said. Grant Thornton is in preliminary talks with a number oflocal firms, none of which are linked to a national network, he said.Grant Thornton's revenues rose 6.5 percent to #114 million in the yearto March 1995. Excluding the firm's insolvency business, organic growthfor the current year is forecast at 7 percent to 8 percent. Insolvencyfees are likely to shrink by about #3 million from #24 million lastyear, McDonnell said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACTTOUCHE ROSS is heading a consortium which is bidding to run the UK's#400 million Millenium Festival, planned for the year 2000.The consortium, called M2000, also includes MAI, the televisionfranchise owner, construction company Bovis and property groupStanhope. Touche's role will be as project manager.The festival will be held at a site in Greenwich and is expected toattract 50 million visitors over its one-year duration.Three rival bids appear to be less comprehensive than the M2000proposal. They include a site at the Birmingham National ExhibitionCentre, which is backed by a promised #50 million from the localcouncil. The other two bids appear to have failed to win any seriousbacking and are almost certainly out of the running.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPOREHLB INTERNATIONAL has strengthened its newly-formed Asia-Pacific regionby signing up Loke Lum & Partners, a two-partner firm which waspreviously a member of Kreston International.Kreston, meanwhile, has linked with David Yeung & Co, a one- partnerunaffiliated practice.Loke Lum, which became a full member at HLB's annual conference inMexico in November, has revenues of about $3 million (#4.7 million) andemploys 50 staff. It has already referred work to HLB members inAustralia, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia and Hungary.As a result of the link with Loke Lum, HLB has cut its ties with FooKon & Tan, a correspondent firm it shared with Grant Thornton. No feeincome figure is available for Foo Kon, which is nearly three timesbigger than Loke Lum in staff terms.HLB chief executive Peter Frost said: "Asia-Pacific is a keydevelopment area for HLB, targeted for significant expansion in thefuture, and we are delighted to appoint a new representative for thegroup in Singapore."As part of a general restructuring, HLB established a formal Asia-Pacific regional committee at the annual conference. Daniel Loke,senior partner of Loke Lum, is one of four members of the council.Chris Flint, Kreston's international secretary, said Loke Lum'sdeparture was not a total surprise, and his group "acted quickly" toplug the gap. David Yeung & Co has revenues of $1 million and employsaround 40 staff.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSIONSome of the Big Six are committed to disclosure of directors' pay aspart of their plans for incorporation. William Gleeson wonders if theyknow what they've let themselves in forWARM BEER, cricket and an obsession with directors' pay. There are somethings people from other parts of the world will never fathom about theBritish. When KPMG publishes its results for fiscal 1995 at the end ofJanuary, the main focus of the press will be on the pay of what TheTimes has already dubbed the biggest "pride of fat cats" to be revealedat one time.Colin Sharman, the firm's senior partner, could be forgiven forregretting the public fascination with the issue. Speculation about hissalary has been rife, with some estimates putting it as high as #1million - although KPMG denies the figure will be anywhere near thislevel.Nevertheless, there is known to be a big difference between what new,young KPMG partners are paid and the salaries of top people at thefirm, particularly in the southeast of England.Hardly a day goes by without a UK national newspaper publishing detailsof what a listed company pays its directors. Reporters are sent up anddown the country by business news editors keen to beat the competitionto the latest "fat cat" revelations.Annual reports are scrutinised for details of the "directors'emoluments". During a hostile take-over bid, a close eye is kept on thevarious offer and defence documents for details of boardroom pay. Theofficial stock exchange news service is examined daily forannouncements of changes in directors' shareholdings in their owncompany, in case it reveals the award or cashing in of share options.But a question mark must hang over whether all this is good for Britishbusiness. It is arguable that, with a few exceptions, the furorecreated every time a director does well for himself may end up damagingthe company he works for.The advertising industry is a case in point.When Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of WPP, sought to getshareholder approval for changes to his pay package, he met withimmense opposition. The big guns from the City institutions came outagainst the deal. The press had a field day.True, Sorrell was after a lot of money. The package could have beenworth almost #30 million over six years. But he argued that similardeals were given to rival advertising agency bosses around the world.At one stage, Sorrell threatened that if he did not get his way, hewould take his agency lock, stock and barrel to the US. In the end, acompromise was reached, which allowed Sorrell to take a lot of moneyaway if the company met certain earnings growth targets.But things were not amicably resolved at what was Saatchi & Saatchi.Maurice Saatchi found shareholder opposition to his pay deal so strongthat he was forced to leave the company. In doing so he took half ofthe agency's best creative staff with him. Now, another business hasbeen created and is doing well having poached a significant number offormer Saatchi clients.The issues are more complex in the case of the privatised utilities.These were once regarded as bureaucratic edifices staffed by careercivil servants who never thought they would earn more than #50,000 ayear.After privatisation, the likes of British Gas chief executive CedricBrown saw their salaries take off. Brown earned #275,000 in fiscal1995. Then British Gas proposed that for the current fiscal year, hisbasic salary should be increased to #475,000. Add to that a share bonusworth 125 percent of the basic - that's #590,000 - and Brown is set toearn over #1 million this year. Not bad for a man who just a few yearsearlier was an unaspiring career civil servant.But, as legitimate as the public interest is in British Gas, it is hardto see the interest the public could have in the pay of a seniorpartner at a chartered accountancy firm. How the firm's profits aredoled out is surely a private matter between the senior partner and therest of the partnership.Even more of a mystery is that since the accounting firms are notrequired to reveal this level of detail, why are they doing it? UnderUK law, KPMG will only be required to disclose directors' pay for KPMGAudit Plc, the incorporated part of the business. But, the firm hassaid that it will go further and disclose full audited accounts for thepartnership.Ernst & Young, which is considering becoming a limited liabilitypartnership (see page 1), is also going further than it needs to. Ithas said it will reveal the pay of the management committee that runsthe firm and the pay of all its partners.This information will be presented in a table which will band theremuneration of the partners in #5,000 steps, as is the practice in UKcompany accounts. Yet who, other than the curious, will benefit fromsuch disclosure?The media hype has the effect of introducing an anti-success culture.This in turn can prevent people from aspiring to become what some mightderide as a "fat cat", but what others would describe as a success inbusiness.The accounting firms have long kept a close secret of what theirpartners earn. The average Big Six partner is undoubtedly on close to#200,000. Making that known could damage accountants' calls forprotection from liability. The massive damages against BDO BinderHamlyn has undoubtedly provoked some public sympathy towards theprofession (see page 3), but how long will that last when it is knownwhat partners earn?The publicity could be destructive to the profession in other ways.Revealing that, despite the cost of litigation, partners are allwealthy, may provide an excuse for some clients to try and force feesdown further.Another factor is the pressure that disclosure will put on executivesat less profitable firms to justify their high salaries. No bad thingfor the firms concerned, of course, but one wonders whether the"fatcats" of the accounting world are ready for the challenge.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PUSHING FOR CHANGEAs plans for the merger between the Chartered Institute of ManagementAccountants and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England andWales take shape, Nick Speechly talks to CIMA president Allan McNabLEADING MEMBERS of the UK accountancy profession must have lostcountless chargeable hours over the years engaged in fruitless mergertalks between different professional bodies. Allan McNab, president ofthe Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), hopes thatthe time he has spent discussing a merger with the Institute ofChartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) has not added to thetally.In early December, McNab presented CIMA's ruling council with detailedproposals for the merger thrashed out over the preceding year by nofewer than 14 joint working parties of the two institutes. Theprospectus for the merger has now been sent out to members of bothbodies (see page 3), and in January, the institutes will embark onenergetic campaigns aimed at explaining their plans to members. Ifmarket research exercises show the proposals are well received, memberswill vote on the plans in April or May.The UK accountancy profession has a long history of ambitious plans fororganisational change which have come to naught - including the mostrecent Bishop committee proposals for a wholesale regrouping of theinstitutes. Divisions among the different bodies and opposition tochange from many of their members have derailed many proposals.Distinctions blurredSo, what benefits from a merger between CIMA and the ICAEW can justifyMcNab and his colleagues spending yet more time in negotiations?McNab can point to his own career, working with a CIMA qualification asa partner at Coopers & Lybrand, as indicative of some of the forcesdriving change. With some CIMA members working in public practicefirms, as he is, and many more ICAEW members working in industry, thedistinctions between the roles of the institutes are becoming moreblurred."It goes to show that the rationalisation of the profession might be agood idea," he said.The proposals would produce a stronger combined institute, focusedequally on the needs of both accountants in public practice and thosein industry, according to McNab. Members who move between audit firmsand business would benefit from strengthened support from within thesame organisation, while the structure will also recognise thediffering needs of the two groups."The two institutes overlap in the middle," McNab said. "But, there arealso distinctive parts of both which we would like to preserve in twostreams of qualification."The combined institute would offer two qualifications, with thosequalified in public practice retaining the "chartered accountant" titleand those trained in industry using "chartered management accountant".The two syllabi would include many common elements, and the process oftransferring from one qualification to another is to be simplified.For CIMA, a major benefit of the merger could be in attracting moreemployers to offer formal management accountancy training schemes. Withmany corporate finance directors holding ICAEW qualifications, they arelikely to be more enthusiastic in supporting trainees in theircompanies for their own institute than they might have been in the pastfor a separate CIMA qualification, McNab suggested."I'd hope that the combined institute will be so attractive andprestigious that we'd encourage more industrial and commercialcompanies to set up formal programmes," he said.The gain of the prestigious "chartered" tag would be another benefit ofthe merger for CIMA members, although McNab did not rank thisparticularly highly."It's a factor - but it's not an overwhelming one," he said, pointingout that CIMA has already received Privy Council permission to use the"chartered management accountant" label in its own right (see page 3).The CIMA president admitted that the ICAEW's attempts to set up its ownindustry management scheme - TOPP (training outside public practice) -had encouraged support from CIMA for a merger. "Obviously if we were toremain independent, and the ICAEW managed to adapt its training so itwas successful in industry, there would be a serious competitor fortraining capacity. One of the minor advantages of a merger would bethat it would take care of the competitive threat."While many attempts to merge institutes in the past have fallen in theface of members' resistance to change, McNab can have a degree ofconfidence that his members, at least, broadly support the principle ofmerging. Market research carried out among members over the Bishopproposals showed support for restructuring, and also showed support fordiscussions with other institutes should Bishop collapse. Further back,CIMA members also voted in favour of the abortive plans for areorganisation of the profession proposed in 1970.Benefits to members"Our members voted for rationalisation at that time, and we've beenconsistent ever since for the last 25 years," McNab boasted.It is more difficult for leaders of the two institutes to be confidentof gaining the support of ICAEW members. But the ICAEW and its memberswill also benefit from the move, according to McNab. Memberstransferring to industry after training in public practice particularlywill gain through having a simpler route to a further qualificationspecifically designed for their new career path."What we hope is that when a chartered accountant moves into industry,he would see the benefits of doing the other side of the qualification - doing the business planning and management accounting," McNab said. "Iactually think that the combination of the two - qualifying throughboth routes - would be the best possible accounting qualification."What is more, the combined institute would be better placed to adapt tochanges in the structure of training within the profession."The nature of audit firms is changing. It's less dependent on lots ofjunior staff and more on senior people, with computer auditingtechniques and that sort of thing. For people who want to become anaccountant nowadays, there are less opportunities through the classicchartered accountancy route."Combination with CIMA provides the ICAEW with the best way of adaptingby providing more training in industry, McNab argued. "If they weregoing to be successful in training in industry, they would have to dosomething that was very much like what CIMA does anyway," he said."So,they might as well join us."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER?In the last issue of TA, Richard Turnor looked at the unlimitedliability of partners. This month, he considers whether incorporationprovides a solutionTHE NEWS that KPMG is to incorporate part of its audit practice,combined with the award in the ADT case (see page 3), has generatedgreat interest in incorporation as a means of protecting partners'estates.Both accountants and solicitors can now, like members of otherprofessions, practise in corporate form. A company has a separate legalpersonality, and the shareholders of a limited liability company inprinciple are not liable for the acts or defaults of the companyitself. Thus, the shareholders of a professional firm who wouldotherwise be partners can protect their personal estates even if thebusiness itself is at risk from claims against the company. In theevent of a catastrophic claim, the shareholder/director may lose hislivelihood, but at least his personal assets will be safe. It may alsobe possible to protect different parts of the business from problems inother parts by incorporating a series of separate companies.But, it is important to be aware of what incorporation cannot achieve.It will not, for example, release those who were partners beforeincorporation from pre-incorporation liabilities, leases and debts.Nevertheless, this is not necessarily a reason to reject incorporation.In time, claims arising from prior advice will become statute barred,the lease will expire, all pre- incorporation partners will retire andeventually the company's shareholders will have no responsibility forpre-incorporation debts.A director or employer of the incorporated company who gives negligentadvice may still incur personal liability under normal agencyprinciples. A director who fails to supervise an employee adequatelymay also incur liability. Thus, incorporation does not provide completeprotection to those immediately involved, but at least the directorsshould have no personal liability for matters for which they are notresponsible. Furthermore, creditors may not in practice think itworthwhile to claim against a small group of directors and employeeswho have been directly involved.KPMG has said that it will incorporate the high-risk part of its auditpractice (TA 5902), while continuing other aspects of its business inpartnership. Arrangements of this nature need to be structured verycarefully. A claimant who is unable to recover adequate compensationfrom the company will explore every possible means of gettingcompensation from the partners. An obvious line of attack is to arguethat he thought he was dealing with a partnership rather than with acompany, or that the company was a sham which ought not to standbetween him and his claim against the partners.Care must, therefore, be taken to ensure that the company genuinelycarries on its own business, and that all advice and services providedby the company are demonstrably given by or on behalf of the company,and not on behalf of the partnership. It will not be enough to ensurethat the engagement letter is written on behalf of the company. Whereit is intended that a client should have no claim against thepartnership, all advice must be given by or on behalf of the companyand all correspondence must be conducted on the letterhead of thecompany. All time incurred on behalf of the company must be recordedseparately from time recorded working for the partnership.It should be remembered that if the company becomes insolvent, it maythen have a claim against the partnership relating to services providedto the company by partners and employees of the partnership. Careshould be taken to insulate the partnership from these difficulties.For example, those who provide advice on behalf of the company shouldbe employed directly by the company to do so.If a partnership incorporates in order to protect the partners'personal estates and the company then incurs a liability to a clientwhich it is unable to meet in full, the client is the loser. Thus, theadded protection of incorporation is obtained at the expense of clientsand others who deal with the firm. How are they likely to react?Clients are likely to be particularly concerned about the financialstrength of the company after incorporation. Partnerships do not haveto publish their accounts, and the fact that the incorporated firm mustdo so may be of some comfort to clients since it will give them aregular indication of the company's net financial position.However, the published accounts will not disclose the company'sinsurance arrangements and some clients may ask for details of covermaintained and of the identity and financial security of the insurers.Most firms will be reluctant to disclose this kind of information sinceit could be valuable to potential claimants. If the clients are notsatisfied with the information provided about the company, they may betempted to take their business to a firm which still practises inpartnership.But, clients may attach more importance to other factors, such as thedegree of skill of the proposed client service team, and itsfamiliarity with the client's business and the issues involved. Indeed,the track record of the client service team may often be regarded as astrong indication that a claim is unlikely to arise in the first place.Clients may not think that the remote risk of a claim that cannot bemet in full justifies losing the benefits of a long-term relationshipthat has been otherwise successful, especially if those firms whichcould offer an equivalent service have also incorporated.In conclusion, while incorporation may not be a complete solution tothe problems of unlimited liability, if it is carefully planned, itshould protect the personal estates of partners from future liabilitiesfor which they are not personally responsible. In practice, clients maybe unlikely to think that the reduced protection justifies abandoningan otherwise satisfactory relationship, especially if the alternativefirms also practise as corporate firms. In such circumstances, why doesany professional firm continue to practise partnership?The main problems are likely to arise in the context of taxation, bothof the profits of the business and of transactions where shares in theincorporated business change hands. I would not presume to instruct areadership of accountants on such matters.Next month, I will consider the implications of limited liabilitypartnerships in jurisdictions outside the UK.Richard Turnor, a partner at London law firm Allen & Overy since 1985,advises professional partnerships on all aspects of their partnershipstructure and documentation.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PROFESSIONAL SURVIVALRonald Gage, chairman of the Canadian Institute of CharteredAccountants and head of Ernst & Young in Canada, talks to Gundi Jeffreyabout the major issues facing the professionIN CANADA, as elsewhere, the accounting profession is facingunprecedented challenges. Years of recession, followed by economicstagnation have flattened revenue growth at most of the firms in thecountry.Traditional audit services were further eroded by an amendment to theCanadian Business Corporation Act in 1994 which eliminated therequirement of privately-held companies to file audited financialstatements. Litigation in the wake of business failures, although notas fierce here as in the US, for example, continue to dog the firms.Times are tough, and Canada's accountants are fighting back.The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) is now in thethroes of several major initiatives aimed at ensuring that its memberscontinue to provide relevant, expert and valuable services to Canada'sbusiness community and thereby hang on to their pre-eminence in themarketplace.The body, which has 58,000 members, differs from other accountinginstitutes in the world in that it alone is responsible for settingnational standards for accounting and auditing. These standards arerecognised in company, securities and banking law at both federal andprovincial level. The CICA develops the Uniform Final Examination allaspiring CAs must pass to qualify, as well as joint continuingeducation programmes with the provincial institutes.It also liaises with the provincial institutes, which are responsiblefor the licensing and governance of their members.TA recently spoke to Ronald Gage, chairman and chief executive of Ernst& Young Canada and current chairman of the CICA, about some of the morepressing challenges facing the Big Six in Canada and the charteredaccounting profession generally.Gage qualified as a CA in 1964, while with Clarkson Gordon, which isnow E&Y. He became a partner in 1970 and worked his way up the ranks tobecome executive partner and chairman of the firm's managementcommittee in 1986, chief operating officer in 1987 and E&Y chairman andchief executive in 1993.As chairman of the profession, as well as head of one of the largestfirms in Canada, Gage has a unique perspective on the profession'sproblems and opportunities in today's information- driven society.TA: Earlier this year, Ontario Premier Mike Harris endorsed the conceptof limited liability partnerships (LLPs) for Ontario's charteredaccountants (TA 5900). Have you any idea when we will see this backingtranslated into legislation?Gage: Although every provincial institute has, for the last year or so,had a task force working on this subject, three provincial governmentshave expressed some commitment to proceed. In Ontario, the timing ofwhen the government will consider this matter really depends on itspriorities and legislative agenda. My own thinking is that is unlikelyto appear on the government's agenda before spring 1996. I would behopeful that we might well see some legislation in Ontario within thecoming year.The governments in Nova Scotia and Alberta have also been addressingthe matter, and I'm hopeful that we will see the legislation some timebefore the end of 1996.TA: If it happens in Ontario first, how will that affect the structureof the national firms?Gage: My understanding is that the firms could establish their nationalpartnership in any province that has the LLP legislation. That wouldthen become their governing legislation and would be respected on aninterprovincial basis. I suspect that, once one or two provinces haveintroduced this kind of legislation, the other provinces would followfairly promptly.TA: Is the profession lobbying to push the matter along?Gage: We have a group in place charged with maintaining an activedialogue with the provincial governments to make sure that they clearlyunderstand what the issues are, that we have an opportunity to answerany questions or reservations they might have, and to keep up to dateon the status of each province.TA: How exactly does an LLP function?Gage: It enables you to practise in partnership form but have the samekind of protection against liabilities that you would have under thelimited liability corporate form. It protects the personal assets ofthe partners in the firm, but it does not protect the assets of thefirm itself. The one exception is that, if one or more of the partnerswere found to be personally negligent in connection with a legalmatter, then their personal assets would not be protected.TA: Once the legislation comes into effect, is that enough? Will itgive the firms the protection they are seeking?Gage: LLP legislation is really just the first step. The far moreimportant issue is the very inequitable situation the firms face underjoint and several liability. That's even a more serious problem thanthe partners' personal assets being at risk. It puts the entire firm atrisk.To deal with that, we are trying to encourage legislative reform inCanada that would provide for proportionate liability in the way thatdamages are allocated in the case of professional negligencelitigation. If we're found to be, say, 5 percent contributory to aproblem, we would be responsible for only 5 percent of any financialaward that was given, irrespective of whether other defendants wereable to pay their awards.TA: Are you making any headway with this one?Gage: I would say yes. We are doing this on a co-ordinated basis rightacross the country, working with all the provincial governments. Theyhave been quite prepared to hear our story, and several have indicateda willingness to examine the matter on a more formal basis over thecoming one or two years and determine whether there is a legislativeinequity that needs to be addressed.TA: In the meantime, what has been happening in the insurance marketfor the firms?Gage: Generally, the commercial insurance market continues to be veryexpensive, continues to offer relatively limited coverage, and the BigSix have to provide a very large proportion - 50 percent or more -through their own captive insurance companies.TA: So what are the firms doing in terms of risk management strategiesto reduce exposure to lawsuits?Gage: Over the past two or three years, all the firms have beenfocusing on managing their risks. In the case of Ernst & YoungInternational, I chaired a task force a couple of years ago on how wecould deal more effectively with risk management in light of thelitigation scene.The kinds of things we put in place are: continuing to educate ourpeople on the risks that are out there and how to best manage thoserisks; putting enormous emphasis on the acceptance and continuance ofclients; and re-emphasising and continually improving our approach toour internal quality control process. We are also re-engineering ouraudit methodologies to heighten our focus on the risk of the industrythe client operates in, and the risk profile of the individual client,so that we can understand where those business and operating risks areto direct our audit activities accordingly.We also strongly support the various initiatives that are going on inthe areas of sound corporate governance. We think that improvedcorporate governance practices go a long way to helping us manage therisks, and part of that is, of course, a strong and effective auditcommittee.TA: What are risky clients and might you decide not to continueauditing them?Gage: We, along with other firms, have declined to take on prospectiveclients, and have decided reluctantly to part ways with existingclients where we felt that their risk profile became inappropriate forus. Certain industries, such as hi-tech, are much riskier than othersin terms of the potential rate for business failure. You also have tolook at the quality of the corporate governance, the quality of theinternal controls and the quality of management. You must always beconcerned with the integrity of the people you're dealing with.TA: Moving on to your role as chair of the CICA, what kind of agendahad you built yourself before you started out?Gage: It seems to me that, to be successful over the long term, ourprofession has be relevant to the society we operate in; we have to bepre-eminent and we have to be attractive to retain the best people. Wehave been experiencing tremendous change and turbulence in the Canadianeconomy, which has had a huge impact on us over the last five or tenyears. It seemed to me that, when I got on the ladder to become chairof the CICA, we needed to take one of these longer, more far-reaching,very integrated views of the profession and create a new vision for thefuture.That was the number one item on my agenda and I'm pleased that, lastFebruary, we created the Vision Task Force (TA 5898). This task forcewill report to the board of governors on a preliminary basis inDecember, offering its long-term view of the future and a series ofrecommendations on what action the profession should take over thecourse of the coming years.It will address several issues. Like, should we be separatingcertification, that is, becoming a chartered accountant, fromlicensure, that is, the right to practise public accounting? Should weformally recognise specialisation? What amount and type of experienceshould be required in the assurance services area to get your CA? Howdo we ensure reciprocity and harmonisation among the provinces?Accounting firms are doing a lot more than accounting. How do wedetermine fees and billings? Who can or can't be a partner? They'realso looking at the very governance of the CA profession itself. Thereis nothing off the table. There are no sacred cows.TA: Did you have anything else you wanted to accomplish as chair of theCICA?Gage: Another area of real deep interest to me, really an offshoot ofthe Vision project, is that we have to re-examine how and where weprovide our assurance and attestation services. Our traditional role asauditors has been to audit historic cost financial statements.As we move out of an industrial economy to an information and knowledgeeconomy, some of the most important assets won't be on a historic costfinancial statement. Intangible assets such as intellectual capital,human resources, research and development, and innovation, don't appearon financial statements. Likewise, we probably have to find new ways tomeasure performance in this emerging information economy.I believe that, as we change our focus and learn to address the moreimportant assets of the new economy, auditors can play a useful role inwhat are now called non-traditional attestation areas. I think thechallenge is for us to identify what those areas are and to what extentthey will have a marketplace value. We shouldn't be trying to sell anattestation service just because we can do it. We should be focused onthe marketplace to see where the market believes there will be value inthird-party assurance. Then we have to establish ourselves in thoseareas.For example, there might be value in users knowing that certaincommercial databases had a process to keep the information accurate andtimely. An audit firm might go in and evaluate the procedures formaintaining the database. There might be areas in the environmentalfield where there was a desire to know to what degree a company hadgood processes and systems in place to monitor compliance withenvironmental regulations.Right now, a lot of this is quite speculative and we need to examinewhere the values of our society are changing and what kind ofinformation is going to become critical in performance evaluation inthe future and whether that performance information would be morevaluable if it had an auditor's opinion on it. I think there is areally critical issue to keep our profession relevant to our society.Again we have established a small task force that, over the next fewyears, will examine this area in a comprehensive fashion. It is co-ordinating its work with a similar committee in the US. TA: Any otherchallenges?Gage: The big issue we haven't talked directly about is attractiveness.We have to make sure the profession is dynamic and challenging, thatmembers are highly respected and regarded within society. And we haveto make sure that it's financially rewarding. That's the only way we'regoing to continue attracting the very best people. Like any profession,we're only as good as the quality of people in it.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESSIn Malaysia, healthy economic growth and a flood of investment iscreating a lucrative market for accounting firms. Sally Roden reportsTHE LAST ten years have seen a remarkable economic turnaround inMalaysia. In the mid-1980s, with the country deep in recession, thegovernment was forced to extend university courses from three to fouryears in a bid to combat unemployment.Today, the problem isn't a lack of jobs; it's an acute shortage ofskilled labour in every industry sector. The government has even had toreverse its decision of a decade ago and cut university courses back tothree years.Economic growth has been impressive. In each of the last seven years,gross domestic product has risen by more than 8 percent.Such economic success, combined with a stable political environment -the National Front Coalition has been in power for 38 years - hasresulted in a flood of investment into the country. And that kind ofinvestment - RM38.4 billion (#10 billion) in 1994 alone - is good newsfor accounting firms."Growth has been bullish and will continue for at least the next threeyears," said Ian Appleby, shortly before retiring as Asia- Pacificregional managing partner at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International."There has been plenty of infrastructural projects and many governmentagencies are being privatised which results in investment," said GohJoon Hai, managing partner of Hew & Tan, the local member of MooresRowland International.Under a privatisation programme launched over ten years ago, roads,railways, the national airline, hospitals, telecommunications and powergenerators have all been sold off. More recently, the governmentannounced that a further 200 state- owned bodies were to be privatised,which is likely to result in more work for accountants.Another source of overseas funds is the government's recently adoptedstrategy of turning Malaysia into an international financial servicescentre. In June, it announced a range of measures to liberalise thecountry's capital markets, while two new derivatives exchanges areexpected to open this autumn.In response to the influx of foreign investors, accounting firms havehad to change the kind of services they offer.Chris Low, tax manager at HALS & Associates, said his firm's clientsused to be concerned only with tax compliance. "Now they have adifferent attitude and look more to consulting to minimise their taxexposure," he said. Changes in tax regulations occur every year, hesaid, as the government moves towards greater emphasis on indirecttaxation.Goh said Hew & Tan is providing more management consulting and taxservices. "Increased investment has meant more tax payers and more taxwork," he said. Taxation is currently handled by a civil servicedepartment but there is a move afoot to establish an inland revenueboard which would be independent of the civil service. There is also aparallel move to introduce a system of self-assessment, which would begood news for accounting firms.Hew & Tan has also been active in corporate finance. "We have played abig role in helping clients gain public listings," Goh said. "We selecta merchant banker and are involved in the initial public issue."The government has also encouraged Malaysian companies to expand intoother markets in southeast Asia. During 1995, it introduced a law thatallowed all profits earned outside Malaysia to be repatriated forinvestment free of tax."Companies with expertise in plantation are buying land in Indonesiaand Vietnam," said Zainal Putih, country managing partner at ArthurAndersen. "Other companies which are experts in road building,particularly because Malaysia's north/south motorway has just beencompleted, are setting up in India and Vietnam where these services areneeded."This drive overseas has provided new challenges for accounting firms."As Malaysia advances towards developed nation status, it can beexpected that competition in the profession will intensify and clientswill become more demanding," said Lai Siew Peng, practice developmentmanager at Ernst & Young.While few Malaysian firms were prepared to disclose revenue figures forlast year, most of those that did reported robust growth. More tellingare the staff figures. Of the 23 firms that replied to TA's survey,only three recorded a decline in total head-count.None of the Big Six would reveal fee income figures, but in terms oftotal staff, E&Y is the market leader with 1,222 employees. The firm'sclients include the state-owned Bank Bumiputra, agriculture andfisheries group Multi-Purpose Holdings and Malaysia's largestconglomerate, Renong Holdings.Lai said the biggest areas of growth for E&Y are tax and consulting.She believes the healthy growth in the Malaysian market is set tocontinue. "The anticipated robust economic activity, rising businessconfidence, lowering of corporation tax [to 30 percent] and theincrease in reinvestment allowance are among the reasons," she said.In second place is KPMG with an estimated total staff of 973. TA putsthe firm's total partner numbers at 23 and professional staff at 750.Arthur Andersen comes next with total staff of 906, up 4.4 percent froma year earlier. This figure does not include Andersen Consulting.According to Zainal, Andersen has benefited greatly from thegovernment's privatisation programme. He said many of the privatisationcontracts go to the Big Six "because of the international nature andcomplexity of the work".Fourth in the staff rankings is Price Waterhouse, with estimated totalstaff of 826, followed by Coopers & Lybrand on 722.Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, which also operates under its local name ofKassim Chan & Co., takes sixth place in the tables with total staff of714, a rise of 5.8 percent on the previous year.Unlike their western counterparts, firms in Malaysia have been largelyunaffected by fee pressure in the audit sector. "Price competition isnot a problem. Clients are concerned with quality, not price," saidChia Kwong Chow, managing partner of KC Chia & Noor, the MacIntyreStrater affiliate.Part of the reason for this is the Malaysian Institute of Accountants'(MIA) monitoring of audit fees. Until three years ago the MIAstipulated a minimum audit fee. It now simply offers a guideline offees that should be charged.By far the biggest problem facing the Malaysian profession is ashortage of staff. The country's thriving commercial sector can affordto offer high salaries in order to lure staff from accounting firms,while stringent immigration laws make it hard to bring in expatriatestaff."This country has had about 8 percent growth for about eight years.With a population of only 20 million, problems are inevitable," saidZainal at Andersen. "Opportunities pop up everywhere."Kim Guan, managing partner of Kreston International member firm THLGKreston - M, believes the only way around the staff shortages is tooffer higher salaries. But others see potential pitfalls in such astrategy."This pushes up the cost of production and can push up prices," saidLow at HALS. "The work environment must be good, and every individualmust be looked at separately to find out what his needs are." Hebelieves the government will have to deal with this growing problemsoon.Other small firms say the biggest difficulty they face is clientsmoving over to Big Six firms when they reach a certain size."Most of the big assignments are dominated by the Big Six," Chia said."The survival of the smaller firms depends on the partner's personalcontact and the market niche carved out by the firm."But, as Goh at Hew & Tan pointed out, this is not a problem unique toMalaysia. "It happens in every country when clients grow to a certainsize," he said. "We have lost one or two jobs over the last two yearsbut this was not a case of clients defecting to the Big Six."In response to the growing globalisation of the profession, more firmsare adopting international names. THLG Kreston adopted the Krestonmoniker 18 months ago. "From the client point of view, it shows thefirm is moving in a certain direction, even though it is not a Big Sixfirm," he said. International work makes up about 15 percent of thefirm's total business.Chia & Noor has not adopted the MacIntyre Strater name. Chia does notthink it would offer the firm any advantage. "We have largely localclients, and membership of MacIntyre Strater is not very useful forthis type of client," he said.The main professional issue on the agenda in 1995 was the proposedmerger between Malaysia's two accounting bodies. The statutory body,the MIA, and the older Malaysian Association of Certified PublicAccountants (MICPA), a private association established by charteredaccountants who qualified in England, are in the process of formalisingthe agreement. It was the MICPA which originally governed theaccounting profession in Malaysia, before the MIA was established in1967."Two bodies are not justified for a relatively small number ofaccountants," Zainal said. The MIA has about 8,000 members and theMICPA about 4,000, while some accountants are members of both.Some people hope that the merger will bring about professional changein the country. For example, Malaysian accountants are not allowed toadvertise, a legacy of the British influence on the MICPA, according toZainal. He thinks this will have to change. "Customers and the publicneed more information," he said. "This is one anomaly in theadvancement of the profession."Looking to the year ahead, most accountants believe the favourablebusiness climate will continue. The economy is forecast to grow by over8 percent again, and Malaysia's enhanced role throughout southeast Asiais expected to produce new business opportunities. In terms of economicmuscle, Zainal said,"we are now moving on to the same plane asSingapore and Hong Kong".SELECT ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY REVEUNE                                       Fee     Fee                                       income  income  Growth Effec-                     International     1994    1993    rate   tiveFirm                 affiliation       (RM/m)  (RM/m)  (%)    dateMoore Stephens       Moore Stephens    4.1(1)  3.6(1)  13.9   Dec 94THLG Kreston - M     Kreston           2.8(2)  2.5(2)   n/a   Dec 94HALS & Associates    -                 2.0     1.8     11.1   Dec 94Wong Liu & Partners  Morison           2.0(1)  1.8(1)  11.1   Dec 94Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton                     /HLB              1.9     1.8      5.6   Dec 94Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison           1.3     1.3      0.0   Dec 94Neoh WM Lam          SCI               1.1     1.0     10.0   Dec 94KK Chow & Partners   IGAF              1.0     0.9     11.1   Dec 94Ong & Wong           IA                0.8(1)  0.8(1)   0.0   Dec 94(1) Figures supplied in US dollars and converted to Malaysianringgit at the year-end exchange rates(2) Estimated by TANote:  Some firms declined to give fee income dataSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY TOTALSTAFF                             Number       Number       Number of                             of           of           chargeable                             offices      partners     staffFirm                         1993  1994   1993  1994   1993   1994Ernst & Young(1)             13    12     24    22     n/a    950KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat                       10(2) 10(2)  20(2) 23(2)  570(2) 750(2)Arthur Andersen(3)           14    14     18    15     610    648Price Waterhouse              8     8(2)  26(2) 26(2)  605    600(2)Coopers & Lybrand            11(2) 11(2)  26(2) 23(2)  n/a    n/aDeloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)   6     7     18    22     494    525Hew & Tan                     2     2      5     5     162    158Shamsir Jasani                4     4      7     7     125    129Robert Teo Kuan               1     1      3     4      80     85Moore Stephens                5     5      5     5      90     76Horwath Mok & Poon            1     1      3     3      48     65Yeo Yong Poh                  2     2      6     6      57     65Roger Yue Tan & Associates    1     1      2     2      52     58KC Chia & Noor                3     3      4     3      41     45Russ Ooi & Associates         3     3      4     4      44     48Ong & Wong                    2     3      3     3      10      9HALS & Associates             1     1      3     3      35     40Anuarul Azizan Chew           2     1      3     3      39     38Wong Liu & Partners           3     3      2     4      39     38Gong & Co                     2     2      3     3     n/a     40Neoh WM Lam                   2     2      2     2      35     40THLG Kreston - M              2     2      2     2      26     28KK Chow & Partners            1     1      1     2      20     20                                    Number of                                    administrative  Total                                    staff           staffFirm                                1993    1994    1993    1994Ernst & Young(1)                    n/a     250     1,124   1,222KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat   180(2)  200(2)    770(2)  973(2)Arthur Andersen(3)                  240     243       868     906Price Waterhouse                    194     200(2)    825(2)  826(2)Coopers & Lybrand                   n/a     n/a       n/a     722Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)         163     167       675     714Hew & Tan                            30      29       197     192Shamsir Jasani                       16      16       148     152Robert Teo Kuan                      20      20       103     109Moore Stephens                       15      20       110     101Horwath Mok & Poon                   12      15        63      83Yeo Yong Poh                          9      10        72      81Roger Yue Tan & Associates           10      12        64      72KC Chia & Noor                       17      20        62      68Russ Ooi & Associates                 9       9        57      61Ong & Wong                           41      42        54      54HALS & Associates                    10      10        48      53Anuarul Azizan Chew                  11      10        53      51Wong Liu & Partners                   9       9        50      51Gong & Co                           n/a       5       n/a      48Neoh WM Lam                           6       5        43      47THLG Kreston - M                      4       4        32      34KK Chow & Partners                    6       6        27      28(1) Figures refer to 1994 and 1995(2) Estimated by TA(3) Does not include Andersen Consultingn/a = not availableSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - FEE SPILT                     International        Account-     Consult-Firm                 affiliation    Audit ing     Tax  ting    OtherArthur Andersen(1)   AA & Co, SC    67     -      17   10       6Hew & Tan            MRI            60    10      18    -      12Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton                     /HLB           52     -      18   16      14(2)Robert Teo Kuan      Nexia          39     -      36    2      23Moore Stephens       Moore Stephens 65(3)  -      18   17       -Horwath Mok & Poon   Horwath        35     5      25    5      30(4)Yeo Yong Poh         DFK            50    10      23    7      10(4)KC Chia & Noor       MacIntyre                     Strater        28     5      20   27      20(4)Russ Ooi & Associates          RSM            26     8      20    -      46(4)Ong & Wong           IA             60     -      20   10      10HALS & Associates    -              50     -      20   20      10Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison        70     2      10    3      15(4)Wong Liu & Partners  Morison        58     6      15   21       -Gong & Co            CKL            51     7      16    -      26Neoh WM Lam          SC             46     8      18    -      28(5)THLG Kreston - M     Kreston        65     -      25   10       -KK Chow & Partners   IGAF           47     4      19    -      30(5)(1) Does not include Andersen Consulting(2) Share registration and corporate recovery(3) Includes accounting(4) Includes corporate finance(5) SecretarialSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - WHO'S WHOArthur AndersenLevel 1Block C (South)Pusat Bandar Damansara50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-255 7000Fax: 60-3-255 5332Contact partner: Dato' Hj. Zainal Abidin PutihAnuarul Azizan Chew (Morison International)18 Jalan 1/64Off Jalan Kolam Air/Jalan Ipoh51200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-441 7233Fax: 60-3-441 0395Contact partner: Azizan Bin Mohd. NoorKC Chia & Noor (MacIntyre Strater)229-1 Jalan Perkasa SatuTaman MaluriCheras55100 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-984 3102Fax: 60-3-984 7952Contact partner: Chia Kwong ChowKK Chow & Partners (IGAF)Suite 171317th FloorIGB Plaza6 Jalan Kampar50400 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-442 2055Fax: 60-3-441 7719Contact partner: KK ChowCoopers & Lybrand22nd FloorIGB PlazaJalan KamparOff Jalan Tun Razak50400 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-441 1188Fax: 60-3-441 0880Contact partner: Mohammad AbdullahDeloitte Touche Tohmatsu (DTTI)3 Changkat Raja Chulan50200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-230 6822Fax: 60-3-232 4585Contact partner: Mohd Kassim Bin SulongErnst & Young1st & 4th FloorsKompleks AntarabangsaJalan Sultan Ismail50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-244 2333Fax: 60-3-241 0676Contact partner: Ali Abdul KadirGong & Company (Clark Kenneth Leventhal)3 Jalan SS2/6447300 Petaling JayaKuala LumpurTel: 60-3-776 4612Fax: 60-3-775 4362Contact partner: Felix GongHALS & Associates (-)12th FloorMing BuildingJalan Bukit Nanas50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-201 1322Fax: 60-3-201 1326Contact partner: Chew Weng KitHew & Tan (Moores Rowland International)Wisma Selangor Dredging7th FloorSouth Block142A Jalan Ampang50450 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-261 5222Fax: 60-3-261 3909Contact partner: Goh Joon HaiHorwath Mok & Poon13-1 Pertama ComplexJalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman50100 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 9560Fax: 60-3-292 9361Contact partner: Mok Yuen LokKPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat4th FloorWisma PerdanaJalan DungunDamansara Heights50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-255 3388Fax: 60-3-255 0971Contact partner: Ramli IbrahimTHLG Kreston - M (Kreston International)Suite OneWisma Rolnic 97CJalan Bangsar59200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-32-827 889Fax: 60-32-827 897Contact partner: Kim GuanMoore StephensBlock D3rd FloorBangunan SPPK46 Jalan DungunDamansara Heights50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-254 1888Fax: 60-3-254 7673Contact partner: Eddy ChongNeoh WN Lam(SCI International)Acctax Corporate Centre2 Bawasah Road10050 PenangTel: 60-4-228 0020Fax: 60-4-228 0023Contact partner: Lam Wai Min                 Neoh Chin WahOng & Wong (IA International)3rd FloorWisma Ho Weng Kee138-140 Jalan Petaling50000 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-230 4033Fax: 60-3-232 4863Contact partner: Ong Kong-LaiRuss Ooi & Associates (RSM International)Letterbox No. 8Wisma Damansara Penthouse14th FloorJalan Semantan50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-254 3388Fax: 60-3-255 5101Contact partner: Russ OoiPrice Waterhouse11th FloorWisma Sime DarbyJalan Raja LautPO Box 1019250706 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-293 1077Fax: 60-3-293 0997Contact partner: Khoo Eng ChooShamsir Jasani(Grant Thornton/HLB)Level 17Menara BankPembangunanJalan Sultan IsmailPO Box 1233750774 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 4022Fax: 60-3-291 5229Contact partner: Narendra JasaniRobert Teo Kuan (Nexia International)171-175 Jalan Maharajalela50150 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-248 3700Fax: 60-3-244 2880Contact partner: Robert TeoWong Liu & Partners (Morison International)62-A Sri Bahari Road10050 PenangTel: 60-4-263 5540Fax: 60-4-263 4953Contact partner: Dean LiuYeo Yong Poh (DFK International)Suite 40244th FloorPresident HouseJalan Sultan Ismail50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-241 2555Fax: 60-3-242 6355Contact partner: Khoo Pek LingRoger Yue Tan & Associates (BKR International)2nd FloorWisma Tai Yoon9B Lorong Medan Tuanku SatuMedan Tuanku50300 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 0722Fax: 60-3-291 6569Contact partner: Roger YueSource:  The AccountantCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT02-B37-35IA086-000616-B019-69http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi113.html 205.156.212.5 19970122003857 text/html 164207HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:36:34 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:28 GMTContent-length: 164019Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi113.html Sample Issue Copyright ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs (6721 words) Top Financial Planning Software (1309 words) Financial Planners' Secrets of Success (1112 words) This Just In: Getting Back to Business (5706 words) Editor's Note: Another Nail in the Coffin? (922 words) Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software (1968 words) Information Services: In Search of On-line CPAs (2060 words) Practice Development: Form 5500 Follow-up (1742 words) Newspages: Tax Vendors for Sale (1328 words) Quicklooks: MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite (1986 words) Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound (1085 words) CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & DogsEach year as the holiday season approaches, the editorial staff at AccountingTechnology gathers for one of the most enjoyable tasks of the year-choosingproducts for our annual Diamonds and Dogs article.  Pouring through countlessback issues of computer and industry trades, newspaper clippings, and our ownnotes accumulated over the year, we narrow down our choices until we wind upwith the dozen and a half "awards" presented here.This year, things were really pretty slow for the first half of the year.With many vendors waiting for the release of Windows 95, not all that muchexciting happened until late summer.  At least, that's what it seems like inretrospect.  In actuality, it was an interesting year all around.  And, as hasbeen the trend in recent years, much of what took place was of benefit to you,both in terms of what you can accomplish, and what it costs to do so.  This isreflected in the large number of Diamonds, with just a smattering of MixedBags and Dogs.The brightest diamond of allFinally, no article on the best of 1995 would be complete without a nod to the"best of the best."  To the staff here at Accounting Technology, that's youthe reader.With this first issue of the new year, everyone at Accounting Technology wouldlike to wish you and yours a happy, healthy, and profitable New Year!So, without further ado, and presented in no particular order (and with noreal malice intended), here are our choices for the Diamonds and Dogs of 1995.DIAMONDSSometimes you Win(95)...And it seems as though Microsoft has indeed won big with this newest releaseof its graphical operating system.  Often delayed, and put through the largestbeta test in history (more on this later), the software was finally releasedwith much fanfare on August 24th.  The papers reported users lining up incomputer stores to purchase the upgrade when it went on sale at midnight.And, with the OEM deals Microsoft cut with hardware vendors, there aremillions of copies out there already, with a fairly large proportion of themactually being used, rather than stuck on the shelf.More conservative users, including many accountants, are biding their time,waiting for a second release.  Of course, as magazine editors, no one expectsusto be all that conservative, so we followed Win95 through the end of the betatest and used it exclusively on our production machines (we still testhardware with Win 3.11, unless it's a PC that comes with Win95 pre-installed).And, we have to admit that a lot of the hype surrounding Win95 is justified.We installed it on several workstations effortlessly, while one hung up untila network card was removed.  The new desktop is really a big improvement overWin 3.11, and once you get used to it, Windows Explorer is more powerful thanthe File Manager it replaces (though you can continue to use File Manager ifyou prefer).Plug and Play, when it works, is a joy, and a terror when it doesn't.  Alltold, just as with any operating system that's preceded it (including IBM'sOS/2 Warp), Microsoft Windows 95 has its good points and bad.Overall, we started out liking it, and as we discover just how to use some ofits not-so-obvious features, that liking grows.2+2 finally = 4Last year at this time, Intel was just recovering from a media blitz nailingthe vendor on its cover-up of math problems inherent in its Pentium processor.Jokes were rampant, and Intel was desperately trying to find some graceful wayout of the mess.  It finally bowed to the inevitable and offered to replaceany Pentium that contained the fault.  You had to give a credit card number,but if you actually returned the faulty chip, your charge account was nevercharged.This strategy worked just fine.  Today, the Pentium CPU rules.  Sure, you canstill buy a 486, but why would you want to?  Everything goes better with aPentium, and system prices on the 75-MHz version (the 60- and 66-MHz CPUs haveall but disappeared) are under $2,000.  Even notebooks are Pentium powered.Cyrix and AMD are still able competitors, carrying the banner for their "5X86"technology.  But while the alternate CPUs are powerful, Intel's Pentium stillhas the edge in both power and market share.  But that's right now.  You neverknow what the future will bring.How much is that accounting package in the Window(s)?Accountants, as a professional group, have been rather slow to adopt Windows.And even those who have moved into the Windows environment haven't embracedWindows-based accounting applications with much gusto.Part of this is that while the benefits of Windows-based productivityapplications such as word processing and spreadsheets are pretty obvious,accounting itself is such a data entry oriented task that it's been difficultto understand the benefits that a visually oriented approach could offer.  Toborrow from the last, short-lived "Zorro" TV series, most of us just want to"Get in, make some Z's, and get out."This situation has resulted in a sort of Catch 22.  With accountants resistantto Windows-based accounting, vendors have been hesitant to invest much moneyand time in R&D.  With few packages available, accountants haven't felt muchpressure to change.That's changed pretty dramatically over the last two years.  It happened firstin the consumer market the year before last.  Windows-based packages fromPeachtree, Intuit, Microsoft, and scores of other vendors started to dominatethe market.  Not only in accounting applications, but in retail tax prep aswell.  With much of their Windows R&D already a sunk cost, many of thesevendors turned their attention to the professional market.  1995 saw a floodof products announced and shipped.  And those vendors that don't already havea Windows product line will most likely offer one this year.  When Win95 wasannounced, we received almost two dozen press releases from accounting and taxsoftware vendors announcing Win95 compliant packages.We're convinced that Windows-based applications offer concrete benefits inease of use, with drop-down menus, a consistent interface, pick-lists, andsimilar features.  Easier to use also means easier to learn, so your trainingand re-training costs go down as well.If you're still primarily a DOS shop, it's time for you to take a close lookat Windows applications.  In many cases, they really are better.CD-ROM gets faster, easier, and cheaper1995 will also be remembered as the year that CD-ROM became a standard, andeven expected, feature on desktop PCs.  Much of the reason for this is aone-two punch.  First, the year marked a switch from SCSI- and AT-interfaceddrives to the ATAPI IDE standard, which allows a drive just to plug into ahard disk cable or second IDE channel on the motherboard if available.This easy interfacing came along with the arrival of inexpensive quad-speeddrives, which dropped in price from over $400 at the start of the year tounder $150 by year's end.  When you purchase them with a complete system, oras part of an upgrade kit, it's quite possible to receive a quad-speed drivethat costs in the $100 range.But quad-speed is hardly even the state of the art.  Driven by more demandingmultimedia applications, six-speed drives are plentiful.  Diamond MultimediaSystems is shipping an eight-speed drive with its top-of-the-line upgrade kit,and several vendors are showing (but not yet shipping) ten-speed units.Many of you already have CD-ROM drives.  But with the silver disc now thedistribution media of choice, if you don't yet have a CD-ROM drive, it's timeto add one.  And if you have a slower drive, it's not very expensive toupgrade to one of the newer, speedier units.ZIP and EasyDrive give you lots of space for very little cashThe mass move to Windows has had one not-so-beneficial effect.  Suddenly,almost everyone is suffering from a lack of hard disk space.  With operatingsystems such as Win95 taking up mucho megabytes on their own, it doesn't takethe installation of too many megabyte-hungry application such as MicrosoftOffice (up to 75MB) before you start getting Disk Full messages from your PC.PCs these days are coming with larger hard disk drives, and replacement driveshave dropped below $400 for a gigabyte drive.  But what do you do if you arealready maxed out in your system?  Most PCs will only support two hard diskdrives.  Unless you want to start transferring files back and forth betweendiskettes and/or tape, you have a problem.Well, you did until recently.  Well-known vendors Iomega and SyQuest haveintroduced your solution-ZIP and EZ*DRIVE removable media drives.  Both thesevendors have a long track record in the removable media industry.  SyQuest hasbeen making high-capacity removable cartridge drives since the Apple II.Iomega followed suit with its Bernoulli Box for the IBM PC in the early 1980s.Over the years, both have been somewhat successful, mostly in verticalindustries.  Many of Iomega's sales have been to various branches of thegovernment and military, where the units' ruggedness is greatly valued, andthe relatively high cost is of secondary concern.  SyQuest has been a big hitin the publishing industry.  Many publications (including this one) send filescreated with page layout software to the printing house on SyQuest cartridges.But relatively high drive and media prices have kept either company from beingas successful as it might have been.  In 1995, however, both vendorsintroduced consumer-oriented, high-capacity storage solutions at affordableprices.  And sales for both have really taken off.The ZIP drive, introduced first, is a terrific-looking external drive thatuses a special 3.5-inch, flexible-media, removable disk.  Providing 100MB perdiskette, both the drive, at about $200, and the media, at $20 per 100MB, areeasy on your wallet.  We've been testing the parallel-port version of the ZIP,and we just love it (the review will be in a future issue).  It seems usersdo, too.  The drives have been flying off the shelves, and many vendors havebeen backordered almost continuously since the drive started shipping.This situation has worked out pretty well for SyQuest.  Its EZ*DRIVE is acomparably priced 135MB cartridge hard disk unit, available in bothparallel-port and SCSI versions (as is the ZIP), and in internal and externalversions (the ZIP is strictly external).  We also have an EZ*DRIVE underreview.  Except for some initial problems installing the SCSI interface, italso has been a joy to use.In fact, about the only fly in the ointment with either of these drives isthat Iomega has already announced a bigger and better drive.  Its Jaz driveshould be shipping about the time this appears.  And while we haven't yet seenone, it's expected to sell for under $500, with 1-gigabyte cartridges costingabout $100 each.  If Iomega does as good a job with the Jaz as it did with theZIP, there's no way it (or you) can lose.Tape backup hits rock bottomWhile we're on the topic of additional storage, let's not forget tape backup.1995 will probably be remembered as the year that tape backup becameaffordable enough for even home users.Tape backup is a technology that's been around almost as long as PCs.  We'veseen it go from the large, clunky 3-M cartridge technology to the tiny DAT(Digital Audio Tape) format.  One thing has remained constant over the years.Tape backup has been expensive, slow, and generally a pain to use.That was then.  The popular QIC format speeded up the backup process.  But ittook inexpensive parallel-port tapedrives to make tape backup an attractive technology.  Prices were falling allduring 1995, but MicroSolutions really hastened the process with an 800MBTravan-technology capable parallel-port drive for under $170.  Iomega quicklyfollowed suit with a similar Ditto drive.  Colorado Memory Systems, now ownedby Hewlett-Packard, already has a large chunk of the installed market, withthe lion's share of OEM deals with system vendors.  You can be sure Coloradowon't give up any sales easily to other tape drive vendors.Just to make things even better, backup software has really improved alongwith drive and tape technology.  Arcada Software provides the software forMicroSolutions and Iomega, and sells an enhanced version on its own.  Othervendors also have excellent software for backup available.Just about all of today's backup software offers extensive scheduling optionsand various data compression features to squeeze more data onto a single tape.Sure, we know you already have a tape backup drive on your system.  Butperhaps it's an older unit, with limited capacity.  With today's units, andtoday's prices, right now is a good time for you to upgrade.Accountants on-lineWhen it comes to technology, accountants generally get a bad rap.  Thestereotype is a green eye-shaded clerk bending over a ledger with a quill penin hand.  The reality, as we all know, is much different.  Accountants areusually quick to embrace a technology once the cost/benefits become clear.And nowhere is this more evident than in telecommunications, this year'shottest technology.Everyone's on the on-line services such as CompuServe and Prodigy.  CompuServehas long served as a support vehicle for numerous accounting software vendors,and if you sign onto Prodigy's Special Interest Section, the first listing youfind is one for accountants run by Sid Breman.The Microsoft Network hasn't been left out either.  F&G, AccountingTechology's publisher, is a Service Provider on MSN, and you'll find currentand back issues of Accounting Technology as well as its sister publicationsThe Practical Accountant and Accounting Today.  The Accounting Office, an arearun by Educational Edge, also provides MSN subscribers with access toaccountant-oriented resources.Even more interesting, however, is how accounting software vendors are amongthe leading-edge innovators on the Internet.  SBT, well known for itsaccounting software products, has an entire new division with the task ofhelping accountants find ways to profit from the Internet.  WebTrader, thedivision's first product, offers a secure method for conducting business overthe Net.  Abacus Accounting Systems, another well-known software vendor, isalso heavily into Internet development.And let's not forget the numerous vendors that have established Web homepages.  If you have an Internet account, be sure to check out Wayne's Web, theweb "home" of Wayne Harding.  Wayne's the VP of CPA Relations for Great PlainsSoftware, and his section can be found on Great Plains' Web page(http://www.gps.com).  If you're an Internet "newbie," Wayne's Web is a goodplace to start your Web exploring.Video conferencing hits the big time:  Here's looking at you, kidOne of the breakthrough technologies in the year just past was videoconferencing.  The basic technology has been available for several years, butit hasn't made much of a splash because of the incredible amount of resourcesneeded to make it work.  We've all been reading about PicturePhones, perhapsthe ultimate video-conferencing technology, for years.  And for years, they'vebeen just around the corner.  Some vendors, such as Casio and Matsushita, havebriefly sold consumer videophones, which sent a single frame of video everyfive or ten seconds.  These haven't been successful, as you may as well justpaste a picture of a person you're talking to on the phone.AT&T has had a bit more success.  If you want to video conference, you canbook some time in a local AT&T center in many major cities and havefull-motion video with other conferencees in similar facilities in othercities.The problem is bandwidth.  Video signals, when digitized, comprise a lot ofdata.  Normal telephone lines don't have the capability of carrying enoughinformation in real-time to allow full-motion video to be transmitted.  EvenAT&T has had to go to special dedicated lines for its video-conferencingservices.This limitation is also felt on the network, but things are changing rapidly.Today's high-speed Ethernet networks can carry much greater information loads.And ISDN phone lines are many times faster than standard ones.  Real-time datacompression reduces the amount of information that needs to be transmitted,while Pentium-level CPUs make it possible to do this compression anddecompression on normal desktop PCs.  Finally, video conferencing is becomingnot just technically feasible, but affordable as well.While it's not yet an off-the-shelf technology, since it needs somewhatspecialized skills to install and set up, there are some big names gettinginto video conferencing.  Intel's ProShare comes in several levels ofcapability.  We reviewed the mid-level package, which offers collaborationover a network, but not video.  With ProShare, video conferencing requires anISDN telephone line for each workstation, even if you're conferencingcompletely in-house.  Corel's new video-conferencing system only requires anISDN line for remote conferencing.  In-house, the video signal is sent over anunused pair of network wires.Video conferencing still isn't cheap.  With most of the systems available now,when all of the costs are tallied up (including a video camera for eachworkstation), you can expect to pay in the neighborhood of $1,000 per seat,with prices expected to drop again this year.  But in a mid-level firm, that'snot all that much money to have instant real-time video conferencing.  It mayeven be worthwhile to consider setting up a video-conferencing system betweenthe firm and its most important clients.  After all, how many other accountingfirms could offer a similar service?Color inkjets:  Better and even cheaper this yearOkay, we gave these inkjet printers a Diamond last year, so we really weren'tplanning on doing it again in '95.  However, we've just finished testing a newbatch of color inkjets, and we have to admit that as impressed as we were lastyear, we're even more so this time around.First off, there are more vendors in the field.  Yes, you can buy aninexpensive monochrome inkjet, but this class of printers is quicklydisappearing, being replaced by low-cost inkjet printers such as the EpsonStylus IIs, Lexmark 1020, and HP DeskJet 600.  All of these printers are"color-capable."  If you replace the monochrome print head with a three-colorunit (cyan, magenta, and yellow), you get full-color output.  The blacks are alittle muddy, since they're comprised of a mixture of the three colors, butoverall the color output looks just great.  And at under $350 (the Lexmark isunder $300), none of these will break the bank.You'll also have more choices in inexpensive four-color inkjets.  The CanonBJC-4100 and BJC-600e, HP 660, and Epson Stylus Color II all offer excellentoutput on plain paper, and are priced in the $550 price range.  Finally, theEpson Stylus Color Pro and HP 850 offer great output, good speed, andoffice-quality durability for well under $1,000.  For adding color to yourproposals and reports, this is definitely the year of the color inkjet.Multifunction printer/fax systems:  They dice, they sliceWe didn't start out liking multifunction office machines.  The idea isn't bad:a Swiss-army knife approach of incorporating a printer along with ascanner/fax machine.  After all, many offices need all of these capabilities,so why pay for separate machines and give up all of that desktop real estatewhen you can put them into one handy package?When we first looked at this solution, we were less than impressed.  Okidata'sDoc*It, one of the first of the breed, was large, expensive, and required aseparate interface card in your PC.  It worked pretty well, but it definitelywasn't a machine for the masses.  Panasonic's initial venture into thismarket, reviewed in the January 1995 printer round-up, was priced right, butgave us a bit of difficulty in setup and use.  Both these vendors deservekudos for their pioneering efforts.As with most technology, time has brought improvement.  We're currentlyreviewing the new breed of office equipment, and there's been a quantum leapin what these new units offer.  Hewlett-Packard's Office FX, Canon'sMultipass, and Lexmark's Medley are all inkjet based, and work with plainpaper.  All of them give excellent results, and the Lexmark unit can evenprint in color!  Brother's MF-4500 and Panasonic's new unit cost a littlemore, but both offer a laser printer, with its additional speed, as the basicprint platform.Couple attractive packaging, easy setup and use, and reasonable prices (in theneighborhood of $1,000 for laser-based units, under $700 or so for inkjetbased), and you have a real winner sitting on your desk.Your desk is alive with the sound of musicAccountants have embraced multimedia with both hands.  And they're not onlyusing multimedia products, but are creating their own multimedia reports andpresentations.  New presentation packages such as PowerPoint, ASAP, andAstound have wizards and assistants that take you step by step through theprocess.  Pre-designed templates offer just the right background, and OLE(object linking and embedding) makes it simple to place an "object," such as agraph, video clip, or even sound file, into your presentation.  There's even aspecialized package from Midisoft called Presentation Partner that makes iteasy to go even further, assembling various multimedia pieces into dynamitedog and pony shows.Technology has enabled the average user to incorporate a lot of fairlyesoteric "objects" into everyday presentations.  Video capture boards let youeasily use your camcorder to shoot video clips that just "drop" right intoPowerPoint, Freelance Graphics, or even Word for Windows, using the InsertObject command.  Lotus ScreenCam makes it possible to capture the action onyour screen while you're running an application.In fact, about the only place this scenario falls down is on the soundtrack.A really professional multimedia presentation generally features some sort ofmusical accompaniment.  You could just connect your CD or tape player to themicrophone input on your sound card, but that's not really a good solution.Not only are you stuck with the prerecorded length of the song you'repirating, but you're also violating someone's copyright.  Sound clipcollections, available on CD-ROM, are a better solution, but they're expensiveand also of fixed length.A better solution is one of the new soundtrack generators.  Available fromvendors such as Sonic Desktop, Yamaha, and Blue Ribbon Software (recentlyacquired by Microsoft), these products let you specify a style (rock, jazz,swing, reggae, country, etc.), a tempo, and a length, then stitch together amade-to-order file from musical components.  Each one works a bit differently,but they all let you adjust the instrument mix to some extent and perform somedegree of blending of musical style when your presentation changes mood.Obviously, none of these products is as good as having a group of professionalmusicians record a custom soundtrack specifically authored for you by apersonal composer.  But even if you have family in the music business, you'renot going to get it done for the under-$200 price tag that all of theseproducts sport.  And you'll be pleasantly surprised at how good a result youcan achieve with just a little playing around.  It's not essential technology,but it does let you add a good deal of polish to your presentations at minimalcost in money and effort.DOGSPentium Overdrive:  Sales shift into reverseOne of Intel's marketing strategies when it was first engineering thechangeover from the 486 to the Pentium was to provide an upgrade path.  Justas it had enabled you to upgrade 486 CPUs by popping in an "Overdrive" chip,Intel suggested that system vendors include a spare socket on their 486motherboards where a Pentium Overdrive chip could be plugged in at a latertime, converting the system to a Pentium-based PC.  Well, it sounded nice intheory, at least before Intel started shooting its own toes off one at a time.First came the delays.  With the math problems uncovered in the originalPentium CPU, you can be sure that Intel wasn't about to bring a replacementCPU to market with the same flaw.  So that delayed the introduction of theunit for a while.  (Bang!  There goes one toe.)  Retooling the chip productionlines to produce all the additional Pentiums needed to replace the originalCPUs put the Overdrive project even further behind.  (Bang!  There goesanother.)  Then there was the great socket problem.When Intel first started pitching the Pentium Overdrive at motherboardvendors, it specified an upgrade socket based on the pin-out design of theupgrade chip at that time.  Unfortunately, as the Pentium upgrade projectprogressed, the chip was continuously redesigned, and the number of pins thatthe chip had was changed.  All of a sudden, the original socket wouldn't workwith the upgrade chip.  (Bang!)  Intel respecified the socket configuration,and many motherboard and system designers went to a different colored socket.Even if you are willing to open up your PC before ordering your PentiumOverdrive and look for the socket (and possibly count the number of holes init), you still may not be able to get the right Pentium Overdrive for yoursystem.  Intel has been very slow in releasing different-speed versions.(Bang!)  And, assuming you've been lucky enough to find and install theversion for your particular 486 system, you may not have seen the speedincrease you expected, since Intel had to leave off some of the Pentium'sperformance features to make it compatible with 486 system design.  (Have werun out of toes yet?)There are a few companies that have survived in the system upgrade business.Evergreen Technologies, Improve, and Kingston still provide modules that letyou wring some additional performance out of your existing 486 at a reasonablecost.  But at this time last year, there were at least two other companies inthis business; they seem to have gone away since then.  Given Intel's ownexperiences, this doesn't seem too surprising.Novell:  Not so Perfect after all?Back in the '80's, Novell Corporation was king.  Its NetWare software was themust-have product if you were serious about having a network.  NetWare isstill the most popular network operating system, but over the years otherproducts, such as Artisoft's LANtastic and Microsoft's Windows NT, have shownNovell that it has to work to keep its dominance.But, riding high with its NetWare success, Novell made some acquisitions thatin retrospect may have done more harm than good.  Its UnixWare division,intended to make Novell as powerful in the Unix market as it is in DOS, hascome and gone, now residing with SCO.  And WordPerfect, once the king of wordprocessing and a prized Novell acquisition, is on the block, as is the QuattroPro spreadsheet software that Novell acquired from Borland.It's laudable that a company would want to diversify.  After all, anessentially one-product company such as Novell is at great risk if that oneproduct becomes less desirable and/or subject to increased competition.Novell's big mistakes were buying a company with products that its ownmanagement had no experience with (NetWare isn't a retail product, whileWordPerfect's product line is), and moving too slowly out of the DOSenvironment.  WordPerfect may still have the largest number of DOS users ofany product, but who cares.  Like it or not, the world is moving to Windows.Let's hope Novell's foray into retail applications hasn't done too muchdamage.  After all, NetWare is still the standard for networking, and withless of a drain on its resources, hopefully Novell will become a bit quickerin addressing some of the challenges that newer Windowing environments offer.As for WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, it may be that they have peaked and arenow waning.Tax software vendors:  And another one bites the dustThe year just past was a rough one for tax prep software vendors.  Every yeara few more vendors leave the tax prep market.  Some, such as Prentice-HallProfessional Software, sell out to another vendor.  In P-H's case, it wasacquired by CLR.  With its own GoSystem and EasyGo products, CLR will mostlikely concentrate on the FAST!  audit software it acquired, rather thanexpending effort on aging tax prep products that compete with its own.  Twoother vendors, FlashTax and Tax Resources, closed their doors before ourannual 1040 Face-Off over the summer.  Right after our 1040 Face-Off wascompleted, a fourth vendor, RAM Software, was acquired by SCS/Compute.It's pretty inevitable that these won't be the last tax prep vendors to closetheir doors.  After all, the professional tax prep market is just aboutsaturated, with very few new, first-time sales being made.  For a vendor togain a new client, it either has to cannibalize some other vendor's user baseor buy out another vendor.  The only other places to generate new business areout in the retail market, as Intuit is doing with its consumer/retail sales ofbusiness tax products, or moving into entirely new markets, as Pencil Pushershas done with its CFS services division.The food chain is a fact of nature.  Big fish eat little fish and areconsumed, in turn, by the next rung up the food chain.  But tax prep vendorsaren't fish; they're people who in many cases have spent an enormous amount ofeffort trying to build a business.  Change is an unavoidable part of life, butwe always experience a twinge of sadness when we read about another vendorpassing into the pages of tax prep history.MIXED BAGS ...And sometimes you don'tWhat we didn't like all that much was Microsoft's Win95 Beta Program.  Billedas the largest beta test ever, it was plagued by media mismanagement anddeadline pressure.  Once Microsoft decided that it couldn't afford the badpress that was sure to result if it blew another announced shipping deadline,the highly touted beta program was mostly for show.  Going through several"final" release candidates, Microsoft's answer to an inability to solve somefairly major problems was to pare features out of the operating system.  Thestrategy worked; after all, it was able to ship a moderately robust product onAugust 24th, as promised.  But it wasn't the product Microsoft initiallyintended to ship when beta testing started.We won't state that Microsoft should have let the deadline slip again tocorrect, rather than cut, features it had difficulty getting to work.  Afterall, at some point you have to bite the bullet and ship a product, even if itisn't 100 percent of what you had hoped.  It takes a lot of courage to airyour dirty laundry in public, as Microsoft wound up having to do during itsextensive beta test program of Win95.What we do take umbrage with is all of the hype that went on with this betaprogram.  Not only was Win95 the largest beta test in history, it was uniquein that thousands of copies of beta software were sold as part of Microsoft'sPreview program.  Savvy software vendors such as Symantec's Norton divisionjumped right on the bandwagon, with "preview" versions of its Win95 utilities.Come on, guys.  There's such a thing as carrying things too far!PentiumPro, not for beginnersJust when you thought it was safe to go back into the computer store, you findout there's a new big fish in the pond.  Intel has had great success prettymuch killing off the 486 in favor of its Pentium CPU.  But the Pentium is acouple of years old already, and it's old news.  By the time you read this, anumber of vendors will be advertising, and probably shipping, systems withIntel's next generation of CPU, the PentiumPro.  The PentiumPro has moretransistors, more cache RAM (moved to a separate chip), and at least on paper,more power.But just as was the case when almost every new generation of hardware has beenintroduced, the advances in hardware have outstripped most users' ability totake advantage of them.  Yes, you can use a PentiumPro-equipped PC as a sortof "super" Pentium.  But only if you are already running 32-bit applicationsunder a 32-bit operating system such as Windows NT, Win95, or OS/2.  If youstill run mostly 16-bit applications (as most of us do), early benchmarksindicate that these applications run slower on a PentiumPro than on a Pentium.Additionally, the early marketing hype on the PentiumPro talked up thebenefits that this new CPU would bring to Asymmetric Multiprocessing.  Thistechnology uses several CPUs within a system and splits the computational loadbetween them.  Unfortunately, it's been more difficult to get this technologyworking reliably than the vendors had anticipated.  Even with the highlytouted PentiumPro.Make no mistake about it.  Intel will be successful with the PentiumPro CPU,just as it has been with its other CPU products in the past.  It just won'thappen overnight.  The Pentium CPU, which will achieve speed of 150s and 175MHz this year, is still going to be the CPU of preference for a while.IBM 1-2-3?And, as long as we're talking about strange acquisitions, let's not forgetIBM's 3 billion dollar purchase of Lotus.  You've got to admire IBM; it's acompany that's succeeded in spite of itself.  First there was the IBM PC, aproduct that none of IBM's top management at the time believed would sell.When it took off like a rocket, quickly becoming the standard for desktopcomputing, IBM made a series of incredible design decisions.  Remember thePCjr?  How about IBM's version of the Compaq transportable?  The P70?  And whocan forget the MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) bus?As incredible as it may seem with this track record, IBM still manages to makelots of money.  When you're that big, it takes an awful lot to throw you offthe course.  At the same time, Big Blue doesn't exactly have a stellar recordin applications software either.  How many of you remember TopView, IBM'sanswer to the original Windows?  The IBM Accounting Series?  Hollywood?  Wereyou even aware that IBM started up a PC software division, acquired marketingrights to a number of products, then closed down the division?And who else but IBM could consider OS/2 a hit?  Sure, it really is a greatoperating system, and it has shipped a couple of million copies, about whatWin95 shipped in the first month of availability.  Even IBM provides Windowson its Aptiva PCs that it sells through Radio Shack.With this string of software successes behind it, it kind of makes sense thatIBM would want Lotus.  After all, Lotus has the tremendously successful 1-2-3,which will hopefully be available for Win95 by the time you read this.  Thenthere's AmiPro, oops, we mean WordPro, the hit word-processing package.We admit it, we're being mean.  Accountants still use 1-2-3, probably morethan any other specific user group.  But how many are buying the newestversion when they go looking for an upgrade?  1-2-3 has steadily given groundto Excel as Windows has become the operating system of choice.  It's possiblefor a product to go into a slide and recover, but it doesn't happen often.Most of the other Lotus applications, such as Freelance Graphics, are alsobeing overtaken by products from other vendors.But it's a good bet that IBM really wanted Lotus for the wildly successfulNotes product.  Notes is the premier groupware product on the market today,and it almost single-handedly set many of the standards for workflow officeproducts.  But the paradigm has changed with the popularity of the Internet.Notes was designed around (and optimized for) a network environment.  TheInternet is sort of a super wide-area network, and the current version ofNotes doesn't work as well with it as some other technologies.  You can besure IBM is working on it; it's got a lot of strength and experience inclient-server technology, which is one of the bases of the Internet.Having many of Lotus's top management people take a hike after the acquisitioncan't be helping matters, however.  Notes is a "big company" kind of product.Lots of "big companies" have made large investments in Notes technology, sothere's a very strong reason for IBM to make a commitment to keeping themomentum going with the product.The downside is that technology changes quickly; witness the Internet.  Andwhile momentum can often be good, it also makes it difficult to changedirections quickly.Will Notes (and Lotus) survive the IBM approach?  Right now the acquisition isa Mixed Bag.  But it could go either way this year.Color lasers:  Set lasers on intermittentOn paper, a color laser printer is almost irresistible.  For around $6,000, ornot quite twice what one of the original LaserJet printers sold for, you getthe best of both worlds.  When you need black and white, your printer zoomsout a speedy 12 pages per minute.  And, when there's a client presentation orreport to do, gorgeous color pages flow from the printer, on plain paper, at 3pages per minute.  With competition for clients getting fiercer by the minute,even that six grand price tag doesn't seem all that imposing, measured againstthe print-on-demand capabilities offered by one of the new color lasers.Color inkjets are terrific, but ah, for a color laser!That's the way it would work if a color laser was as easy to use out of thebox as regular monochrome lasers are.  That hasn't been our experience,however.  When a major vendor of color lasers offered us the opportunity lastyear to look at its latest model, we jumped at the chance.  Weighing in atover 100 pounds, it took two of us to unpack it and move it into position, anda fair amount of time to set it up.  Mechanically, with four different colortoners (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black), these printers are more complexthan a single-color laser.  Even this setup, though somewhat time-consuming,isn't beyond the abilities of most potential users.But in several months of testing, we ran into problem after problem.  Flakydrivers for Windows and Windows NT drove us nuts.  Problems with long printjobs were also disconcerting.  Sometimes the job printed in its entirety,sometimes the same job printed halfway through, then started spewing pages ofPostScript code.  The vendor's technical support was helpful, but in the endwe decided that we had experienced just too many problems to continue ourreview.  Thanking the vendor, we offered to come back at a later time foranother look.We have another vendor's color laser currently under review at the moment.This is a new product, and the vendor has a strong background in providingterrific software drivers.  We won't mention the vendor since we want somemore experience before we decide on a full-scale review, but so far, so good.We've been running Windows 3.11 drivers under Win95 with no problems yet.  Thenext step is to try networking the unit and moving it between a number ofdifferent PCs.  At over 100 pounds (all color lasers are heavy!), this won'tbe easy, but we want to make sure that this unit doesn't have the sameproblems we ran into with the last printer.  If it doesn't, than you canexpect a review soon, and maybe in next year's Diamonds and Dogs, we canchange the Mixed Bag into a Diamond.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Top Financial Planning SoftwareFinancial planning software can help you and your clients find perfect ways toearn more money.  Here's a selection of top packages to help you find theperfect solution for your clients' needs.The All-Star Line-Up.  BNA Income Tax Planner, BNA Software, 1231 25th St.,NW, Washington, DC 20037, $495; with Fifty State Planner, $890.  Available nowfor either Windows or plain DOS (the DOS version is called BNA Income TaxSpreadsheet), BNA's planner lets you project federal income tax for up to 10years.  With the optional Fifty State Planner, you can do the same for all 50states, the District of Columbia and New York City.  It calculates regular,alternative minimum and capital gains, self employment, lump sum and estimatedtaxes and lets you input data from K-1s and 1099s.  Along with the Income TaxPlanner, BNA sells a Corporate Tax Planner and Estate Tax Planner.Easy Money Plus, Money Tree Software, 1753 Wooded Knolls Dr., Philomath, OR97370, (503) 929-2140, $500; Golden Years, $500; Retirement Solutions Plus,$250.  Easy Money Plus prepares the key pieces in a client's financial plan,including net worth, cash flow, retirement, survivor, education funding,estate taxes and income taxes.  It uses questionnaires to create its reports.Golden Years produces a 52-year projection of assets, income, expenses andincome taxes using a Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows template.Retirement Solutions Plus supplies nine programs that cover lump sum and earlyretirement distributions, 401(k) and IRA accumulation accounts and otherretirement issues.ExecPlan, ExecPlan, Inc., 777 Alexander Rd., Princeton, NJ 08540, (609)987-5000, $1,995.  ExecPlan's estate-planning features let you draw up assetdistribution plans.  Using a flowchart, you move assets between family membersand the program recomputes the results.ExecPlan also offers federal and state tax planning, retirement and educationplanning, stock option analysis and cash management.  You can do investmentplanning, draw up a capital needs analysis in case of disability or death andprepare a financial profile.Vista, ViewPlan, Inc., PO Box 80788, San Diego, CA 92138, (800) 826-2127,$699.  A Windows-based estate-planning package, Vista provides visualpresentation tools, such as flowcharts and graphs, along with text, thatillustrate estate tax consequences for your clients.  A DOS version, EstateForecast Model, is available, and ViewPlan offers Data+, a $99 Windows and DOSadd-on program to help you gather client asset information.In addition, ViewPlan sells Factuary, a $349 Windows program for calculatingwhat-if scenarios and tax effects for clients; Progeny, a $349 DOS productthat graphically displays the tax benefits of using generation skipping; andBenequick, a $349 Windows and DOS product that calculates charitable gift taxdeductions and illustrates their benefits.  Later in the year, ViewPlanintends to offer Beneview, a Windows product that will graphically display thetax advantages of charitable trusts.Expert Series, Sterling Wentworth, 57 W.  200 South, Ste.  500, Salt LakeCity, UT 84101, (800) 752-6637, $695 per module, $1,995 for full system.Sterling Wentworth's Windows update to its DOS-based Planman incorporatesRetirement Expert, Portfolio Expert, Estate Expert, Risk Management Report andExpert Tool Kit modules.  Retirement Expert provides 55 reports that you cancustomize through a drag-and-drop interface.Portfolio Expert lets you evaluate your clients' investment objectives anddefine 10 portfolio categories and nine portfolio allocations.Estate Expert analyzes your clients' current estate value and tax liabilitiesand estimates what they'll be in the future.The Risk Management Report covers survivor needs and disability income.  Andthe Expert Tool Kit handles lump sum distributions, accumulation, mortgagerefinance, income tax and cash flow.Financial Planning Professional, Lumen Systems, Inc., 4300 Stevens CreekBlvd., Ste.  270, San Jose, CA 95129, (800) 233-3461, $1,495 single-user.This comprehensive financial planning system can produce either modular orfull plans, or macro or micro plans, depending on the amount of informationyou want.Leonard 2000, Mobius Group, P.O.  Box 13959, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,(800) 632-3044, $1,500.  Leonard 2000 generates professional-looking reportspacked with information and graphs.  The reports are organized into sectionsfor the Objective and Recommendations.In addition, Mobius sells Leonard 5000, which covers asset and riskmanagement, cash flow and income taxes and retirement and estate planning.M-PREPS (Professional Retirement Planning System), a $200 product from Mobius,offers extensive modeling, historical rates of return for assets, andprojections in full color reports.PFP Partner, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, P.O.  Box2209, Jersey City, NJ 07303-2209, (800) 226-5800, $595 for AICPA members, $655for non-members.  The AICPA's financial planning product automates goalcalculations, producing a five-year statement of projected net worth,five-year cash flow projection and tables for education, retirement anduser-specified goals.In addition, the software lets you try out what-if scenarios, showing whathappens when you increase annual contributions according to any rate.  Ithandles risk management and performs a needs analysis for life and disabilityinsurance.Professional Series, International Financial Data Systems, Inc., P.O.  Box888165, Atlanta, GA 30356-0165, (800) 554-8004, Professional Series/3, $599;Professional Series/2, $399; Penny Pincher II, $199.  Professional Series/3provides an interactive database, including an investment and tax shelterlibrary, client directory, balance sheet projection by asset category,mortality table, tax rate maintenance programs and a variety of personalizedreports, including five-year projections of AMT and federal income tax.Professional Series/2 is a more scaled back product that can store up to 30investments or tax shelters.  Penny Pincher II analyzes net worth, educationcost and capital needs.Profiles Plus, Financial Profiles, Inc., 5421 Avenida Encinas, Ste.  A,Carlsbad, CA 92008, (800) 237-6335, $695.  Profiles Plus includes personalfinancial planning and business planning modules, client data management and arun-time version of Harvard Graphics.ProPlan, Financial Planning Consultants, Inc., 2507 N.  Verity Pkwy., P.O.Box 430, Middletown, OH 45042-0430, (800) 666-1656, $495; Lifescape graphingmodule, $85; monthly support, $95.  ProPlan handles planning in a variety ofareas:  income tax, investment, risk management, educational funding, cashflow, estate, survivor income and retirement.  It figures estate income andliquidity, analyzes retirement income and retirement account projections andcomputes the effects of disability for either spouse.Quicken Financial Planner, Intuit, P.O.  Box 3014, Menlo Park, CA 94026, (800)816-8025, $39.95.  This retirement planning product takes your clients who useQuicken through an interview about their finances and retirement goals andbuilds a plan.  To refine the plan, they can just click a button and see whathappens if they save more money or less in the bank, retire sooner rather thanlater, and invest more conservatively or aggressively.  The program helpschoose an appropriate mutual fund and assists with planning other goals suchas college and a second home purchase.  To top it all off, there are 30minutes of multimedia advice from Newsweek columnist Jane Bryant Quinn.Total Resource, Wilson Associates International, Inc., 1355 Terrell Mill Rd.,Bldg.  1462, Ste.  200, Marietta, GA 30067, (800) 831-7636, $2,495 ($1,000rebate available).  Total Resource lives up to its name, with capabilities inthe areas of marketing, practice management, asset tracking and portfoliomanagement, general financial planning, tax and cash flow, retirement, estate,insurance, education, disability and compliance and commission tracking.  Itincludes a database of 2,500 securities and lets you set up your own assetcategories for portfolio tracking.You can also set up a client prospect database with the system, usequestionnaires to gather data from clients and produce financial statements.For other purposes, you can produce a survivor needs analysis, see the cashvalue of insurance policies, analyze disability needs for your clients andtheir spouses and track the status of buy and sell security orders.Financial planning software can provide valuable information for your clientsand rewarding returns for your practice.MICHAEL COHN is senior editor of Accounting Technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Financial Planners' Secrets of SuccessAfter 10 years of grinding out monthly financial statements and tax returns,Peggy Ruhlin shut down her CPA practice to go into financial planning.  Andshe never looked back.  At the height of the next season, she called herharried friends at the old firm.  "I'm going skiing," she told them.  "Whatare you doing?"  She could almost hear their teeth gnashing.  "I went on twovacations during that first tax season.  It was wonderful."Since then, Ruhlin has built a major financial planning practice, Boudros &Ruhlin, in Columbus, Ohio.  Boudros & Ruhlin manages about $250 million inclient funds, making it a major discount broker's biggest operator in theregion.And she is not alone.  More and more tax and accounting professionals, many ofthem CPAs, are getting into financial planning.  Some enter the field byaccident, pushed by faithfulclients seeking help as they enter their most fruitful years.  Others arepulled by the huge promise of an exploding market of monied but fretfulbaby-boomers.Different Challenges.  To be sure, the typical fee-only financial planningfirm remains as small a business as the average tax and accounting practice.Industry sources say most offices have one owner, who may net about $75,000 ayear, and one assistant.  About 25 percent of the financial planners arewomen, a much higher level of ownership than in accounting.  Few practiceswill have more than $10 million in funds under management, priced at a 1% feeor less.But freed from billing by the hour, a practitioner's income is limited only byhis or her ability to develop clients.  Fees based on a percentage of assetsunder management can rise with little or no incremental costs, meaning everynew dollar falls straight to the bottom line.  In a bull market year, everytick upward in the Standard & Poor's index is another clang of the assetmanager's cash register.  "When the S&P is up 25%," said one practitioner,"clients don't notice the 1% annual charge.""If your target market is small business and professionals," says CPA BobPhillips, "you end up dealing with financial planning issues whether you likeit or not."  Phillips is one of eight partners at the CPA firm of Whipple &Co., which, with 60 people and revenue of more than $5 million, is one of the10 largest firms in Indianapolis.In his firm, Phillips is the one charged with the mission of building thefinancial planning practice.  "We decided years ago to help our clients plantheir personal lives as systematically as we do their businesses," he says.As a result, Phillips is now playing an active role in his clients' investmentdecisions and portfolio structuring.But serious financial planning work, which always involves actual investmentdecisions and execution, is much different from traditional estate planning.The leading financial planners, whether they work on commission or onfee-only, relish their roles as active players.  They share a desire to bemore than a mere advisor.  They also cherish the challenge of makinginvestment decisions, choosing products and running money.People-Oriented Focus.  Many traditional CPAs and tax professionals just don'thave the constitution for it.  "There's a lot more uncertainty in this work,"says Phillips.  "All of a sudden, you are much more accountable for a lot ofthings you can't control.""You have to be very people-oriented," adds CPA Cynthia Conger.  "It's a lotmore difficult for the technical types to get into the counseling aspects ofthis work."  Conger, now one of two principals in the Arkansas FinancialGroup, in Little Rock, earned her CPA certificate in 1981, using it first as acorporate controller and later in insurance sales.  She started full-blown,comprehensive financial planning in 1985 with an associate from the insuranceagency.At first, she shunned tax returns.  But bending to client demand, todayConger's Arkansas Financial Group handles about 175 tax customers a year,including corporate and fiduciary forms.  Her firm also handles accounting atsix to eight small businesses.  But the core of the business is the 250 to 300financial plans she writes a year and the $35 million in assets undermanagement.  Eventually, she and her partner plan to launch a trust company toadminister all the trusts they've put in place for clients.  But before that,Conger may launch a line of administrative services for individuals, to handleroutine bill-paying and banking chores, which could be invoiced monthly.  "Wedeal with a lot of double-doctor households who just don't have the time to dothis kind of thing," she says.Gary Shalhoob, a Dallas financial planner, agrees.  "CPAs need a much broaderperspective as a financial planner," says Shalhoob.  "You have to weigh notonly the estate and tax consequences, but also the investment ramifications aswell."  Shalhoob developed financial planning units first at Bank of Americaand then at Deloitte & Touche and Price Waterhouse before starting his ownfirm, Resource Management Group.  He is also a contributing author to "Tax &Financial Planning for Older Clients," issued by Practitioners Publishing Co.of Fort Worth, Texas, an affiliate of Faulkner & Gray Inc.Today Shalhoob works with CPAs, trading referrals, convinced that BigSix-sized financial planning practices are not economically sensible.  "Thisis not a business you can build on leverage," he says.  "All the service isvery personal, nothing can be delegated."  But firms are also limited in theirrange of movement.  They might be reluctant to recommend specific stocks orfinancial companies, if they are involved as auditors.  Mixing audit clientsand financial planning clients can also complicate carefully groomedrelationships.  "One bad year in the market for a CFO could blow your auditcontract," Shalhoob says.  And, with a big firm's overhead, pricing is aproblem if you can't work on commission.  "Anyone trying to do fee-onlyfinancial planning has a very difficult time making money," Shalhoob says.So, many CPA financial planners do what Ron Humeney has done.  Humeney, aSouthfield, Mich., CPA, runs two businesses-Starfire Financial, to handle taxpreparation, and Starfire Investment Advisory Sevices, to sell products andmanage assets.  If they are unfettered by CPA regulations, they might do whatEd Gerstein and Gregg Fisher have done.  Gerstein ran a Brooklyn, N.Y., taxpractice solo until two years ago when he brought nephew Gregg into thebusiness.  Today, Gerstein crunches tax returns for about 1,500 clients, whileFisher is attempting to leverage that database into a financial planningpractice.RICK TELBERG is editor of Accounting Today, also published by Faulkner & Gray.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996This Just In:  Getting Back to BusinessIf you cringe every time you hear another Congressperson say how great itwould be if only everybody paid a flat tax, it's time for you to investigateoptions in business tax preparation.  Compared to the near-universal gripingthat goes on about the 1040 individual tax, few politicians are getting muchsound bite time on the evening news if they propose axing corporation taxes.Sharpening your practice's focus on business tax clients could help save itfrom rough times in 1997.Perhaps in anticipation of greater demand for professional business taxproducts next year, software vendors are beefing up their 1065, 1120, and1120S lines with more capabilities this year.  Even if your firm already has asolid foundation of business tax clients and the software to service them, youmay want to consider where your current vendor is heading compared to othersin the industry.  We checked with them to find out what their plans are forthe software they'll be shipping this season.Alpine climbs every mountainAlpine Data is packing more features into its 1995 Tax/Pack Professionalbusiness modules.  You'll be able to access a preparer scratchpad from anyscreen, so you can take notes on a client whose return you're preparing.  Alsomore accessible will be the pop-up calculator, which you'll be able to bringup from within any field.  And a new monthly calendar utility will be poppingup as well.Alpine is also leaving room for your laser forms software.  It offers a laserfill feature that lets you view and enter data on laser forms that aren'tincluded in the Tax/Pack software.  Tax/Pack will then save the data that youtype in to a separate area from the business return data.Form 1120 customers will now be getting a full billing module.  And Alpineplans to add the billing module to its 1065 and 1120S products as well.AM wake-up callIt's morning in America, and AM Software is already enhancing its business taxsoftware for the coming season.  Whereas the AM-Tax LaserForms product was anoptional add-on last year, this year AM is including it with its 1065, 1120,and 1120S programs.  But despite bundling the laser software, AM isn'tignoring other types of printers.  It has improved its graphical printingfeatures, so you can get official-looking forms on inkjet and dot-matrixprinters without resorting to special fonts or extra software.Networked offices will now be able to enjoy network compatibility with AM-Tax,so multiple users can share data files while keeping their own systemsettings.  AM has also simplified data entry by offering convenient pick listson certain forms.  You'll be able to access them by pressing a function key,choose the entry you want, point to it, and the program will enter your choiceinto the field.Lower renewal prices will please existing customers.  They're down 20 percentto $129.  And to go along with the new network compatibility, you can addextra AM-Tax stations for only 20 percent of the original, first-computersoftware price.More pluses for AndersenArthur Andersen LLP is showing its Big 6 muscle with enhancements to its APlus business tax line.  A Plus Tax 1120 and 1065 are gaining per-returnpricing and more comprehensive calculations.  You'll also see interfaces tothe AICPA's ATB (Accountant's Trial Balance) and Andersen's own electronicworkpapers products.For 1065 users, Andersen is providing a special allocations worksheet, as wellas inter-product transfers of K-1 data.  The K-1's will automatically printwith the 1040, saving time for A Plus Tax 1040 users.  Also saving time willbe a direct interface to CD-ROM tax research products like CCH U.S.  MasterTax Guide, RIA OnPoint, and BNA Tax Practice Series.Andersen has tinkered with the A Plus interface as well, consolidating screensand improving screen and application flow.  A multimedia training course willbe available.  And on the boards for next year is a Windows version.If you're in the tax department of a large corporation or have large corporateclients, also check out the brand-new Windows-based AACTS (Arthur AndersenCorporate Tax Solutions) line.  Aimed at corporations with multiple entitiesor multiple filing responsibilities, it will handle federal and state taxcompliance, and prepare the 1120.  AACTS will integrate with other Windowsapplications, by using facilities like DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange), so it canupdate data from other Windows apps in real-time.One product in the AACTS line, DataOnDemand, will establish dynamic linksbetween an Excel spreadsheet and your corporate tax information.  Anotherproduct, AACTS Real-Time Tax, will integrate with high-end general ledgerapplications such as SAP and Oracle; it will also include support for SQL(Structured Query Language) and ODBC (Open Data Base Connectivity) standards.A third product, AACTS-International Planning, will let you build complex taxscenarios over multiple-year periods, such as calculating dividends and loansfrom foreign subsidiaries.  It's a whole new aact for Arthur Andersen.ATX enhances the spreadsheetATX Forms has enhanced its TaxSolver line of spreadsheet-based tax prepsoftware by adding a Windows-based forms program.  The result is ATX's newSaber line.  Unlike TaxSolver, which required you to combine the ATX templateswith either 1-2-3 or Excel, Saber cuts out the need for third-party softwareby including a built-in spreadsheet program.  Saber also provides an audittrail, along with the ability to create formulas and write directly on the taxforms.ATX sells its 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs in several ways.  Each return isavailable in a Basic version for $49, and a Professional version for $99.  TheBasic version includes a few of the most important supporting forms andschedules, along with extension and depreciation worksheets.  The Professionalversion provides more than 100 supporting forms and schedules, together withthe ability to create client letters and invoices.In addition, bundled packages are available for preparing the 1065, 1120, and1120S, along with other types of forms.  A basic version of this bundle,called Business Basic, sells for $149.  The Professional version costs $295.CCH proves it's a proCCH is upgrading the Windows version of its ProSystem fx 1065, 1120, and 1120Sprograms by adding interfaces to general ledger and time and billing products.Also being added to the 1120S product is an interface to CCH Tax Assistant forS Corporations, a practice management system with research, analysis, andcompliance features.Installation and printing will also be on the upswing in ProSystem fx.GoSystem keeps going and going...CLR/Fast-Tax's GoSystem 2 is really going places in both its DOS and Windowsversions.  The system now supports fast 28,800 bits per second transmissionspeeds for electronic filing, and CLR will be offering NetWare 4.1 and Windows95 support as well this season.The 1065 program for DOS and Windows will let you perform multiple partnertransfers on the same day.  And it will handle transfers with capitalcontributions and distributions while using the same locator, as well as dotransfers for more than five excluded partners.The 1120 software for DOS and Windows will offer an express consolidationfeature to speed up consolidation time.  You'll also be able to delete rentalproperties.  In addition, CLR has reorganized the rent and royalty input, andwill be enhancing the 1120 program's list of activity codes.  The program willsummarize state tax liabilities and supply a common input for stateintangibles.The Windows version alone has several enhancements.  It now offersadministrative functions that used to be found only in the DOS version.  TheView menu will include a Received Date option.  And CLR is going to beproviding a Windows version of its TaxServer product and will support aWindows Portable Organizer.Upcoming hyperlink capabilities in the Windows product will add hyperlinks tofields, as well as "direct to organizer" hyperlinks.  Workpapers will allowoverrides, DIF import and export, and hyperlinking by field.Also on the way are better navigation capabilities, including a FileManager-like expanding folder metaphor.  You'll be able to customize menuswith activity descriptions, toggle menus on or off, bring up a new "activeforms" view, and edit and format customized letters for all return types.Lots of changes are coming for GoSystem users.Digitax does graphicsCold River Software has been promoting its Windows-based 1040 software,Veritax, for the past couple of seasons.  But even its DOS-based tax product,Digitax Business Returns, is getting some graphical enhancements.  The 1065,1120, and 1120S programs will be offering graphically enhanced supportingschedules and letters.  Also going graphical are the manuals.  They'll beavailable in both printed form and in a printable, searchable Adobe Acrobatelectronic format.Cold River's also moving toward better technical support.  A 24-hour FaxBackservice is now available, as well as a home page on the Internet's World WideWeb.  Surf the Cold River rapids at http://www.cold-river.com.CPAS makes new convertsCPASoftware's business tax software is undergoing a conversion for theupcoming filing season.  You'll be able to convert entities from 1120 to1220S, or 1120S to 1120.  And CPAS is not only converting its 1120, it'sconsolidating it as well.  You'll be able to consolidate up to 10 corporationswith the 1120, as well as prepare supplementals for the first four pages ofyour consolidations, along with supplementals for applicable forms, schedules,and supplemental schedules, such as the 4562, Schedule D, and other income.In addition to conversion, salvation is at hand.  CPAS's new archivingfeatures let you save tax returns, input detail, workpapers, and other filesin a compressed format.  CPAS is passing the silver platter too by offeringaccess to CD-ROM research material.  State clicks will be another new option,allowing you to buy use of a state package one return at a time (similar tothe pay-per-return concept).Speaking of states, you'll be able to compute up to five states with a singlecompute.  New states joining the CPAS flock include Arizona, California, NewYork, and Texas for the 1120.  Entering the 1120S fold will be California, NewYork, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin, and new 1065 states for Arizona, California,New Jersey, and New York.  Only one new city return will be added to the 1065,1120, and 1120S, but it's a big one:  New York City.Creating the UltrabusinessCreative Solutions is building a better business solution for this comingseason.  It's adding 10 new states to its 1120/1120S package, UltraTax/1120,upping its coverage to 31 states for both C and S corps.  In UltraTax/1065, 13new states are joining the Union, for a grand total of 23.  These new programswill be available on the UltraTax CD-ROM and as pay-per-return options.UltraTax/1120 is also gaining a two-year comparison and calculation to supportthe IRC Section 1377 (a)(2) election for termination of a shareholderinterest.A new feature to speed data entry to the ultra-quick level will be an Index ofTax Subjects that helps you locate the proper section of the appropriate dataentry screen when you're not quite sure where to input a particular item.You'll also be able to generate custom selection lists of commonly used itemsspecific to your area, such as local banks.Drake makes goodDrake Software will let you print all its forms in either laser or dot-matrixmode this season.  You'll be able to access on-line help for almost every dataentry field, and written documentation will be improved.  Over 35 federalforms will be available.  Drake will also offer a new pay-per-return option,priced at $250 for up to 20 returns per computer, and $10 apiece foradditional returns.Dunphy does itDunphy Systems' federal 1120 program will offer support this season for Form1120-W (Estimated Tax for Corporations), with a three-page quarterlyworksheet.  And Dunphy will provide Ohio users with a new quarterly look-uptable for county personal property rates in its Ohio FT1120/FT1120S package.Michigan users too will be seeing some enhancements.  The new Michigan SingleBusiness Tax (SBT) program will support all 17 forms for that tax, includingextensions, estimates, and amended returns.  You'll also be able to importcompany and shareholder information into the Michigan SBT from other federalprograms, such as Dunphy's 1040, 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The MichiganSBT will even include laser forms software, so you can make official-lookingprintouts for your Michigan business clients.Exactax minds its businessExactax has been integrating software from the Business Tax Service of NewYork with its own system, and this season will be offering a trial balanceworksheet input system.  You'll be able to input information through a trialbalance income statement and balance sheet into the Business Tax System, soyou can complete the books and use the year-end trial balance, instead ofconverting book data into tax return format.Other enhancements will include automated multiple-state processing, alongwith new state returns for Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware,District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, NewJersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Virginia.  Exactaxis also making its supporting schedules and instruction letters easier toread, and its estimated tax section more comprehensive and automatic.  Theprogram will compute Section 277 Co-op Housing figures, and will offer moreflexibility when you enter detail on a Schedule K-1.Business Tax System will provide comprehensive net operating loss andcontribution carryover schedules, along with more comprehensive financialstatements, such as the statement of cash flows, interim financial statements,and sole proprietor (Schedule C) financial statements.  You'll be able togenerate a financial statement from the book data you enter to create a taxreturn.In addition, the system will automatically print the original extension formfor each return that you have on extension.  And it will handle unlimitedK-1's and rental income, as well as comprehensively report rental detail foreach K-1.  You'll be able to prepare automatic book/tax adjustments for itemssuch as depreciation, amortization, contributions, entertainment, penalties,officers life insurance, federal income tax, Section 263A, and automobilelease inclusion.  Exactax will offer expanded customer service hours, from 6am to 7 pm Pacific time (or 9 am to 10 pm Eastern time).  That should matchmany accounting firms' regular hours this tax season.Intuit pursues two marketsFor tax year 1995, Intuit is making a big push to upgrade its business taxproducts, for professional tax preparers and small-business taxpayers alike.A new Homebase feature in the professional software will provide convenientaccess to client files and main program functions (such as printing andtransferring).  You'll be able to access the entire TurboTax ProSeries linefrom the Homebase as well, and generate any number of copies you want of formsand schedules for inclusion with your clients' returns.ProSeries/1120 for Windows will offer an ACE depreciation worksheet.  Fifteennew states will join the corporate business return list:  Colorado,Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, MichiganSBT, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, andWisconsin.  Client files will be interchangeable with the DOS version.  Andpull-down pick lists will be available for certain fields, such as businesscodes and depreciation methods.ProSeries/1120S for Windows will add a shareholder's basis worksheet thatautomatically gets amounts from the Schedule K-1 worksheets.  You'll be ableto have an unlimited number of K-1's, and Intuit has improved both K-1 inputsheets and data entry.  Thirteen new states have been recruited to the 1120Steam:  Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, NewJersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin.Meanwhile, partnerships haven't been overlooked by Intuit.  ProSeries/1065 forWindows supports unlimited K-1's and the new K-1 input sheets, as well asinterchangeable client files with the DOS version.  Seven new partnershipstates include Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, andPennsylvania.  Furthermore, the California Limited Liability (CA 568) companyreturn will be available this season, and it will read and transfer data fromthe 1065 program.Intuit isn't stopping there with business tax software.  As discussed in thisissue's Editor's Note, it's also bringing out TurboTax for Business.  This$79.95 product will enable small-business owners to prepare their own 1065,1120, and 1120S returns.  As with the personal version of the 1040 product,TurboTax for Business will include tax advice and tax planning suggestions.Complete IRS instructions and full-text versions of IRS publications for smallbusinesses (as well as the text of a book called "Tax Savvy for SmallBusiness" by tax attorney Fred Daily) will be available on-line, and the helpfacility will be context sensitive.TurboTax for Business will use an interview approach to take taxpayers throughthe preparation process.  It can import accounting data from QuickBooks andQuicken, and will provide automatic error checking and tax-saving tips whilepreparing a return.  Intuit will be offering 49 Windows state modules, soldseparately.  After TurboTax for Business prepares a return, it will go backand check for omissions and errors, and alert users to possible audit items.In addition, Intuit will be bundling Netscape's Navigator with the package, sotaxpayers will be able to access the new TurboTax home page on the World WideWeb (http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax) to get tech support, tax advice andinformation, and state software.  MacInTax for Business will also be availablefor Mac users.Lacerte adds upLacerte Software is adding more forms, features, and states to itsprofessional tax prep line.  New to its 1120 program, for example, is Form1120W, the Estimated Tax Worksheet.  And joining the Lacerte 1120 states willbe Delaware, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.In the Form 1120S program, you'll be able to print K-1 instructions, as wellas collated copies of Schedule K-1, the shareholder transmittal letter, andK-1 instructions.  When preparing S Corp returns, you'll have the opportunityto calculate the excess net passive income tax, and print certain electionstatements for S Corps.  New 1120S states will include Florida, Kansas,Missouri, and Utah.For the 1065 program, Lacerte will now print Schedule K-1 instructions, alongwith the contents of the client letter.  States will follow the example of thefederal program on the invoice setup; partnership states will allow forbilling per state K-1, so you'll have an additional option besides billing ina lump sum.  The Additional K-1's printing option will include a Schedule K-1collation routine, with three new global user options and three new overridecodes that you can make specific for your clients.  When you get to the end ofa return and set the Additional K-1's to generate a specific number of copies,the program will print the Schedule K-1 Transmittal Letter, federal ScheduleK-1, federal Schedule K-1 instructions, the state Schedule K-1 (or aLacerte-generated Partner Summary), and (when required) the state Schedule K-1instructions.  You can then distribute them to as many partners and members inyour firm as you please.The new Jumptopartner routine doesn't necessarily put you on the fast track topromotion in your firm.  But it does let you jump back and forth betweenpartners in all of the 1065 program's Special Allocation screens.  Even whenyou jump in this way, the cursor and line position will stay the same as inthe last entry, making it more convenient to enter special allocations.  Thisroutine won't replace other input methods; it's simply one more handy-dandyfeature provided by Lacerte.  Also new to the 1065 will be state returns forFlorida, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.For 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs, new enhancements will include bookdepreciation schedules that let you enter and track depreciation for bookpurposes.  You'll also have the ability to print different numbers of copiesof depreciation schedules for 1995 and 1996 regular tax, AMT, and bookpurposes.  Lacerte will also let you amend prior-year returns as well asoverride "corrected" amounts.  There's power for you:  the ability to changehistory.  Also new for this coming season in all the programs are slip sheetsand filing instructions.Laser surgeryLaser Systems is powering up its TaxWorks Corporation 1120, S Corporation1120S, and Partnership 1065 Business Systems for next season.  All threeprograms will generate financial statements that are prepared on an income taxbasis.  You'll also be able to print a customizable letter to accompany thestatements.  When you update clients from last year, you'll have the option ofcarrying the ending balance sheet detail information over to the currentyear's beginning balance sheet fields.Three new options will be available to smooth out K-1 processing and printing.These will let you process, view, and print returns with or without the K-1information included.In all the Business Systems will be a new General Information screen.  AndLaser Systems has standardized the format of the date, Social Security, andEmployer Identification Number fields.In addition, Laser Systems is adding electronic filing to the 1065 System.For the 1120 System, a new Federal Net Operating Loss Worksheet and CharitableContribution Worksheet will help you keep track of NOL and charitablecontribution deduction and carryover figures.  Lastly, the 1120 System isgetting Form 1120X.  X marks the spot for TaxWorks development.Corporate reliefMicro Vision Software is integrating its 1120 and 1120S software, Tax ReliefCORP, with other vendors' software to improve these programs' productivity.  Ageneral ledger link will let you import data from major client write-up andgeneral ledger programs.  The software will also link with Microsoft Excel andTimeslips.  And the company recently purchased Summit Software, anotherbusiness tax software developer.New states for the Windows version of Tax Relief CORP will include New Jerseyand New York.  For DOS users, new states are Colorado, Delaware, Georgia,Ohio, and Texas.  Through a third-party developer, it's providing DOS userswith integrated state programs for Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, District ofColumbia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire,New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.For 1065 DOS users, Tax Relief PART is adding two new state programs developedby Micro Vision, California and New Jersey.  And through a strategicpartnership, DOS users will be getting access to more state programs thatintegrate with Micro Vision's own DOS-based software.  These will includeAlabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma,Oregon, S.  Carolina, W.  Virginia, and Wisconsin.For all its Tax Relief products, Micro Vision has added the ability to dialinto its bulletin board from within the program so you can downloadcorrections and get questions answered.  Client files will be fullyinterchangeable between the DOS and Windows software, and Tax Relief forWindows will also be compatible with both the DOS and Windows state modules.You'll be able to change your data path from the activate screen, and MicroVision is adding expanded fields throughout the software, along with moredetailed diagnostic messages.  Finally, Tax Relief products will be availableon CD-ROM with either an unlimited use license or on a pay-per-return basis.Pencil Pushers gets to the pointThe Damirus Corp., which makes Pencil Pushers Tax Software, is focusing mostof its development efforts on a future Windows product and on shipping its DOSproduct bug-free and on time.  In the meantime, for this tax season, it'sadding a Florida corporate return to its business tax line, along with a fewunusual business credit forms.SCS/Compute advances on both frontsSCS/Compute is enhancing both its Tax Machine and LMS Tax lines.  For TaxMachine, you'll be able to print K-1 labels for partners, shareholders, andbeneficiaries.  New state modules will include Louisiana, Mississippi, and NewMexico.  One new city module, a Philadelphia S Corporation return, will alsobe available.  Tax Machine will be released on CD-ROM, and you'll be able tolink the program to other accounting products, such as SCS's own DataWrite andthe AICPA's ATB.  Or you can use Audisys's TAXi to import accountinginformation into Tax Machine.For LMS Tax Business Programs, SCS will be offering simplified data entryscreens and input forms for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S.  You'll be able toprint mailing labels for each K-1 in the partnership and S-Corp returns.  SCSis improving LMS's link to DataWrite and ATB, and offering TAXi for importingdata from other accounting applications.TaascFORCE is up to the taskTax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TaascFORCE) is building a betterProfessional Tax System.  This coming season, it will be providing a freePractice Manager that generates specialized client lists and sorted mailinglabels.  Other new extras will include file compression, the ability to createan itemized schedule for any input field, carryforward of specified stateinformation from last year's state returns, and support for up to 999depreciable assets.New states for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S products will include Alabama,Arkansas, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Louisiana, and New Mexico.  Newforms on the roster will be 1120A (Corporation Short Form), 1120X (CorporationAmended Return), 2848 (Power of Attorney), 8271 (Tax Shelter RegistrationNumber), 8586 (Low Income Housing Credit), 8822 (Change of Address), and TD F90-22 1 (Foreign Bank Accounts).On the 1120S and 1065, TAASC has enhanced the Schedule K-1 in several ways.The software will automatically handle special allocations, let you selectwhich shareholder or partner K-1's to adjust for rounding, and printshareholder/partner numbers on each K-1.In addition, the Professional Tax System will be able to convert existing CCorp data to an S Corp return, and will add a new field where you can enterthe title of your firm's signing officer.  The transmittal letter for thepartnership state programs will offer paragraphs about the tax due andestimated tax.  And Form 4684 will now support multiple casualty dates.  Nexttax season will be less of a casualty with TAASC on the job.TaxByte does moreTaxByte will be expanding the depreciation capabilities of its TaxCommissioner business tax products, increasing depreciation capacity from 250assets to 450.  A trial balance import feature is also new, along with anenhanced direct data input system, and more automatic calculations.  TaxBytehas also added general letters and customizable, client-specific letters foreach K-1, along with an enhanced, automated invoice feature that does updatesfor time and billing.In the 1120 package, there will be a net operating loss carryforward featurefrom prior years.  Tax Commissioner will also carry over depreciation from the1040 version into the business tax products and perform conversions from oneentity to another, such as for a C Corporation that becomes an S Corp.  Lotsof transitions are underway in the business tax arena, and Tax Commissionerwill be policing them.TAX$IMPLE builds upTAX$IMPLE's 1995 Business Tax Programs are looking to 1995 and beyond.They'll include a three-year comparative summary report and will automaticallygenerate supporting schedules.  You'll be able to do year-to-year transfersfor all your balance sheets, worksheets, and supporting schedules.  TAX$IMPLEwill also support RAM drives, and will let you transfer business K-1'sdirectly into the TAX$IMPLE 1040 program.  The business programs are alsogaining Forms 851, 1120X, 1139, 4466, 8810, the 1120-A short form, Schedule H,and Schedule A for Form 1120-W.Mouse support is also on schedule for this season, along with enhancedprinting features.  You'll be able to choose specific forms and the number ofcopies per form to print, as well as print state and federal forms incombination.  Text for 22 topics will be available for your transmittal orcover letters.  You'll be able to say plenty with TAX$IMPLE.TenKey has it togetherTenKey will be offering four business tax programs in one this season.  TaxShop Entities will contain 1120, 1120S, 1065, and 1041 programs in the samepackage, together with laser software and a depreciation program.  Thesoftware will be available for Windows (with Windows 95 compatibility) thisseason, and you'll be able to transfer data from the DOS program to theWindows version.The Windows version will also include all the features in the DOS program,such as built-in electronic mail and communications.  This allows access toTenKey's on-line Problems Resolution Database, which gets updated with eachmessage received from an on-line user.Pennsylvania will be joining the entire Tax Shop Entities state roster, and tojust the 1065 software TenKey is also adding California, Illinois, and NewYork.  In addition, a third-party add-on program, TAXi Tax Import Bridge, willbe available to import data from other vendors' general ledger and clientwrite-up software into Tax Shop Entities.Growing UniversalUniversal Tax Systems is improving its TaxWise business tax software with agalaxy of new options.  You'll be able to print a mailing label with your taxreturns or from the Query Database Screen.  The program will highlightincomplete forms in red.  You'll also be able to invoke the 1120, 1120S, and1065 modules without exiting to DOS.  The program will flag estimated amounts,so you'll be able to distinguish them from your actual data.  Universal willalso let you order federal and state 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs from thesame CD-ROM platter as the 1040 and 1041.New for this season are 18 state business modules, bringing TaxWise's total to23 states:  Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia,Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, NewJersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin.  In addition, you'll have theability to print out as many blank forms as necessary for a client.New menu options will enable you to apply updates, install state software,copy master forms and macros from one user to another, batch your problemreturns together for transmission to Universal's service bureau, shell to DOS,and install soft fonts.  Universal will also be offering a conversion programfrom its 1040 product to do a prior-year carryforward of client data.In addition to these new features, Universal is enhancing some old ones.  Thebusiness modules will include customized database and diagnostic screens.Mailing labels will be able to contain phone numbers.  You'll be able to querythe database to learn the amount of a fee deposit, and access a scratchpad andcheck information when you've printed more than a single check.  The clientletter has improved to allow for multiple letters, letterhead paper,signatures, refund or balance-due amounts, and if-then logic for whichparagraphs to include.  The depreciation worksheet has also been enhanced,letting you access a new spreadsheet while TaxWise is displaying a list ofexisting assets.  It will let you compute next year's depreciation, displayit, and show a list of depreciated assets.  All in all, TaxWise seems to begetting wiser every year.Xpress train to your taxesXpress Software is improving practice management and database functions inXpress Business Returns, its 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The company isalso expanding the messages and diagnostics it provides for the preparationprocess.  And Xpress is developing an interface for importing data from otherprograms, along with adding state business returns for Alabama and Louisiana.Vendors like Xpress are making improvements where they can to their businesstax products.  And with the world of 1040 tax prep increasingly moving intothe hands of sophisticated, PC-equipped taxpayers, it's a good idea to beef upyour practice with the latest business tax software, so you can providewhatever services your business clients require.Michael Cohn is senior editor of Accounting Technology.For More InformationAlpine Data, Inc., 737 S.  Townsend Ave., Montrose, CO 81401, (800) 525-1040,fax (303) 249-8511, http:\\alpine@rmii.com.AM Software, PO Box 25010, Kansas City, MO 64119, (800) 858-8537, fax (816)741-1517.Arthur Andersen LLP, 2805 Fruitville Rd., Sarasota, FL 34237, (800) USA-1040,fax (813) 953-5310.CCH, Inc., Worldway Postal Center, PO Box 92938, Los Angeles, CA 90009, (800)45-PROFX, fax (310) 543-8104.CLR/Fast-Tax, 2395 Midway Rd., Carrolton, TX 75006, (800) FAST-TAX, fax (214)250-8104.Cold River Software, Inc., 4420 Varsity Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48108-2274, (800)DIGITAX, fax (313) 677-6647, http://www.-cold-river.com.CPASoftware, One Pensacola Plaza, Ste.  500, Pensacola, FL 32501, (904)434-2685, fax (904) 433-8198.Creative Solutions, 7322 Newman Blvd., Dexter, MI 48130, (800) 968-8900, fax(312) 426-5946.Drake Software, 106 Palmer St., Franklin, NC 28734, (800) 890-9500, fax (704)524-9549, http://www.1040.comDunphy Systems, Inc., 6740 Huntley Rd., Ste.103, Columbus, OH 43229, (614)431-0846, fax (614) 431-0776.Exactax, Inc., 2301 W.  Lincoln Ave., Ste.  100, Anaheim, CA 92801, (800)352-3638, fax (714) 778-2571.Intuit, Inc., 100 Juliad Ct., Ste.  107, Fredericksburg, VA 22406-1124, (800)934-1040, fax (800) 685-7036, http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax.Lacerte Software Corp., 4835 LBJ Freeway, Dallas TX 75244-6098, (800)765-7777, fax (214) 770-8955.Laser Systems, PO Box 407, Kaysville, UT 84037, (800) 230-2322, fax (801)552-8900.Micro Vision Software, Inc., 140 Fell Ct., Hauppauge, NY 11788-4360, (800)TAX-RELIEF, fax (516) 232-3481.Pencil Pushers Tax Software (division of the Damirus Corp.), 10 New EnglandExecutive Park, Burlington, MA 01803, (800) 370-2500, fax (617) 273-0575.SCS/Compute, Inc., 2252 Welsh Industrial Ct., St.  Louis, MO 63146, (800)326-1040 fax (206) 644-7372.Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TAASC), 6914 S.  Yorktown Ave., Tulsa, OK74136, (800) 998-9990, fax (918) 493-6189.TaxByte, Inc., 1801 6th Ave., Moline, IL 61265, (800) 245-8299, fax (309)764-0976.TAX$IMPLE, Inc., 3155 Rte.  10, Ste.  114, Denville, NJ 07834, (800) 323-2662,fax (201) 366-5877.TenKey, 5422 Carrier Dr., Ste.  201, Orlando, FL 32819, (800) 300-8244, fax(407) 351-0966, tssales@tenkey.com.Universal Tax Systems, Inc., 215 Broad St., Rome, GA 30161-3021, (800)755-9473, fax (706) 236-9168.Xpress Software, Inc., 1327 Broad River Rd., Columbia, SC 29210, (803)731-1040, fax (803) 750-4144.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?I've just come out of a meeting with Intuit, and I'm both impressed anddisturbed.  You know Intuit.  It's the company that bought TurboTax a fewyears back.  TurboTax already pretty much owned the consumer tax prep market,and a great deal of the professional market as well, when Intuit boughtChipSoft.  With savvy marketing and constant improvements, the vendor has beenable to keep its position in an increasingly turbulent and voracious market.Having captured the high ground, Intuit is about to fire the opening salvo ina new war.  And if you don't react the right way, and quickly enough, youcould be one of the ones who gets winged.Taking it to the streetsWhat I found both exciting and disturbing is Intuit's announcement of consumerversions of its business tax products.  Of course, "consumer" is probably abit of a misnomer.  Perhaps the term "retail" is more accurate, though theseproducts do differ a bit in capability from the ProSeries entity products.But make no mistake about it.  If you currently prepare 1065, 1120, or 1120Sreturns for the non-Fortune 1000 set, these products will let your currentclients do a pretty good job in many cases of preparing their own returns.  Aswith the current crop of retail, consumer-oriented 1040 products, just howgood a job depends on the complexity of the business transactions andorganization, and how savvy the person trying to produce the return is.  Atthe very least, if this series of products is even half as successful asIntuit's consumer version of TurboTax 1040, it has the potential to do a lotof damage to the revenue stream in many accounting and tax prep practices.The end of the world as we know it?This move into your client base isn't totally unexpected.  After all, did youreally think that the PC had empowered just you?  You haven't been blind tothe advantages offered by computerizing, and neither will some of yourclients.  And the more work they do, the less will be left for you.But this is old news.  The accounting profession has undergone some dramaticchanges in the last decade.  And it will continue to change in the years tocome.  That's part of life.  And, to be realistic, most professions undergosimilar, if sometimes less dramatic, changes.  Just look at the practice ofmedicine.  With the advent of managed health care plans more of the burden ofthe health care process is placed on the consumer.  FDA approval of formerlyprescription medications for over-the-counter sales has accelerated thisprocess.  Think of these products as the Quickens and TurboTaxes of themedical profession.New challenges = new opportunitiesBut the availability of more options for self-care hasn't put doctors out ofbusiness.  After all, you've always had the option of forgoing the physicianand trying to go it alone.  Sometimes you can.  Unless you're in frail shape,there's not much a doctor can do for you if you're suffering from a cold orflu.  You can pretty much take care of yourself.  It's when that cold or fluturns into something more dangerous that the doctor's involvement becomes notonly desirable, but frequently critical.  You might be as good as any doctorwhen it comes to a cold, but pneumonia is another story.  That requiresmedications that aren't available to you without a doctor's say-so.  Andthere's good reason for that.  Administration of these medications requiresthat someone have the training and experience to recognize when they areappropriate, and the judgment to know which medication, and how much of it, touse.And training, experience, and judgment are really what are important in ourprofession as well.  Yes, you are going to lose business clients to computerprograms that let them prepare their own returns.  Get used to that, becauseeven if it doesn't happen this year, it is going to happen.But that doesn't mean you have to give up your tax practice, only that youhave to change with the times.  Because no matter how easy Intuit and othervendors make the tax preparation process, there are always going to bequestions that require a judgment call.  And judgment isn't something that canbe easily packaged in a computer program, artificial intelligence researchnotwithstanding.  It comes from experience, and the long application of thisexperience to real-world situations and decisions.I think that the real money isn't going to be made by the vendors of tax prepsoftware.  It's going to be made by readers like you who have the savvy, guts,and vision to be able to adapt.  To stop thinking of themselves as taxpreparers, and start thinking of themselves as tax consultants.  And who takethe initiative in marketing themselves as a solution and source of experiencedadvice for those consumers of both the personal and business tax prep productswho are willing to do the grunt work, but smart enough to understand that theywill occasionally need to turn to someone with the training and background tohelp them face those judgment calls.New challenges have a way of also creating new opportunities.  I think thepractice of our profession is going to be very different in coming years.  AndI also think that Accounting is going to be not only a lot more interesting,but for people with the right attitude, a lot more profitable as well.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting SoftwareIf you or your clients need an accounting software program with powerfulmulticurrency and foreign-language capabilities, consider SunSystems, aproduct of Great Britain-based Systems Union, Ltd., (10 Bank St., WhitePlains, NY 10606, (914) 948-7770).  This innovative program offers tools tomeet the accounting and information requirements of businesses in manycountries.  It's available in 20 languages, including French, German, Spanish,Russian, Japanese, Chinese, and Arabic.Systems Union, Ltd.  was founded in 1981 by a small team of financial andtechnical experts.  Its SunSystems product was first released in 1982 and hasbeen regularly upgraded over the years.  Today, Systems Union employs over 300people in 15 locations, with offices in North America, Europe, and PacificAsia.  Systems Union also maintains an international network ofrepresentatives.Flexible featuresSunSystems consists of seven accounting and business modules, as well asseveral utility software packages.  Accounting and business modules includeLedger Accounting (Accounts Payable, Accounts Receivable, General Ledger),Fixed Assets, Corporate Allocations, Sales Order Processing, Purchase OrderProcessing, Inventory Control, SunQuery report writer, and the SZ screenmodifier utility.It's easy to install SunSystems on a PC or network.  Loading the diskettestakes from 15 to 30 minutes.  The program requires at least a 25-MHz 386 or486 PC with 8MB RAM for the Windows version, or 540K for the DOS version.  Forthis review, we tested the Windows version of SunSystems running on a NovellLAN.  Although this review focuses on the Windows product, the DOS versionoffers similar functionality.Systems Union's software uses a single set of source code, facilitatingcustomization, a clean user interface, and high functionality.  SunSystemsalso enables you to customize information to meet your unique specifications.For instance, each SunSystems module can be configured to select and report onvarious vendor, customer, asset, and inventory information by using analysiscodes.  You can customize these codes to track and report transactions bycustomer region, customer sales territory, vendor group, item product type,and asset location.  And you can customize the chart of accounts by usingaccount analysis codes.  They provide a 60-character code block, with up to 10alphanumeric characters for the account code, plus 50 additional characters.The SZ utility, a screen modifier, lets you customize input screen labels.(However, data screens cannot be reconfigured to call additional prompts, norcan you develop new forms using existing ones.)  In addition, you may need tomodify multiple screens when you want to make changes to an input screen,since other screens use data from input screens.  Although SZ is flexible whenchanging text descriptions, field lengths, and removing unnecessary fields,you need to document all changes, since upgrades override all of SZ's changes.By and large, however, each module promotes user flexibility.  For example,the Ledger Accounting module, which consists of Accounts Receivable, AccountsPayable, and General Ledger, lets you configure journal types in which journalentries are preset and posted according to classifications such as cashreceipts, prepayments, sales invoices, and foreign currency journals.You can also configure the Sales and Purchasing modules with various types ofpredefined sales and purchasing transactions.  You'll be able to enter presetinformation for orders according to the type of order (for example, sales andpurchase order types for specific customers, vendors, countries, or items).But while the Purchasing module has been designed for flexibility, none of itsstandard reports lets you sort information by purchase order type, and only acouple allow for sorting by analysis code (analysis codes permit you toorganize information in all the modules).  The Purchasing module also lacks areport writer for customizing or designing reports, or for reporting onpurchase order information by analysis code or purchase order type.  One wayto solve this problem is to use the SunQuery report writer to customizereports.  When Systems Union releases the purchase order layout report writer,as well as a Report Definition utility for the Purchasing module, this stepwon't be necessary.Besides the problems with the Purchasing module's reports, we also haddifficulty copying multiple purchase and sales orders in the Purchasing andSales modules.  Although the copy command () successfully duplicated theprevious Header information screen, field by field, the  key could not beused for the detail screen.  This is because it only copies the detail lineabove the current detail line of the purchase order, as opposed to the lastdetail line in the previous purchase order.  This problem was solved byimplementing a macro procedure to record the information for the first PO,which allowed us to copy the same information into new purchase and salesorders.The gang of fourSunQuery, the user-defined transaction-level report writer, offers flexibledata selection, report layout, and sorting features.  Although SunQuery isfairly flexible and includes more GUI enhancements in its latest version, thefully graphical report writer that's currently under development will be anespecially welcome upgrade for Windows users.The Ledger Accounting module includes three other report writers:  FinancialAnalysis, Financial Statements, and Financial Tables.  The Financial AnalysisReport Writer provides the easiest way to report on expenditures, in summaryor detail, with flexible sorting options.  The Financial Statements ReportWriter offers enhanced reporting facilities that produce customized incomestatements, balance sheets, and other financials.  The Financial Tables ReportWriter can produce reports in a matrix format that you can consolidate frommultiple ledgers to do comparisons of companies or individual departments.Each report writer is easy to customize.The latest release of SunSystems also includes a powerful new enhancement, theData Dictionary.  The dictionary stores all the information related toSunSystems data files, including field name, length, start position,justification, and so forth, in a single location.  This feature enhances theLedger Accounting module by including a Report Definition tool that lets youcustomize the layout and content of standard SunSystems reports.  It alsoallows you to create an unlimited number of custom layouts, because the ReportDefinition tool can now read the Data Dictionary directly.Systems Union is currently developing the Report Definition for all otherSunBusiness modules as well, including Purchasing.  The Data Dictionary shouldmake it easier for outside vendors to develop and maintain links andinterfaces with SunSystems.  That will facilitate implementation of featuressuch as Form Entry and Document Imaging, enhancing SunSystems' leadershipposition in the marketplace.We were unable to alter SunSystems' reports with third-party tools because itdidn't generate reports in ASCII format.  Although the reports could bedesigned to be generated in other third-party tool formats (such as Lotus),the generated reports only included summary raw data and therefore did notinclude column headings or subtotals.  However, we plan to use the newlyreleased Data Dictionary as the link between a third-party report writer togenerate and alter the look of the reports (font types and sizes).The wide, wide world of accountingThe program's international accounting flexibility is one of its strongestselling points.  It's an excellent solution for international businesses whosebooks need to conform to the accounting conventions of a particular country.Users can access a common database in their choice of the following languages:English, French, German, or Spanish.Strong multicurrency support is another program hallmark.  You can work with,consolidate, and report in an unlimited number of currencies, as well asmaintain inventory and create multicurrency orders and invoices.  The programalso performs currency conversion during data entry, and converts foreigncurrency to base currency or vice versa.A sophisticated mapping facility offered in the program allows you to map outa chart of accounts from one database to another to satisfy country-mandatedchart of accounts and company-wide reporting standards.SunSystems offers predefined charts of accounts to accommodate varyingstatutory requirements for more than 50 countries.  The program complies withdomestic and international financial standards, such as GAAP (GenerallyAccepted Accounting Principles), FASB (US standards), CICA (Canadianstandards), SSAP (Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales),and IAS (International Accounting Standards).New features have been added to address some of the European tax reportingrequirements for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  Although SunSystems allows you tocustomize VAT reports and procedures for maintaining VAT information, the newversion includes an updated Tax Listing Report and a Day Book Listing thatgenerates sequential references against transactions.Strong security and moreSunSystems Accounting Software sports strong data security features.  You canrestrict any user's or company's field access to menu options, analysis codes,or account types.  And you can set up user groups for easier maintenance andtighter reins on security.SunSystems includes drill-down capability within its Ledger Accounting module,letting you trace a journal entry back to its source.  It's designed to postonly balanced journal entries and offers the option to "put the journalon-hold" if corrections or supervisory approvals need to be made, making theproduct a real-time solution.  SunSystems also lets you post entries inseparate accounting periods, as long as the periods are "open" and you canaccess them.A powerful, flexible budget ledger feature lets you maintain up to 10 budgetledgers at either the account or project level.  This provides a great deal offlexibility for financial reports and analysis.The combined ledger is designed to present information in real time.  Allreports and inquiries paint an immediate snapshot of a company's actualposition rather than its position the last time you ran a report.An intermediate ledger, or rough book, allows all users to post completetransactions in a working ledger.  This feature, originally designed to meetItalian statutory requirements, helps reduce numerous adjusting entries.Issues and challengesSunSystems is a very flexible accounting system and can provide powerfulfunctionality if you set up the system properly.  But you'll need to invest agreat deal of time and effort into designing the system before implementingit, since an incorrect installation can lead to major modifications later, andyou may overlook key features if you implement the setup phase too hastily.The average cost of a single-user SunSystems license (for both Windows and DOSversions) ranges from $2,000 to $5,000 per module, and for a four-user licensefrom $2,500 to $10,000 per module.  Complete product support is availablethrough comprehensive manuals, a telephone hot-line, on-line system help,messages, and user defined help areas, where specific on-line assistance isprovided.  You can also direct questions regarding any SunSystems module tothe technical support staff by paying an additional support fee, whichincludes free upgrades upon request and use of technical bulletins.  A fullrange of client-server products is also available, including support for SQLServer and Oracle.The Sun will come out tomorrowWhat does the future hold for SunSystems?  Over the years Systems Union hasbecome a leader in international accounting and business applications byoffering a wide range of solutions for small to large companies.  SystemsUnion allies with many major hardware and software vendors, keeps abreast ofnew technology, and focuses research and development efforts on improving itsproduct.The company plans to continue enhancing the graphical user interface (GUI) foreach operating environment it supports.  In addition, the current MicrosoftSQL Server version of SunSystems will be ported to Sybase SQL Server 10.  Thiswill allow support for SQL technology on a number of Unix platforms, includingthe RS/6000, Sun SPARC, and HP 9000 machines, as well as SCO Unix systems.Although SunSystems is currently available in 20 languages, Systems Unionintends to add new translations over the next three years.  In addition,Systems Union plans to work with foreign-language authors to improvedocumentation and modules.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAsWith various commercial on-line services (such as CompuServe, America Online,and Prodigy) and the Internet in the news so much these days, you're probablywondering if it's worth your time to check out their diverse offerings.For the average accountant, the answer is a qualified yes.  There are specificresources for accountants on CompuServe and the Internet, as well as featureson America Online and Prodigy that might appeal to the average accountant.  Inthis article, we'll review the major on-line services, as well as examineaccounting-related services on the Internet.On the one hand, the major on-line services feature a limited number ofaccounting-related subject areas.  Only CompuServe devotes entire areas todiscussions of accounting information.  On the Internet, there is a Usenetnewsgroup devoted to financial software.So what's an accountant to do?The commercial on-line world is mainly a good place for accountants to findadditional information about computing.  Most computer magazines sponsoron-line forums of some sort, ranging from ZD Net on CompuServe (which includesinformation from PC Magazine, PC Week, and more) to the varied offerings onAmerica Online's Newsstand service (representing PC World, Windows, andWordPerfect magazines).  And all three commercial services feature a wealth ofmainstream financial information, ranging from extensive market reporting onthe Prodigy CNBC area to a wide variety of investment information on theAmerica Online Personal Finance Forum (including Morningstar Mutual Fundslistings, a Tax Forum, and various magazines).Try before you buyIn addition, America Online and CompuServe feature large libraries ofshareware-software that you can try out and pay for later if you like it.While a good chunk of shareware tends to be amateurish, many useful programsare available, particularly small tools that perform specific functions.A search through the America Online software libraries, using the keyword"accounting," yields over 800 matches.  Granted, this number includes manyhome-oriented shareware packages for tasks like balancing checkbooks andcalculating mortgage payments, but some of the software may be of interest tothe accounting professional.And, of course, there's one additional reason to go with any on-line service:universal electronic mail.  If you join a commercial on-line service orprocure an Internet account, you can exchange electronic mail with any otherInternet or commercial service user.  (This doesn't extend to files, by theway; a file attached to an America Online mail message can be received only byan America Online user.)  With over 28 million e-mail users in America, youcan be sure you'll have a few clients who will appreciate the instantcommunications offered via e-mail.Who else is out there?Other specialized on-line services are available that you may find useful,depending on your needs.  Dow Jones runs an on-line business-news service thatyou can access via MCI Mail (800/444-6245) or Knight Ridder (formerly Dialog)Information Services (800/334-2564).  The DowVision service is also accessiblefrom Coopers & Lybrand's Tax News Network (800/528-5816), which providesextensive tax information of its own, in addition to the Dow Jones materialand articles from other tax research providers.  Both the LEXIS/NEXIS on-lineservice (800/227-4908) and Knight Ridder feature Dun's Financial Records Plusand Standard & Poor's Corporate Descriptions.  You can also find usefulaccounting information on Creative Solutions' bulletin board system ARNE(800/968-8900).Before you get startedTo access on-line services or the Internet, you'll need a modem-the faster,the better.  A high-speed modem is a good investment.  These days you can finddecent high-speed modems running at 28.8K bits per second for $200 or so.America Online, CompuServe, and many Internet service providers offer 28.8Kbpsaccess, while Prodigy and CompuServe top out at 14.4Kbps.America Online and Prodigy require you to use their free software to accesstheir services; you can find Prodigy starter kits in most computer stores,while America Online distributes its access software with many magazines, aswell as through direct mail solicitations and bundling deals with computermakers.  You can access CompuServe with any communications software package(such as Procomm Plus), but a graphical front-end, WinCIM, is also available.Getting on the Internet typically means using specialized software, especiallyif you want to access the World Wide Web (see "The Net Surfer" in the December'95 issue of Accounting Technology for more details).America OnlineAmerica Online combines a lot of consumer-oriented information with a slew ofon-line magazines, such as Your Money and Worth.  Most of this information isprobably of little interest to the average accountant.  Yes, there are someareas you might find useful in an eclectic practice, such as the Morningstarguide to mutual funds, but by and large these services are for generalists,not accountants.The newest version of AOL software for Windows (there is a Mac version aswell) will feature full Internet access, however, including a top-notch Webbrowser from InternetWorks.  It should be fully released by the time you readthis article.  And America Online is the cheapest commercial on-line service,making its Internet access even more financially attractive.CompuServeThe only major on-line service to feature forums specifically for accountantsis CompuServe.  The Accounting Vendor Forum offers areas run by variousaccounting software vendors (including Best!Ware, BNA, Champion BusinessSystems, Manzanita Software, NEBS, Open Systems, Outlook Software, SBTAccounting, SCALA, Solomon Software, Versatile Solutions, XP Systems, ZPAYPayroll, and others), as well as a number of general discussion groups (TheBreak Room, Ask the CPAs, Accounting Training, Tax Issues, and AccountingSoftware).While discussions in the vendor forums probably won't interest you if you'renot using the vendor's software, the general discussion areas are lively andfilled with postings.  I found one message describing a hypothetical businesstransaction, in which the author asked other members of the forum what theappropriate journal entries and taxable income and deductions would be, andwhether the transaction qualified as a royalty, commission, or sale ofintangible property rights.  This question yielded several responses fromother accountants participating in the forum.  In addition to advice anddiscussion, software libraries specifically for accountants are available onthe forum.The recently opened Accountants Forum on CompuServe is sponsored by the AICPA.It includes message areas devoted to general information and ethics;accounting; audit, compilation, and review; taxes; information technology;personal financial planning; management accounting and industry; government;CPA firms; universities and colleges; and management consulting.  Also withinthe forums, you will find separate libraries devoted to many of these samesubjects.CompuServe also allows access to the Internet (including File TransferProtocol and Telnet features, Usenet newsgroups, as well as the World Wide Webif you use CompuServe's NetLauncher software).  For any accountant, it's clearthat CompuServe is the place to begin the on-line quest, if only because ofthe existence of an Accounting Vendors Forum and the AICPA's new AccountantsForum.CompuServe's pricing plan allows access to over 3,000 Internet addresses,including e-mail.  They also offer software for DOS and Macintosh users.ProdigyAs the most consumer-oriented major on-line service, Prodigy doesn't providemuch information of direct interest to accountants.  But that doesn't meanProdigy is a total wash, only that its information tends to be general innature.Prodigy does have the most extensive financial information on-line, however.It's the official on-line service of CNBC, the cable service that devotesdaily programming to business topics.  Yes, you'll find the stock listingsoffered by all the major on-line services.  You can also buy and sell stock onProdigy and set up "track lists" to keep tabs on specific stocks in yourportfolio.  And Prodigy's CNBC area goes further by offering complete marketinformation, including Dow Jones averages, gold prices, Treasury bond yields,and a U.S.  dollar index.  It also gives you an overview of futures andmutual-fund information, with listings of over 6,000 funds.  And for financialexperts, Kiplinger's magazine is on-line.In addition, Prodigy offers full Internet access, including newsgroups, filetransfer capability, and a World Wide Web browser.  While the Internet is avast, amorphous entity, you'll find some useful resources there for anaccounting practice, and one way to reach those resources is through Prodigy.Prodigy's pricing plans are more varied, offering plans starting at $9.95 permonth, with its top plan costing $24.95 per month.  Each plan includes anumber of free access hours, with minimal charges for additional hours andminutes.  Prodigy also offers on-line software compatible with DOS andMacintosh machines, providing access for almost all computer environments.The InternetDespite the ad-hoc nature of the Internet, a surprising number of resourcesare available on the Net that your firm could find valuable.  The main trickis finding their locations.  I've done a few searches and come up with severalaccounting resources on the World Wide Web that can also serve as aspringboard to other Internet accounting treasures.With a Web browser, good places to start are the Accountants Home Page(http://www.servtech.com/re/acct.html) and the Accounting Resources on theInternet Home Page(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/internet/internet.htm).  Both sitesoffer listings for other accounting resources on the Web.  Some of theselistings are general in nature (most of you won't need to know about the NYState Assembly or care about accessing the THOMAS Web service run by theFederal Government).Some sites, however, are operated by prominent accounting organizations.  Forinstance, the Education Materials Committee of the American AccountingAssociation runs its own home page(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/aaa/aaa.htm), which also containspointers to other accounting-related resources on the Internet.  In addition,there's a low-traffic Usenet newsgroup calledcomp.os.ms-windows.apps.financial where you can discuss various Windows-basedfinancial applications.Load up your software and log onThe on-line world is rapidly becoming a valuable business tool in Americansociety.  While some services, such as America Online and Prodigy, still needto beef up their accounting-specific resources, there's a wealth ofinformation already available on CompuServe, the Internet, and severalspecialized services.The on-line world has a way of creeping up on you, and it won't be long beforeinformation services begin creating more content of interest to accountants.The brand new Microsoft Network, in fact, is already developing suchresources, and you'll find Accounting Technology, as well as other Faulkner &Gray accounting publications, and areas such as the Accounting Office and theCCH Business Owner's Toolkit, on-line there right now.Kevin Reichard contributes to a variety of publications and has written 15computer books for MIS:Press/M&T Books.  His electronic-mail address isreichard@mr.net.America Online America Online Inc.  8619 Westwood Center Dr.  Vienna, VA22182-2285 (800) 827-6364Price:  $9.95 per month, five free hours; extra hours cost $2.95Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGAgraphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better, mouse.The Balance SheetAssets:  Full Internet access; wide range of discussion areas.Liabilities:  No specific forums for accountants.CompuServe CompuServe 5000 Arlington Centre Blvd.  PO Box 20961 Columbus, OH43220-9910 (800) 487-9197Price:  Standard Pricing Plan is $9.95 per month for 5 hours of connect time.Extra Internet hours cost $2.95 per hour.  The Super Value Club Plan costs$24.95 per month for 20 hours of connect time.  Extra hours cost $1.95 each.Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGAgraphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.The Balance SheetAssets:  Specific forums for accountants; many software libraries.Liabilities:  Most expensive on-line service if you wander past the freeservices.Prodigy Prodigy Services Co.  445 Hamilton Ave.  White Plains, NY 10601 (800)PRODIGYPrice:  Basic Plan offers 5 hours of Core features for $9.95, with extra hourscosting $2.95; Value Plan offers unlimited access to Core features and 5 hoursof Plus features for $14.95, with each extra hour of Plus costing $2.95; 30/30Plan offers 30 hours for $29.95, with each extra hour costing $2.95.Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 5MB of hard diskspace, 4MB of RAM, VGA graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.The Balance SheetAssets:  Strong financial tracking capabilities; full Internet access.Liabilities:  Little content of direct interest to accountants.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-upIn the August 1995 issue we looked at eight pension return preparationpackages.  These ranged from simple forms-oriented programs to comprehensiveemployee benefits administration systems.  As a follow-up, this time around welooked at two additional entries in this growing field:  ATX Tax Solver 5500Benefit Plan and Shepard's Form 5500 System.ATX solves your 5500 needsOffered by ATX Forms Inc., ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan differs from theother pension software packages we've looked at in that it's spreadsheetbased.  The vendor's family of software includes modules to prepare forms inall the major income tax-filing areas, including individual, business,fiduciary, and payroll taxes.  In addition to tax preparation products, ATXalso offers a depreciation system and a tax planner.All of ATX Forms' applications are available in either 1-2-3 or Excelversions.  ATX supplied the software to us on a single 3.5-inch diskette, andwe quickly installed it by simply typing ATX at the command line prompt.  Weused the Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows edition for this review, but the softwaresupports both the DOS and Windows versions of 1-2-3.  You can also get any ofthe ATX products for the Macintosh (which work with the Mac version of Excel).And, if you'd rather not have to play with a spreadsheet at all, ATX justintroduced its Saber line of software, which doesn't require you to have aspreadsheet program installed.The 47-page user guide covers operating instructions for all of the ATXmodules, and provides information for specific modules as needed.  Thedocumentation, though not voluminous, adequately covers getting started;entering, saving, and printing tax information; menus and macros; tips andtechniques; and troubleshooting.  Instructions in the manual and on-screen aregood enough that someone not familiar with spreadsheets will be able toproduce returns.  If you already feel comfortable using a spreadsheet, you'llbe right at home with the product.Once you're in the spreadsheet program, select the main file, !OPENATX, toreveal starting instructions and a list of supported forms.  Forms included inthe package are the 5500, 5500-C/R, 5500-EZ, supporting schedules A, B, C, E,F, G, P, SSA, and forms 2848, 4506, 4571, 5558, 8453E, 8821, 8822, 945, SS4,and W9.  To process a client, check off the forms you wish to prepare, thenpress Ctrl-N.  This automatically creates a taxpayer directory, copies theforms into the directory, and opens Page 1.  The program makes good use ofspreadsheet macro facilities, including over a dozen macros that automate suchtasks as opening, updating, saving, and printing files.  You can also selectthese tasks from a pull-down menu.How many forms am I holding up?One useful feature is that you can have more than just a single form open atthe same time.  Just how many can be open simultaneously depends on the amountof memory available.  Given enough memory, you could conceivably have them allopen.  Once you open a form, you can key your data into an on-screenreproduction of the original form.  The screen is color-coded, displaying theform in black, the data in blue, and the instructions in purple.  You have achoice of using Input Mode (by pressing the Ctrl-I key combination), or youcan move around freely as in any spreadsheet.  If you choose Input Mode, theright arrow key takes you to the next input cell.  All cells not requiringinput are protected, and the program carries over standard information, suchas name, address, and identification numbers, to other forms as appropriate.ATX Tax Solver 5500 automatically performs math calculations on the financialinput areas and produces balanced statements.  However, it's still possible tohave an out-of-balance condition, since the program automatically carries thenet asset amount from the balance sheet to the income statement.When you complete one page or form, you call up the next, until you'vefinished them all.  You can easily print to an HP-compatible laser printer byusing the macros provided, and ATX also supports dot-matrix and inkjetprinters.  You have the option of selecting and printing one or all forms, andusing a batch-printing mode.  The printed forms are clear, professionallooking, and IRS approved.  No diagnostics are available to alert you toproblems or erroneous input, but you can produce a two-year comparison of theincome and expense entries to provide some troubleshooting help.To transfer client information to the next year, a macro (Ctrl-U) updates thenew forms with carryover information.  ATX Tax Solver 5500 doesn't produce aninvoice or client transmittal letter, however, and Forms 990-T and 5330 Returnof Excise Taxes Related to Employee Benefit Plans are not available in thismodule.No help for the weary?On-line help is pretty much taken for granted these days, and this is oneplace in which ATX Tax Solver 5500 is a bit weak.  If you've grown used to taxprep software that gives you explanations and advice on a line-item basis, youmay be a bit disappointed.  ATX assumes that you know what you're doing whenit comes to Form 5500 preparation.  While the standard spreadsheet helpscreens are available, neither the screen nor manual provides help on thetechnical aspects of 5500 preparation.  You also need to step throughinapplicable input boxes; since the program doesn't automatically skip them,you need to know which items require responses.ATX Tax Solver 5500 isn't the fanciest product to produce 5500s.  But for areasonable price, it supplies an efficient way to get the job done, althoughit does require you to be conversant with the Form 5500 preparation process.Should you need help, technical support is available on weekdays from 9 a.m.to 5 p.m., EST.  The back of the manual also offers some troubleshootingadvice.Does Shepard's lead the flock?Shepard's/McGraw-Hill is a well-known, venerable publisher of books andservices.  Less well-known is its expanding line of software.  One of thenewest is the Shepard's Form 5500 System reviewed here.  Other Shepard'ssoftware products include a tax forms library in addition to an integratedfamily of estate planning, preparation, and accounting programs.The software is Windows based, and you install it through the Program Managerby using the File Run command.  The install routine establishes a new programgroup, with separate icons for the 5500 and 5500-C/R.The User's Manual is a brief 11 pages, but it covers basic program operationsefficiently.  It uses screen shots to good advantage to illustrate the primarysteps.  Making up for the sparse documentation is extensive on-line help toassist you in working with the program, along with on-line IRS instructionsfor the forms and line-by-line instructions.  Particularly useful is the splitscreen option; while you input various lines on the form in the upper window,the instructions for those lines automatically appear in the lower window.Most practitioners don't produce Form 5500 all that frequently, so a nicefeature in the help function is the indexes for two Shepard's publications,ERISA Practice and Procedure and Guide to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans.Shepard's offers these books at a discount to purchasers of its 5500 software.Clicking on the program icon brings up the opening screen, consisting of Page1 of the 5500 form.  The familiar Windows menu and tool bars cross the top ofthe screen.  In addition to standard icons on the tool bar, you'll find iconsfor the six pages of the 5500 form.  You can use these icons to open one ormore of the pages at the same time.  Supporting forms are accessible from theForm pull-down menu, including Schedules A, B, C, E, F, G, P, Form 5558, andSSA.To start a new return, just begin inputting information into the on-screenPage 1.  Otherwise, open an existing file using the File menu or icon.  Inputis straightforward and easy since you're working with an accurate reproductionof the actual form.  When you enter an item, the cursor automatically moves tothe next input field, and you can use the Tab key or mouse to skip a field.The software doesn't automatically skip inapplicable entry fields, so you needto be aware of which entries are appropriate, based on what you've enteredpreviously for a client.Shepard's Form 5500 System carries over names, dates, and identificationnumbers to other forms.  It automatically totals amounts in the financial andnumerical fields, and carries over the total of net assets on the balancesheet to the income statement to show the change in net assets.  Everythingbalances fine, but be careful if you change amounts later, or the incomestatement may no longer foot.With your input complete, you're ready to print.  As with the ATX packagereviewed above, the Shepard's software provides no diagnostics to alert you topotential errors or inconsistencies.  Printing to an HP-compatible laserprinter produces crisp, clear IRS forms, however, and Shepard's includesdownloadable soft fonts.  You can print one, several, or all forms at once.This 5500 system doesn't contain client transmittal letters, invoices, orForms 5500-EZ, 5330, or 990-T, though you can obtain the forms by purchasingShepard's separate forms library package.Technical support is available at a toll-free number on weekdays from 7:00a.m.  to 5:00 p.m.  Mountain time.Shepard's Form 5500 System is easy to learn and use, letting you producehigh-quality 5500 forms in a short time.  Although it lacks some bells andwhistles of more comprehensive (and expensive) packages, it does the basictask of creating a Form 5500 very well.Gerald Herter, MBA, CPA is president of Sterman, Higashi & Herter, anaccounting firm in Tustin, CA.ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan Price:  $99 ATX Forms Inc.  P.O.  Box 630Washburn, ME 04786 (800) 944-8883, (207) 455-4603 fax (207) 455-0963The Balance SheetAssets:  Practical, well integrated, spreadsheet-based package; producesprofessional-looking forms.Liabilities:  Lacks on-line help screens or instructions for 5500 preparation;few diagnostic or data management features.Shepard's Form 5500 System Price:  $129 Shepard's/McGraw-Hill, Inc.  555Middle Creek Pkwy.  Colorado Springs, CO 80935-3530 (800) 525-2474, (719)488-3000 fax (719) 481-7391The Balance SheetAssets:  Straightforward; easy to use; attractive Windows interface and formsoutput; good on-line help for the price.Liabilities:  Lacks diagnostics.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Newspages:  Tax Vendors for SaleAn offer you can't refuse Dept.  What would you do with a couple of billiondollars?  Illinois-based tax research publisher and tax prep softwaredeveloper CCH, Inc.  announced in late November that it had been sold toWolters Kluwer NV, an Amsterdam-based international publisher, for a cool $1.9billion.  CCH's product line includes ProSystem fx, CCH Access, and CCH TaxAssistant.According to CCH public relations manager Mary Dale Walters, the Dutch companywanted to acquire CCH's technology knowledge for use in the European market,as well as to increase its presence in the US market through technologies likethe CCH Business Owners Toolkit on the Microsoft Network.  She doesn't foreseemany immediate changes in CCH's own product line, however."There's a chance of new and better technology down the road," she says.  Thecash infusion "will give us more impetus for continued development.  We'realready aggressively pursuing on-line activities.  We can do more."Founded over 103 years ago, CCH was named Commerce Clearing House until lastyear.  Although it's a publicly traded business, the majority of stock hasbeen in the hands of the Thorne family up until now, and Oakleigh Thorne,president and CEO, will continue to manage the company.One hurdle that CCH and other vendors were working on overcoming at press timewas Congress's and the President's budget wrangling last autumn.  "Obviouslywe can't do anything until they do something," says Walters.  "At this point,we're not sure when we'll have that legislation.  There are a number ofretroactive provisions in that bill."  Although CCH began shipping apreliminary version of its tax software as early as November, the delays inthe final forms may mean that many taxpayers will have to file amendedreturns.  For extra info, you can call CCH at (800) 45-PROFX.More tax mergers Dept.  The CCH deal was preceded last autumn by another taxvendor acquisition.  This one involved RAM Software, makers of RAM 1040Professional Tax Software, which was picked up by SCS/Compute, makers of TaxMachine and LMS Tax.  Unlike SCS's purchase of Accountant's MicrosystemsInc.'s Tax Machine line several years ago, SCS won't continue development onthe RAM program."They're taking features in RAM and adding it to their own," says RAM vicepresident Frances Michelon.  "They wanted to expand their market share."RAM's head programmer Richard Michelon will be writing a program to convertRAM 1040 Professional Tax Software data to Tax Machine and LMS Tax formats.SCS is setting up special support lines to help RAM customers make it throughthe transition, according to LMS Tax product manager Lou Ann Vandemore."We're contacting each of their customers and offering them LMS Tax and TaxMachine," she says.  Future RAM-inspired enhancements to SCS's tax productsmay include its multistate processing, speed, and the way it accounted forautomobiles.  Call SCS/Compute at (800) 736-4587 for more information.New on CD-ROM dept.  The second issue of Faulkner & Gray's The ElectronicAccountant began shipping last November.  Featuring advanced multimediafunctionality, the new issue is the first out from the product's newEditor-in-Chief (and Accounting Technology Consulting Editor) Laurence K.Zuckerman, CPA, MST.The cover story, "Discomania:  The Best CD-ROMs for Accountants," includesdemonstrations of popular tax research, forms, spreadsheet, and CPE softwareproducts.  Also on the disc are war stories about malpractice insurance,pension compliance tax planning, 1040 software, installing a tape backupdrive, and the manufacturing practice niche.  For a free copy of theElectronic Accountant, call (800) 535-8403.Down with Unix Dept.  Platinum Software announced the general release ofPlatinum SQL NT 3.2 last November, a client/server accounting solution thattakes advantage of Microsoft's BackOffice suite, primarily its Windows NT andMicrosoft SQL Server components.  New modules in Platinum SQL NT include AssetManagement and Advanced General Ledger Allocations.A new financial alerts feature will send an administrator an e-mail alert if aspecified threshold is exceeded, such as a cash balance going above or below acertain level.  Queue cards will help train users through processes likeentering vouchers.The new release signals a switch in strategy for Platinum, which used tosupport the Unix market by running on top of Sybase's version of SQL Server.No longer.  Platinum is now betting on Windows NT over Unix."We have to make a choice," says Kevin Dowling, Platinum's vice president ofmarketing.  "We see more and more of our customer base have been interested inan NT and SQL Server solution.  We think Windows NT will be the dominantclient/server operating system.  We decided to focus our energies on providinga solution that's integrated and almost plug-and-play with BackOffice,reducing the risks of having all the pieces fit together."To help its Unix customers make the transition, Platinum is becoming partnerswith Microsoft and Compaq to provide the necessary software and hardware."We'll release product upgrades for a year and do product support for the yearafter that," comments Dowling.  "They can continue to use the product and willhave access to the source code at the end of 1996."  Dowling also says thatanother vendor may eventually take over Platinum's Sybase offering.  PlatinumSQL NT sells for $10,000 to $15,000 per module, plus per-user fees.Several modules for the network-based Platinum for Windows product are alsofinally in release, including two general ledger modules (standard andpremiere), along with a cash management module.  By the time you read this,accounts payable and accounts receivable should be available, and in March,Platinum plans to release order entry, purchase order, and inventory modules.For more information on these products, call Platinum at (714) 453-4000.Going vertical Dept.  Intuit's latest editions of QuickBooks move themarket-leading small-business accounting solution onto the path of verticalaccounting software.  QuickBooks 4.0 takes a small-business user through astep-by-step interview that customizes their books according to the industrythey're in and generates customized documentation for over 20 differentindustries.  The software also offers customized fields, as well as differentmethods of handling income.  Other new features include contact management,to-do lists, mail merge, and the ability to print 1099, 940, and 941 forms.This new QuickBooks line will be available in several iterations, in bothWindows ($99) and Macintosh ($119) versions on disk, and in a Windows versionon CD-ROM ($129).  QuickBooks Pro 4.0 for Windows ($189) and QuickBooks Pro4.0 for Macintosh ($189) will add time tracking, estimating, and advanced jobcosting features.The company has also announced a fix to a bug in version 3.0.  When QuickBooks3.0 was allowed to condense data, the average cost of inventory items could beaffected, causing inventory values and the cost of goods sold to be under- orover-valued.  Intuit estimates that only a few users will be affected by thiserror.  For more details, call (800) 238-4247.In other Intuit news, the company is introducing a version of its retailTurboTax and MacInTax programs designed with special business advice forcustomers who need to prepare their own Schedule C.  The product will becalled TurboTax (or MacInTax) for Business/Sole Proprietorship.  For moredetails, check out Intuit's new Web site at http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax oryou can just call them at (800) 934-1040.  Fresh fruit Dept.  The latestversion of Peachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5, began shipping inNovember.  It offers a multimedia setup feature with video and audio clipsthat take small-business users through the process of automating their books.The $129 program includes 75 business templates.Other new features provide management tools such as an events log that alertsyou when quotes expire or invoices go uncollected.  Also new are a to-do list,alert signals for when customers exceed credit limits and inventory items aredown, and additional customized reporting and drill-down capabilities.  Tolearn more, phone (800) 247-3224, or connect to the Peachtree Web site athttp://www.peach.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics SuiteProblem:  you have a phone, fax machine, and modem, but you only have onephone line.  Or you have several phones, modems, fax machines, and othertelecommunication devices, and more than one phone line, but still not enoughlines to go around.  Expensive solution:  add more phone lines and pay anextra $250 or so per line every year to the phone company.  Another expensivesolution:  set up a network, including a complicated network modemconfiguration.  Better solution:  make a one-time investment of about $349 inMAXShare, a new state-of-the-art line-sharing device.At approximately 6.5 by 9.5 by 1 inch, MAXShare doesn't take up a lot of deskspace.  However, it does allow you to share multiple telecom devicesautomatically.  In fact, MAXShare permits up to eight devices to share up tofour lines.MAXShare is easy-to-use hardware that works with your existing phone lines.It uses an included 9-volt power transformer that plugs into any standard ACelectric outlet.  After you plug the transformer into the back of MAXShare andyour electrical outlet, simply connect MAXShare to a standard RJ-11 phone jackand then connect your phone, fax, modem, or any other telecom device to one ofMAXShare's eight RJ-11 jack connectors.  The entire process takes onlyseconds.  There are no switches to set, no software to install, and no networkrequired.  If you do need technical support, it's available toll free, fromMonday through Friday, from 9 to 5.Automatic routingMAXShare's operation is completely transparent.  It automatically routesincoming calls to the assigned telecom devices.  In other words, MAXSharesends calls that come in on phone line 1 to telecom device 1, calls thatarrive on phone line 2 to telecom device 2, and so on, up to the unit'sfour-line maximum.There are limitations, of course.  For starters, modems connected to telecomdevice jacks 5 through 8 cannot receive incoming calls.  Perhaps moreimportant, if the telecom device associated with an incoming call is in use,MAXShare does not route the call, and the caller hears a continuous ringingsignal (there is no charge to long-distance callers when this occurs).  Thismay be inconvenient for your callers, and you certainly would not want yourprimary client phone lines to behave this way.  However, you can minimize thisproblem (for example, by using your modem after business hours).MAXShare also prevents accidental interruption of phone lines in use and isdesigned to eliminate conflicts.  For example, when a modem attempts to dialout, the modem in essence takes its "handset" off-hook, "listens" for a dialtone, then dials the number.  Enter MAXShare.  When it detects that your modemhas gone off-hook, it assigns it to any phone line that's available.  At thispoint, the modem gets the dial tone that it's waiting for and makes the call.But what if you try to access a modem when all outgoing MAXShare lines are inuse?  MAXShare will cause your modem to deliver a "No Dial Tone" message toyour communications software, which typically prompts you to try again laterwhen phone lines are available.  MAXShare will not interrupt the currentsession in progress or cause irritating or costly disconnections.Room to growMaxShare offers several advantages.  For starters, competitive line-sharingdevices, which may be less expensive than MAXShare, only work with a singlephone line.  MAXShare accommodates up to four phone lines, which gives youroom to grow.In fact, if you're considering setting up a network to share phone lines andtelecom devices, you may want to consider MAXShare as a more affordablealternative.  It makes adding extra phone lines easy and reduces the need formore network modems.  MAXShare also connects to any modem; you can use it withvirtually all PC, Macintosh, and Unix workstations.Currently, I have my telephone, fax/answering machine, and modem hooked up toMAXShare, which is connected to a single outgoing telephone line.  MAXShareworks well for my SOHO (Small Office/Home Office) setup, and this versatiledevice may be helpful for you too.-Laurence K.  Zuckerman, CPA, MSTHiJaak Graphics SuiteBoldly go where no accountant has gone before.  Instead of just using aspreadsheet program in your practice to graph data in financial statements andother reports into bar and pie charts, and a presentation graphics program todazzle clients at meetings, and a desktop publishing program to producenewsletters and related correspondence, you can use HiJaak Graphics Suite torelieve the frustration of employing separate tools for heavy-duty graphicschores.  It matches up programs and graphical data with compatible filestructures, sharpens your output, and lets you capture, modify, and enhanceimages.  The $99 Suite provides an integrated set of utilities withsophisticated graphics capabilities.Each program in the Windows-based Suite performs different functions.  You canuse them separately for simple tasks, or collectively for multi-function jobs.Browser, the desktop publishing program, manages files and organizes projects,offering easy access to the other components.  Smuggler helps you search forand import files from other applications in over 75 formats.  TouchUp turnsdull, fuzzy images into bright, crisp ones, and offers various enhancementcapabilities.  PRO is a screen capture feature that saves images in manyformats, and Draw lets you customize and modify images with 15 drawing tools.Killing two birds with one stoneIf you're comfortable using Windows, you can get started quickly, butoperating the program fully and efficiently takes some time and patience.  Myfirst encounter with the program was a few months ago while reviewing pensionsoftware packages (Accounting Technology, August 1995).  HiJaak PRO producedthe screen shots that appeared in the story.  Being short on time and long onpension packages, I ignored other features and ventured directly intocapturing the screen images.  Surprisingly, I was able to produceprofessional-looking illustrations in short order, with a quick stop over inRetouch and File Conversion.  E-mailing the images to the editors didn'taffect their quality or reduce the resolution size.  I later returned to theprogram for a closer look and discovered the extensive nature of the otherprograms within the Suite.Available on eight 3.5-inch diskettes or one CD-ROM, HiJaak loads through theWindows File Run command.  The CD-ROM version contains 3,000 additional clipart images as a bonus.  Full installation requires 40MB of hard disk space,but running the program from the CD requires only 1MB of disk space.HiJaak furnishes you with a several-hundred-page User Guide that containsscreen pictures and diagrams for each application.  The Getting Started manualincludes an overview and installation instructions, along with a four-lessontutorial that shows you how to create a flier combining text and graphics fromvarious sources.To organize the components in your project, begin with HiJaak Browser.  Hereyou catalog, view, and search for files.  A file index tree similar to theWindows File Manager appears on the left side of a split screen, allowing youto collect various files that contain pertinent data for the job at hand.  Onthe right, Browser displays "thumbnail" images of the files in the collection.You can open, copy, print, or move these images.  When you're ready to work ona thumbnail, you drag it to the appropriate icon to launch the HiJaak programyou need.For example, you may have a thumbnail of a map you want to use for a project.Just drag the thumbnail to the HiJaak PRO icon to launch that program.  Withthe thumbnail now in PRO, you set the options for how you want the imagecaptured and where to store it.  PRO takes a "snapshot" and places it in afile.  If the designated application requires the image to be in a differentformat, PRO can convert it at your direction.  PRO can capture pictures inboth Windows and DOS environments.To place the picture in your text file, first open HiJaak Smuggler.  Smugglerstays running in the background until you're ready to use it.  In Browser'sfile manager, locate the file containing your text; it will appear as athumbnail.  Clicking on the thumbnail launches the word processing app inwhich the text was written.  Smuggler will have attached itself to the titlebar of the word processor, so you just click on the icon there.  Afterindicating where you want the picture, as well as its size and resolution,Smuggler places it there.Touch up your imagesIf the image appears fuzzy or dark, you can filter it with HiJaak TouchUp.TouchUp works with color, grayscale, or black and white images in a variety offormats.  It produces an instantaneous display while you change variousfactors, so you can experiment and adjust the image as you go.  A variety ofretouch tools are at your disposal, such as color, texture, brightness,contrast, halftones, airbrush, pen, eraser, sharpening, softening, embossing,sculpting, highlighting, sizing, positioning, and more.  Even though you mayneed to consult the manual to learn each of these tools, you can intuitivelyperform many tasks on your own by simply moving various gauges and trying thetool icons.With HiJaak Draw, you can create some of your own artwork to convey aparticular message in your project.  Draw contains a vast array of drawingtools.  Whether you merely want to produce a geometric figure with some textinside, or compose a new work of art, Draw will accommodate you.  The Drawmanual is over 350 pages long and offers ample features and intricacies toserve both amateur and professional illustrators.Draw lets you organize artwork into multiple layers and pages.  Twenty-threedrawing methods extend the versatility of its 15 drawing tools for creatinglines, boxes, circles, and other objects.  For example, it offers sevenmethods for drawing a rectangle, such as corner-to-corner andcenter-to-corner.Your freehand drawing can be natural, or you can set tolerance limits thatsmooth out irregularities in your lines and shapes.  You can also program yourtext in many fonts and shapes, so they can flow straight or curve aroundobjects at your command.  Additional tools help you position, shape,transform, and arrange these objects.  They can be painted with a choice ofseveral color models, each with seemingly endless colors and gradations.Draw sets up and manages various clipart libraries, letting you easily importand export images.  Numerous print options accommodate your specifications.For instance, if the finished product exceeds your paper size, Draw can tilethe picture onto several sheets if you want a large image, or scale it down toa single sheet.  And if you're sending artwork to a printing press, you canproduce the work in color-separated format.How suite it is!When you incorporate the five HiJaak modules into the HiJaak Graphics Suite,the result is a comprehensive, integrated solution to your graphics needs.You'll be impressed with all you can do graphically to enhance clientpresentations and proposals with relatively little expertise, with the help ofthis useful, time-saving software.  l-Gerald Herter, CPAMAXShare Price:  $459 MAXBase, Inc.  668 American Legion Dr.  P.O.  Box 2127Teaneck, NJ 07666 (800) 631-1121The Balance SheetAssets:  Effective telecommunication device; easy to set up; accommodates upto four phone lines.Liabilities:  Lines in use do not produce a busy signal-rather a continousring.HiJaak Graphics Suite Price:  $99 Inset Systems Inc.  71 Commerce Dr.Brookfield, CT 06804 (203) 740-2400Requires:  IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better, 4MB RAM (8MB recommended),Windows 3.1 or later, 40MB hard disk space for full installation or CD-ROMplus 1MB disk space.The Balance SheetAssets:  Powerful, comprehensive set of graphics utilities, functional in awide variety of formats.Liabilities:  None significant.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound"One of the last great tax shelters," said Charles Ratner, a principal inErnst & Young's Cleveland office and the firm's national director of personalinsurance counseling, when describing life insurance.  He explained the reasonis that life insurance's cash value builds up tax-free and can be accessedduring the insured's lifetime through tax-free withdrawals and loans and thereis an income tax-free death benefit.Whole or variable life insurance is usually favored because of the substantialcash value that can be built up.  Also, second-to-die policies areincreasingly being used when the marital deduction can insulate the firstspouse's estate from estate tax.Tax-Wise Moves.  If you don't want the policy proceeds to be included in aninsured estate, then you must make sure that the insured was never the policyowner or the insured must have transferred ownership more then three yearsbefore death.A common way of making sure that the insured doesn't own the policy is throughthe creation of an irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT).  The insurednormally transfers cash annually to the ILIT to pay the premiums.  Ifpossible, the trust takes out the policy so the above three-year rule doesn'tcome into play.  In order for the cash contributions to qualify for the gifttax annual exclusion, the ILIT normally gives the trust beneficiaries aCrummey withdrawal power.In setting up an ILIT, a financial planner must be aware of whether ageneration skipping transfer (GST) tax can apply.  Because life insurance is aleverage vehicle, the amount that can eventually be subject to the GST tax canbe quite substantial.  Accordingly, there is a strategy that can allocate partof the GST $1 million exemption to amounts being transferred to the trust.ILITs are also being used in conjunction with lifetime charitable transfers.Bill Fleming, director of personal financial planning in the Hartford, Conn.office of Coopers & Lybrand, noted that wealth transferred to charity is oftenreplaced by using the savings on income taxes from the charitable transfers topurchase life insurance that is owned by a ILIT.  "This technique worksparticularly well if the individual is in their 50s, rather than their 60s,"added Fleming.Split Dollar.  Many of the more creative uses of life insurance involvesplit-dollar insurance being used as compensation.  A split-dollar arrangementbasically allows the insured to pay the lower term value of a policy while theemployer pays for the cash-value part of the much higher premium.  Whatusually happens is that the company pays the entire premium and then reportsincome to the insured.  The amount reportable as income is based on tables(PS-58 for individual policies and PS-38 for survivorship policies) or theterm equivalents provided by the insurance company.  No deduction is allowedfor the employer.  The net result is that the insured owns the policy and owesthe company the amount that it paid as cash-value premiums.  Normally, at alater date (or at the insured's death) the company is paid back.A split-dollar arrangement can be used for an owner of the closely heldbusiness or for a key employee.  The cash value is growing tax-free and,usually on retirement, if desired, the insured can withdraw premiums and eventake a loan against the policy.  As long as the policy is not surrendered, theinsured is getting a tax-free stream of income.  (Note:  The same tax-freestream is available with normal respect to whole or variable life.)  Upondeath, the payout will be reduced by the amounts owed on the policy.  Flemingsaid that split-dollar insurance is particularly attractive to transfer to anILIT "because the value of the gift subject to the annual exclusion is thelower PS-58, PS-38 or term premium value."Tom McCaskill, president of McCaskill & Associate, a family businessconsulting firm in Wichita, Kansas, widely uses a variable split-dollarinsurance policy as the funding mechanism to pass the business to youngergenerations when a business owner is alive.  He pointed out that a variablepolicy allows the business to fluctuate the insurance premiums to a prescribedmaximum and also allows the insured to make the investment decisions withrespect to the policy.Split-dollar arrangements are also used by large shareholders of publiclytraded corporations so that there are sufficient funds to pay estate taxes,according to James Hodge, chairman of The Eyrie Group based in Danville,California, a consulting company to first-generation business owners.  Hodgemakes an important point about all split-dollar arrangements that you want toeventually rollout the company (end its premium payments).  He said that asthe insured gets older, the imputed income that the insured will haveincreases if the company is paying the entire premium.Life insurance is also widely used in cross-purchase agreements.  That is whenowners of closely held business purchase individual policies on each of theother co-owners.  The problem is if there are five business owners, then eachowner has to buy four policies.  According to Fleming, many business ownersnow use an escrow or partnership arrangement whereby only five (rather than20) policies are purchased and the surviving owners each receive a portion ofthe insurance proceeds, which are used to purchase the deceased businessowner's stock.Bigger Hazards.  Although the benefits of life insurance are substantial, therisks are also substantial from a tax standpoint.  McCaskill says there arenumerous pitfalls along the way that can trip up the plan.  One is that youcan overfund the premiums so that the IRS will say it is not an insurancepolicy building up tax-free.  Also, there will be problems if the insurancecompany imposes a penalty for a partial surrender or if a surrender isconsidered by the IRS to be a complete surrender of the policy with a hugeincome tax liability being imposed.McCaskill said that a common problem he sees with split-dollar is that thecompany and individual don't follow through and make a formal split-dollararrangement.Ratner warned that you must particularly watch out for inflated expectationsabout the rate of return of investments in variable life policies.  He addedthat the amount of premium selected should be able to sustain the deathbenefit even against poor performance of the investment.  He summed up hisconcerns this way, "You don't want to make today's solution tomorrow'sproblem."HOWARD W.  WOLOSKY, J.D., LL.  M., is executive editor of The PracticalAccountant.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-36IA086-000616-B019-184http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi115.html 205.156.212.5 19970122004021 text/html 201254HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:37:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:27 GMTContent-length: 201066Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi115.html Sample Issue Copyright ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PEOPLE (1756 words) BRIEFS (652 words) Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stable (469 words) FORECAST &REVIEW: By the numbers: The top 10 news events of 1995 (1185 words) Letters (2431 words) TECHNOLOGY: TECH BRIEFS (547 words) CONSULTING INSIGHTS: Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96 (979 words) FASB rules on nonprofits' investments (177 words) Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accounting (627 words) 5 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishments (956 words) NEW PRODUCTS (1215 words) FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projects (828 words) PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM: For better recruits, target professors, survey says (1172 words) HOT TIPS (575 words) CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q results (262 words) TAXING ISSUES (536 words) J.D. Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis line (396 words) With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programs (1063 words) ACTION IDEA: How to have a successful seminar (150 words) Budget worries kill workload relief bill (560 words) Congress passes tort reform bill with veto override (703 words) TAX PRACTICE: Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep waters (1881 words) Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employees (360 words) AICPA, AT&T cite businesses (99 words) Expect the unexpected: Trends to watch (1173 words) Quotables, 1995 (440 words) THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995 (617 words) Rogue AAA 'Club' demands change (293 words) Get real, AICPA tells flat taxers (963 words) Geo. S. Olive acquires local health care consulting firm (829 words) IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence' (516 words) Audit & Accounting: Change Of Auditors (2566 words) SOFTWARE REVIEW: Budgetary moves add steam to fund accounting (3056 words) COMING EVENTS (593 words) CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PEOPLEARIZONADave Stocking, partner-in-charge of Eide Helmeke's Phoenix office, has beenelected chairman of the firm's management committee.  The management committeefunctions as the firm's board of directors and sets firms policy.CALIFORNIAGreg Garrison has been appointed chairman of Price Waterhouse's entertainment,media and communications group and managing partner of the firm's SouthernCalifornia practice based in Los Angeles.  Garrison has been with the firm for19 years, previously serving as manager of the products industry practice inSt.  Louis.  Chuck Bauer, former chairman of the firm's EMC practice, has beennamed co-chairman of the firm's products division.  ...  Susan K.  Screen hasbeen named shareholder of Stonefield Josephson in San Francisco.  Screenprovides litigation support services and income tax and financial planningadvice.  ...  Robert E.  Wacker, of R.E.  Wacker Associates in San LuisObispo, has been elected to serve on the board of governors of the CertifiedFinanical Planner Board of Standards.  Wacker has been a CFP licensee since1988.CONNECTICUTMark A.  Semmelrock has joined Cole, Frago, Cusick, Chestler & Co.  inWethersfield as manager of computer systems and consulting, as a result of thefirm's merger with MAS Associates.  Sarah Murach has joined the firm assupervisor of computer systems and consulting, and Dawn Pfeffer has joined asa staff accountant.DELAWARECarl Turner has been named to the board of directors of Wilmington-basedSiegfried Schieffer & Seitz.  Turner will serve as adviser to firm presidentRobert L.  Siegfried Jr.  Turner formerly served as vice president in chargeof General Electric's semiconductor business, advanced technology and computersystems.GEORGIAClarence E.  David III has been named a shareholder of Atlanta-based Habif,Arogeti & Wynne.  David performs financial statement examinations and taxcompliance and planning.  He joined the firm in 1987.  ...  Donna G.  Barwick,partner with the law firm Lefkoff, Duncan, Miller, Grimes, Miller & Barwick ofAtlanta, has been elected chair of the Certified Financial Planner Board ofStandards board of governors for a two-year term.ILLINOISNora Gile has been admitted as manager of the tax department of Nykiel Carlin& Co.  in Schaumburg.  Gile formerly served as supervisor of the taxdepartment of Skokie-based Michael Silver & Co.  ...  Chicago-basedBrook+Weiner+Sered+Kreger+Weinberg has elected Gordon Johnson to member of the firm.  Johnson hasbeen with the firm for the past 15 years and was promoted to manager in 1988.Sheldon Weiner and Robert J.  Krawitz, both members of the firm, havesuccessfully completed the examination to become certified business valuationanalysts.KENTUCKYJohn A.  Switzer has been named managing partner in the Louisville office ofKPMG Peat Marwick.  Switzer had previously served as managing partner of thefirm's Lexington office.MASSACHUSETTSVitale, Caturano and Co.  in Boston has made new additions to its staff.Gordon Earle has been appointed director of the firm's technology consultinggroup, Deborah Cafarella has been named network specialist and Steven Brownhas been admitted as groupware engineer.  ...  David J.  Underwood has joinedJones, Camp & Associates in Worcester as a supervisor.  He formerly workedwith O'Brien & O'Brien.  Peggy A.  Thieriot has been admitted as a staffaccountant.  Richard G.  Howarth Jr.  has been promoted from an experiencedaccountant to a senior accountant.  Joseph P.  Furnari has passed the CPA examand has been promoted to in-charge accountant.  Cassandra A.  Camp, partner ofthe firm, has been re-appointed as the New England representative to thetechnical issues committee of the Private Companies Practice Section of theAmerican Institute of CPAs.MARYLANDWalpert, Smullian & Blumenthal in Baltimore has elected David S.  Leibowitzand Deborah O.  Schultz principals of the firm.  Leibowitz works primarilywith retail automobile clients.  Schultz specializes in profit improvement andfinancial consulting for privately owned wholesale distributors andmanufacturers.  Linda K.  Diehl has joined the firm's legal servicesconsulting group.  Prior to joining WS&B, Diehl worked for eight years as aconsultant for Altman Weil Pensa in Newtown Square, Pa.  ...  Warfield,Garrett & Associates in Baltimore has been accepted for membership toCPAConnect, a network of CPA firms.MICHIGANFremont-based Gerbers Products Co.  has appointed Stan VanderRoest corporatecontroller.  Prior to joining Gerber in 1989, VanderRoest worked for Coopers &Lybrand.MINNESOTAThe St.  Paul office of McGladrey & Pullen has promoted James M.  Parks andRick D.  Rodenbeck to partners.  Parks provides consulting services in theareas of employee benefits and qualified retirement plans for the firm'sbusiness clients.  He has developed and leads the upper Midwest regionretirement plan administrative and consulting group.  Rodenbeck specializes inproviding tax planning and consulting services to clients in the financialservices industry.  With his promotion, he assumes the role of regionalcoordinator of tax services for financial institutions.  In the Minneapolisoffice, Peter Rasmussen has been promoted to partner and Alan W.  Lusk hasbeen promoted to senior manager and information technology group practiceleader.  Rasmussen provides assistance in business financing and operationalissues for the firm's clients.  Todd Anderson has been promoted to seniormanager in the Bloomington office.MISSOURIMichael C.  Abfall has been promoted to manager and Stephanie D.  Czeschin hasbeen promoted to senior in the controllership services department of St.Louis-based Grace & Co.NEW YORKPhilip R.  Rotner has been named general counsel of Deloitte & Touche upon theretirement of Howard J.  Krongard.  Rotner, who is based in the New Yorkoffice, previously served as a partner in the San Francisco law firmMcCutchen, Doyle, Brown & Enersen.  ...  Goldstein Golub Kessler & Co.  in NewYork has admitted Eric S.  Holzberg, Christopher S.  Reed, Jill Zelenko andStuart B.  Zlotolow partners.  Charles J.  Riess has been admitted asprincipal.  Riess is responsible for the management and development of thebusiness services and solutions group.  Debra J.  Feiger, a senior staffmember in the tax department and personal finance group, has been designated acertified financial planner by the Certified Financial Planner Board.  ...Russell T.  Glazer has joined Hauppauge-based Peare & Heller as a shareholderafter merging his practice, formerly part of Kutzin & Glazer in Mellville,with P&H.  ...  Erick L.  Avni joined Valley Stream-based Biscotti, Toback &Co.  as a junior accountant.  ...  Craig Morris & Co.  in Syosset has admittedRoberta Bos Hill to assume responsibilities for the firm's audit services.Hill worked in the New York and Melville offices of Touche Ross and Co.  from1975 to 1979.  ...  Frank W.  Sluter has been named partner of Satty, Hollis &Ciacco in Roslyn.  He has been with the firm for the past 10 years andspecializes in working with nonprofit clients.  ...  Senior tax partner AlanE.  Weiner of Melville-based Holtz Rubenstein & Co.  has been admitted torepresent clients before the U.S.  Supreme Court.  ...  Lisa Haynie, anaccountant with Marcum & Kliegman in Syosset, has been elected president ofthe Long Island Chapter of the American Society of Women Accountants.NORTH DAKOTAGary Ness, tax partner of Eide Helmeke's Fargo office, has been elected vicechairman of the firm's management committee.  Ness joined the firm in 1978,becoming partner in 1984.  Jim Thompson is a newly elected member of themanagement committee.  He has served as partner-in-charge of the Minot officesince 1987.OHIOMichael P.  Bohan has been appointed managing director of professional andtechnical services by the Institute of Management Accountants.  Bohanpreviously served as corporate controller of BP America Inc.  in Cleveland.He also worked as an audit partner at Deloitte & Touche in New York, servingas director of accounting standards.  ...  Saltz, Shamis & Goldfarb hasseveral new hires.  Mary M.  Kulak, formerly with Hausser & Taylor for morethan seven years, has been named firm administrator in the Cleveland office.Bruce E.  Manes has been admitted as a senior associate of the tax departmentand Maria V.  Martino is an administrative assistant in the employee benefitsdepartment.  Both are in the Akron office.  ...  Tom Bialota has joinedHausser + Taylor's Canton office as a tax supervisor.  Prior to this position,Bialota spent more than 30 years with the Internal Revenue Service, holding avariety of positions including tax auditor, internal revenue agent, computeraudit specialist and group manager.  ...  James T.  Martin, former presidentand CEO of Meaden & Moore in Cleveland, has been elected vice chairman of theAccountancy Board of Ohio.  Martin was appointed to the board two years ago byGov.  George V.  Voinovich.SOUTH CAROLINAIrvine T.  Welling, managing partner of Elliott Davis & Co.  of Greenville,has been elected chairman-elect of Moore Stephens North America.  He succeedsStephen B.  Humphries.SOUTH DAKOTABob Wiedeman has been re-elected to the management committee of Eide Helmeke.He serves as partner-in-charge of the Sioux Falls office.  Wiedeman has beenwith the firm since 1979 and was admitted to the partnership in 1981.WISCONSINWipfli Ullrich Bertelson has hired Greg Freeman as director of tax services inthe Appleton office.  Freeman has more than 11 years' experience in theindividual and corporate tax service area.CFP board elects new membersDENVER - The Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards has elected newmembers to sit on the 1996 Boards of Ethics and Professional Review, Examinersand Practice Standards.In other news, Loyola University in Chicago has been registered with theCertified Financial Planner Board of Standards.  Students completing theuniversity's financial planning program will be eligible to sit for thenational CFP exam.Appointed to the Board of Ethics and Professional Review are Lewis M.Wallensky of Lewis Wallensky Associates Inc., of Los Angeles; L.  MartinMiller, managing partner of Cogen Sklar of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.; and KatherineVessenes, president of Vestment Consultant Inc., of Bloomington, Minn.Mark J.  Smith, president of M.J.  Smith & Associates, Aurora, Colo., has beenappointed to serve on the 1996 CFP Board of Examiners.James L.  Budros, principal of Budros & Ruhlin Inc., of Columbus, Ohio,Herbert K.  Daroff, senior partner of Capital Analysts of New England inQuincy, Mass., and Patricia P.  Houlihan, partner of Cavill and Co.  inOakton, Va., have been selected to serve on the CFP Board of PracticeStandards.The CFP Board is a nonprofit professional regulatory organization founded toenforce education, experience and ethics requirements for CFP licensees.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996BRIEFSIIA rips internal audit outsourcingORLANDO, FLA.  - Terming the move by CPA firms into internal auditing "athreat to the objectivity and independence of the audit process," theInstitute of Internal Auditors is calling on federal regulators to impose newmandates on outsourced internal audits.Companies should be forced to disclose the practice in their annual reports,said IIA president William G.  Bishop in a letter to Securities and ExchangeCommission chief accountant Michael Sutton."If a public accounting firm performs all the internal auditing activities onan outsourced basis, it becomes, at the very least, an indirect advocate ofmanagement's assertion" over its internal control structure, said Bishop."An organization's external auditor cannot assume significant responsibilitiesfor performing internal auditing and, at the same time, retain itsindependence in both fact and appearance," the IIA said in a new positionpaper.Coopers fees up 7% to $1.9 billionNEW YORK - Coopers & Lybrand said its United States revenue for the year endedin September gained 7 percent from 1994, to $1.905 billion.  Overallconsulting revenue gained 15 percent, led by a 45 percent growth in fees frominformation and communications industry clients.  Business assurance servicesgained 5 percent and the tax practice expanded 12 percent.  Worldwide, thefirm reported a 13 percent sales advance, to $6.2 billion.U.S.  fee growth was led by a 30 percent gain in the firm's pharmaceuticalsand chemicals sector, 29 percent in media and entertainment, 20 percent eachin insurance and health care, and 15 percent in high tech.  The firm's humanresources advisory line grew 16 percent, to become one of the top five suchconsulting practices in the nation, Coopers said.Moss Adams acquires Kimball DixonSEATTLE - Regional firm Moss Adams has acquired local Medford, Wash., firmKimball, Dixon & Co., bolstering its West Coast presence.The $59 million Moss Adams now has 17 offices from Canada to Mexico, with aconcentration in Oregon, said managing partner Bob Bunting.  "We're filling inthat I-5 corridor, growing geographically," he said.  "We've done very wellpositioning ourselves as a dominant firm in small markets."The six partners and 16 employees of the $2 million Kimball Dixon join MossAdams, said managing partner Ron Dixon, who initiated the merger talks twoyears ago.CLR buys PW tax softwareCARROLLTON, TEXAS - Computer Language Research took another step to makeitself the dominant player in corporate taxation with the purchase of PriceWaterhouse's tax software line.CLR acquired Price's TMS software for about $15 million.  The price includes$11 million for the software and the remainder for accrued support liability.CLR is also planning to hire from 125 to 135 Price employees.  By comparison,CLR had 947 employees when it issued its annual report earlier this year.Price Waterhouse has 1,200 TMS users, according to Price spokesperson JanButler.  But that number includes licenses, which several individuals couldhave access to at a particular site.  Butler declined to discuss TMS revenue.Price also agreed that CLR's GoSystem 2 will be its exclusive in-housepreparation line.  CLR has a similar arrangement with KPMG Peat Marwick.  Aspart of the extended transition, Price will dedicate the services of threepartners involved in TMS for the next four or five years.Corrections"Homes boggle flat tax planners," (Dec.  11-31, 1995) incorrectly saidtaxpayers annually deduct mortgage interest worth $58 million, charitablecontributions of $17 million, state and local taxes of $26 million, and realestate taxes of $14 million.  In fact, the figures should have been renderedin billions, not millions."Automatic Software puts Big Business on market," Tech Briefs, (Nov.  20-Dec.10, 1995) reported incorrectly the company's location and phone number.Automatic Software is based in Los Altos, Calif., (415) 919-2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stableby Robert W.  ScottST.  LOUIS - Looking for resources to compete more effectively in aconsolidating market, SCS/Compute will be acquired by giant Thomson Corp.  ina deal valued at just over $30 million.The acquisition is the latest in a number of notable deals announced in recentweeks that signal increasing consolidation.  Others include the purchase ofCCH Inc.  by Dutch publishing giant Wolters Kluwer and Computer LanguageResearch's purchase of the TMS corporate tax business from Price Waterhouse.SCS/Compute's own financial position in an increasingly competitive market wasclearly a factor in its decision.  "We've been strapped for resources," saidRobert Nolan, SCS/Compute's founder, chairman, president and chief executiveofficer.Nolan, who plans to remain president and chief executive, said all softwarecompanies were facing strains from high- fixed costs.  "I think that is goingto be exacerbated by Windows development," said Nolan.Thomson is assigning SCS/Compute to the Research Institute of America Group,which includes Warren Gorham & Lamont and Practitioners Publishing Co., and isheaded by president Euan Menzies.  Thomson also owns Accounting Today througha separate subsidiary.RIA is getting an opportunity to develop a broad line of tax and accountingproducts.  SCS/Compute has two tax software packages, LMS/Tax and Tax Machine;a write-up package, Datawrite; and a growing number of client software titles.Nolan agreed to sell his 1.1 million shares to Thomson U.S.  Holdings, adivision of Thomson Corp.  of Toronto.  Thomson has launched a tender offerfor another 1.5 million shares outstanding - all at a price of $6.75 a share,up from recent trading at $2.375.The deal will cost Thomson more than just the stock price of $17.5 million.It must also redeem preferred stock and long-term debt owed to SCS/Compute'smajor lender.While growth in the tax preparation market has clearly reached a plateau,Menzies said he sees opportunity.  "We are confident we can take market shareaway from other companies," he said.But RIA is not getting a market leader in SCS/Compute.Industry sources rank SCS/Compute at about seventh place in terms of overallmarket share.But Nolan cited Thomson's deep pockets as an important aspect of the deal.Harvey Stein, executive vice president of Pencil Pushers Software ofBurlington, Mass., agreed, saying "it gives them a base to acquire othercompanies."During the last year, SCS/Compute had made three acquisitions, to mixedreviews.  SCS/Compute picked up, for example, In-the-Black software, a low-endpackage it was forced to rewrite.  In the last quarter, SCS/Compute acquiredSaltWare, a sales tax line, for$130,000 and stock now worth $54,000.  SCS/Compute also agreed in the lastquarter to buy RAM Software, a tax preparation line with 400 users, for about$500,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FORECAST &REVIEW:  By the numbers:  The top 10 news events of 1995Death and taxes.  The two constants made plenty of appearances in 1995'saccounting news.Death claimed an independent Kenneth Leventhal and a logical way to accountfor stock options.  Taxes - and what needs to be changed about them - werediscussed everywhere from executives' roundtables to kitchen tables.Sometimes death and taxes came together, as in the cancellation of last year'staxpayer compliance measurement program.But all wasn't gloomy.  Experiments, such as KPMG Peat Marwick's Baymark, andexpansion, such as American Express Tax and Business Services' (dreaded, tosome) growth, breathed fresh air into this year's news.Through it all, the American Institute of CPAs is undergoing a transformationthat should help members cope with all the issues raised by Accounting Today'sTop 10 stories of 1995.1.  "Melancon rattles top ranks of AICPA":  When Barry Melancon replacedlong-time AICPA president Philip B.  Chenok July 1, he pledged to reducebloat, break down bureaucratic fiefdoms and modernize the institute'soperations.  But he surprised even his closest supporters in October when hebegan a massive restructuring with a shake-up of top management ranks.  Hetrimmed the number of executive staff positions and directors.  Additionallayoffs of from 5 to 10 percent were expected late last year.  The changeswere made, Melancon said, to focus on an area he targeted as important sincehis nomination - delivering products and services members want.  The new andimproved AICPA also launched an advertising campaign aimed at making chiefexecutives and other decision makers in large companies think of CPAs asbusiness advisers.  An Accounting Today survey found that not only do CPAssupport advertising that would enhance their image, they would be willing tospend more than the $3 million the AICPA budgeted for the program.  2."Overhaul or not, big changes loom":  If you can't guess what this headlinereferred to, you were on a year's vacation.  Yes, alternative income taxsystems - especially the flat tax - were debated ad nauseam in 1995.  Inaddition to a flat tax bill proposed by Rep.  Dick Armey, R-Texas, anUnlimited Savings Allowance plan was proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., andPete V.  Domenici, R-N.M.  Others in Congress called for a national sales tax.Whatever the philosophy, the message is clear:  The tax system must bereformed.  And the experts say we're as close as we've ever been to a changein the current income tax system.  Look for the issue to figure in this year'spresidential campaign.  3.  "Texas board sues American Express":  The TexasState Board of Public Accountancy joined Florida in its crusade to stopAmerican Express Tax and Business Services Inc., formerly known as IDSFinancial Services Inc.  The board wants a Texas state court to forbidAmerican Express from signing its name to any financial statement that impliesthat it is an accountant.  The statements also may not contain any wordingindicating it has expert knowledge in accounting unless it complies with thePublic Accountancy Act.  Under the act, the only business entity that can do acompilation is a CPA firm.  American Express claims that the case is "allabout competition."  4.  "Tort reform leaps hurdle in Congress":  Theaccounting profession - and the AICPA - were poised to win the battle forlitigation reform.  The bill would have reduced the financial liability ofaccountants for fraud by their corporate clients and limited investors'ability to collect damages from accountants and others with deep pockets.Unfortunately, President Clinton vetoed the bill late last month.  5.  "Fewmourn as IRS kills TCMP audits":  A collective sigh of relief could be heardfrom tax practitioners across the country in late October, when the InternalRevenue Service announced it was going to indefinitely delay last year's roundof taxpayer compliance measurement program audits.  The IRS had planned toselect 153,000 tax returns and subject their owners to rigorous checkups, butbacked out after Congress refused to fund its entire $8.2 billion proposedbudget.  The IRS conducts the TCMP audits to gauge both the level of voluntarycompliance and the best methods for selecting tax returns for future audits.The AICPA had been troubled by the IRS' plan to subject all individual TCMPvictims to a "financial status" test or "economic reality" check.  During afinancial status audit, taxpayers are quizzed to find unreported income.  Theso-called "economic reality" checks also caused headaches as practitioners sawclients answering IRS inquiries about cash on hand at home, in a safe depositbox or "hidden somewhere."  6.  "'Filing season from hell':  House panel rakesIRS chief over coals":  The tax world was abuzz and aghast last tax season asmeasures used by the IRS to detect fraud were holding up refunds and tryingtaxpayer's patience from coast to coast.  Taxpayers claiming the earned incometax credit didn't receive their cash credit until the IRS double-checkedtaxpayers' and dependents' Social Security numbers.  Former H&R Blockpresident Harry Buckley called last year "without a doubt the most difficulttax season" when it came to customer dissatisfaction.  Buckley blamed thecomplaints on the "IRS' inability to effectively communicate the proceduralchanges."  Taxpayers who paid extra to have their returns electronically filedwere especially aggravated at having to wait for their refunds.  7.  "Politicskills FASB stock options plan":  After more than a decade of study and morethan two years of increasingly acrimonious opposition, the FinancialAccounting Standards Board dropped its plan to force companies to chargeexecutive stock options against earnings.  The FASB backed down only after itbecame clear that pursuing its plan could prompt the Republican-controlledCongress to seize accounting rule-making from accountants and place it undergovernment authority.  Constituencies in industry, especially high-techinterests, claimed the change would have devastated "the fastest growingsegment of the economy.  In the end, the FASB voted to seek only footnotedisclosure."  8.  "Leventhal deal firms up Ernst's real estate muscle":  In adeal that joined two real estate giants, Ernst & Young acquired KennethLeventhal & Co.  Los Angeles-based Leventhal's operations, once the 11thlargest U.S.  accounting firm, are run as a business unit within Ernst &Young.  Leventhal's departure left only three second-tier firms:  GrantThornton, McGladrey & Pullen and BDO Seidman.  9.  "With $1.9B sale, CCH gainsDutch uncle":  CCH Inc., the nation's largest tax publisher, was acquired for$1.9 billion by Netherlands-based Wolters Kluwer NV, a European giant, in atransaction announced late last year.  The deal ended the 103-year reign ofthe Thorne family over a business that now generates $600 million in revenue.10.  "Peat makes grab for Wall St.  fees with franchise deal":  KPMG PeatMarwick blazed a financial services trail when it launched an investmentbanking unit, called KPMG Baymark, with a group of veteran Wall Streetinvestment bankers.  The unit is providing private placement debt and equityfinancing to Peat's middle-market corporate finance clients.  While Peatdreamed of the millions of dollars in fees Baymark could generate, some CPAsquestioned whether the firm could maintain its independence with clients whohave signed on to Baymark.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LettersEthics dilemma has two sidesThis is in response to your story ("FBI douses report it wants CPAs to squealon clients," Aug.  21-Sept.  10) which refers to a USA Today article,"Accountants should turn in crooked clients."From these articles it is assumed that all three entities involved in thisdispute believe that CPAs have few ethical standards.  Your article alsosuggests that CPAs are not turning in clients unless the behavior is "soegregious" that in order for the CPA to avoid being tainted by it, he or shecontact the authorities.According to the American Institute of CPAs Standards Rule 102 ammended May20, 1991, "a member ...  shall not knowingly misrepresent facts or subordinatehis or her judgment on others."  Yet, they are following standards by notinforming the Federal Bureau of Investigation about clients because a membercannot "disclose any confidential client information without the consent ofthe client."  CPAs also fear the consequences of whistleblowing, such aslosing the confidence of their clients or, worse, getting fired by the firm.One of the questions not answered in your article is, what reward is the FBIwilling to offer to CPAs if they do turn in their clients?  If CPAs aregreatly involved in a crime, they would also be prosecuted.  If prosecuted,these CPAs would be terminated as members of the AICPA.  Arguments from bothsides should be presented in the same article.Every time CPAs take on new clients, they should use their integrity to decidewhether to get involved with "dirty clients."  CPAs are obliged to protecttheir clients, yet they cannot knowingly misrepresent facts.  If theyunderstand and remain objective, they should be able to control the problem.Perhaps this issue could be resolved within the AICPA rather than byoutsiders, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission.  However, asethical and professional behavior will always be, this issue will remaindebatable.Amy R.  Barrie Moscow, IdahoYour report on Linda Pappajohn's recent speech at the AICPA PracticeManagement Conference ("Clarity, ranges keys to compensation policies," Nov.6-19, 1995) included some solid advice on salary issues and compensationpolicies.  However, I want to share my surprise at the sample salary ranges inthe article, specifically for marketing directors, which range from a low of$21,317 to a high of $28,778.A quick call to Linda informed me that the salary ranges in the chart wereprovided to her by the Minn-Dak chapter of the Association for AccountingAdministration.  During our conversation, Linda thought that the low rangesmay reflect the salaries of secretaries with little background in marketingwho have been promoted.I don't know of a seasoned marketing director who will work within thosesalary ranges.  In fact, according to a Gallop & Robinson poll, the averageannual salary for marketing directors in all industries is $80,478.  A looserule of thumb among marketing directors in various industries:  You should bepaid 1 percent of a company's gross.Marketing directors in accounting firms often take on two other roles:director of public relations - average annual salary $55,500, according to thePublic Relations Society of America - and director of advertising - averageannual salary $61,611, according to Gallop.  Even studies within our ownaccounting industry, specifically the Pencor Report, publish that 17 percentof full-time marketing professionals earn between $50,000 and $75,000annually.If there is any validity to the Minn-Dak ranges, it's no wonder that LeeBerton of The Wall Street Journal reported recently that midsized firms arehaving problems competing with the Big Six.  (Incidentally, Boulay, Heutmaker,Zibell & Co.  is noted in Berton's article as a firm that is prospering byfighting the Big Six on our own turf with advertising, promotional videos andclient satisfaction programs.)Regardless of statistics, the truth is accounting firms need marketingdirectors who will work as partners with firm management, challenging them toincrease business, market share, opportunities and awareness with marketingprograms and strategic plans.  And believe me, no marketing director of thatcaliber will consider working for the salary ranges listed in the Minn-Dakchart.If accounting firms are settling for marketing directors with little, if anyexperience, and basically leading them by the nose, they will get what theypay for - small results within their comfort zone.  My advice to accountingfirms, especially since they usually hire one marketing professional and not awhole department, is to hire the best you can afford.  In this age of fiercecompetition, it's breakthrough marketing led by seasoned marketing pros thatwill set apart the winners from the losers.Lyne P.  Manescalchi, director of marketing, Boulay, Heutmaker, Zibell & Co.MinneapolisBoards must address unfair competitionThe letter to the editor by Bernard Kiely, of New Jersey, ("State boards needmore power," Oct.  9-22) misses the major issue- the unfair competition thatpurchasers such as American Express Business Services inherently have.They are only buying accounting write-up and tax practices to ultimately sellfinancial products to their clients.  That is why they can charge far lessthan a CPA, who is prohibited by most state boards from doing the same thing.The Federal Trade Commission was thinking along the same lines when it ruled afew years ago that CPAs could sell financial products, with full disclosure,to clients for whom they don't provide audit or review services.Most state boards are like ostriches with their heads in the sand, living inthe regulated past, and will only be forced to go along with the FTC whenlitigated to do so.This is an issue that affects all CPAs, large and small.Kevin A.  Lawrence, CPA Los AngelesMesonic thanks you for mentioning our Windows 95 Financial Accounting Softwarein Tech Briefs ("Mesonic offers Windows 95 accounting," Sept.  11-24).  Thiswas the first mention in your publication of an accounting software vendorshipping a Windows 95 accounting software package.You can imagine our suprise when the next issue of Accounting Today reportedthat another vendor claimed to have the first approved Windows 95 accountingsoftware ("SourceMate claims win with first Windows 95 accounting," Oct.9-22).  Mesonic would like to challenge this claim.  Mesonic's Windows 95version has been available since the beta days of Windows 95.A stringent testing procedure must be successfully completed and verifiedprior to a product being awarded the use of the "Designed for Windows 95"logo.  This testing establishes whether or not a program is eligible to besubmitted to Microsoft for the Windows 95 logo.  Mesonic's software packageWINLine 95 passed this test Sept.  13, 1995.  Furthermore, this same articlestates that, "SourceMate is field testing its Visual AccountMate with severalaccounts ...  The product is scheduled to have several modules shipping inNovember."WINLine 95 is currently shipping 20 modules, several of which are availablewithout any wait.  Because WINLine 95 was derived from our NT version, whichhas been on the market since 1993, your readers can be assured of a reliableprogram and not a first-level release.WINLine 95 accounting software by Mesonic is truly the "first Windows 95accounting system" to both pass testing and to be available on the market.Jeffrey Green, director of reseller support, Mesonic Oakdale, Pa.AmEx KOs Fla.  board in CPA title boutby Sandy HockTALLAHASSEE, FLA.  -- In a decision that's expected to sweep the country, afederal judge ruled that an American Express Tax and Business Services Inc.manager could call himself a CPA even though he works for a non-CPA-ownedcompany.In doing so, Chief Judge Maurice M.  Paul of the U.S.  District Court for theNorthern District of Florida struck down Florida statutes that prohibit a CPAemployed by a nonlicensed accounting firm and performing only non-attestbusiness services from telling clients that he or she is a CPA."This decision will affect most states," said Sarah McKenzie, nationaldirector of firm development and government affairs for Minneapolis-basedAmerican Express Tax and Business Services.  "That's why we brought it tofederal court.  It was a constitutional issue."In the wake of the decision, American Express was reportedly readying amassive new expansion program.  The company finished fiscal 1995 in June with$40 million in fees from about 341 professionals in 55 offices.  High-rankingAmEx strategists were said to be formulating a plan to reach $200 million inrevenue by the end of the decade.Chief Judge Paul ruled that the Florida regulation infringed on CPA StephenMiller's freedom of speech.Miller, senior managing director of American Express' Tampa office and leadplaintiff in the case, expressed relief that his 18-month court battle wasover."It's been a real tough year," Miller said after the judgment was handed downlast month.  "Everyone asks if I'm a CPA and I have to give them a lot ofexplanation about the legalities of what I can tell them.  It puts a lot ofcaution in their minds."The Florida Board of Accountancy will vote on whether to appeal the decisionto the U.S.  Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta at its meetingthis week, said John J.  Rimes III, a Florida assistant attorney general."Obviously, the state isn't happy," Rimes said about the Miller case.  "We'redisappointed in the outcome."Even with the Florida ruling, CPAs working for non-CPA firms should be carefulabout how they refer to themselves, Rimes warned.  The U.S.  Court of Appealsfor the Ninth Circuit in California ruled in September that the CaliforniaState Board of Accountancy could discipline a CPA affiliated with H.D.  Vestinvestment securities for advertising his CPA credentials while also acceptingcommissions.  Similar litigation also is pending in Texas and Louisiana, whilea preliminary investigation is underway in Arizona, Rimes said."It means there's some confusion out there," Rimes noted.  "There's noquestion about that."If the board doesn't appeal the decision, it could impose a disclaimer forCPAs who work for firms that aren't regulated by the state, Rimes said.If the Miller decision holds, it marks the third time in three years that theFlorida board lost a major case.  In June 1994, the U.S.  Supreme Court struckdown a Florida regulation forbidding attorney-CPAs from advertising their CPAand certified financial planner credentials.  In 1993, the highest courtabolished the board's rule that forbade CPAs from such solicitation activitiesas cold calling.While conceding that fighting such issues as solicitation was an outdatedposition, Florida Institute of CPAs executive director Lloyd "Buddy" Turmaninsisted that CPAs are dead set in favor of the fight against American Expresson the Miller matter.And the FICPA maintains that the issue involved is not simply allowing a CPAto call himself one.  It goes deeper- to the very structure of firms - and theprofession."What you end up with is a noncorporate entity being able to provide serviceswithout facing any consequences, except being sued," Turman said.  "Firms willhave a tendency to shuffle licensees in and out of a practice.  If a CPA getssued and his license gets revoked for substandard work, you just fire them.There's no discipline that can be taken against the corporation."This case, Turman said, "allows you to say you're a CPA, but you don't have toact like a CPA."Imagine, he said, a CPA in business who puts together real estate deals withreal estate professionals.  The CPA could take advantage of the "public'strust for CPAs" by saying he is one, but not perform any of the workassociated with them.For Miller, however, his case is about his freedom of speech."I should have been able to tell the truth," he asserted.  "It was alwaysawkward.  I'd have to say technically, I've earned my certificate, but thefirm I work for is not a CPA firm.  Unless you ask me, I can't tell you."Miller, a former Big Six staffer and sole practitioner, began his long,strange trip against the Florida board three years ago after the boardinformed him it didn't like the language his American Express office had usedin a compilation report.  The state then came back jointly against AmericanExpress, which at the time was still called IDS Tax and Business Services.The action against Miller led American Express to file a suit against theFlorida board in state court in March 1994, charging that the boarddiscriminated against American Express by holding that its CPA employees couldnot prepare third-party statements.  American Express claimed that sinceFlorida law allows anyone to prepare such statements, it was being unfairlysingled out.  American Express dropped its suit in September 1994 when theboard agreed to allow its CPAs to prepare third-party statements.American Express renewed its legal efforts in November 1994 when, with Milleras the lead plaintiff, it decided to test the constitutionality of Florida'sholding-out rule.American Express had concluded that the June 1994 U.S.  Supreme Court decisionthat allowed Orlando attorney-CPA Silvia Ibanez to publicly call herself a CPAin turn gave American Express employees the right to hold themselves out.Florida, on the other hand, maintained that the Ibanez case did not clarifythe holding out issue.  That attitude pushed American Express to refile thesuit.Miller admits that American Express, even though it has only 18 CPAs and atotal of 40 employees in Florida, scares many CPAs in the Sunshine State - andthe rest of the country."It's what we represent," Miller explained.  "We're a big corporation withmoney behind us.  We have the marketing and operations know-how that localaccounting firms don't.  They think that it gives us an unfair advantage."In fact, since his legal tussles began, Miller has fielded many telephonecalls from CPAs interested in the American Express system and in hooking upwith the company.  A CPA Miller thought was "interested in joining the fold"invited Miller and a staff member to visit his office."He was antagonistic from the start," Miller recalled.  "I said, 'Why did youinvite us over.' He said, 'You guys are the devil incarnate.  I wanted to knowsomething about the other side.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TECHNOLOGY:  TECH BRIEFSGREAT PLAINS RELEASES DYNAMICS C/S+ FOR SQL SERVER 6.0:  Great Plains Softwareof Fargo, N.D., was scheduled to begin controlled release of its Dynamics C/S+for SQL Server 6.0 this month.  The controlled release includes the Report andSystem Manager and General Ledger.  The line is designed to enable midrangecompanies to migrate financial applications to Microsoft's BackOfficeenvironment.  For further information, call (800) 456-0025.MICRO VISION EXPANDS SUITE PRICING OPTIONS:  Micro Vision of Commack, N.Y.,has implemented new pricing for its Accounting Professional Suite.  PresidentChandra Bhansali said the company offered options because it found users oftenhad one or more components of the five-package suite, which is sold for $995.Now, Micro Vision offers its Tax Relief software and any two components for$795, and $895 with three other components.  For more information, call (800)829-7354.SBT LINKS PAYROLL TO THE NET:  SBT Accounting Systems of San Rafael, Calif.,has designed Pro Series Payroll with WebPay to enable users to interacton-line with a national clearinghouse that manages direct deposits to or fromany bank.  The software is designed to handle payroll for up to 10,000employees.  WebPay is part of of an expanding line of InterNet products thatworks with the Pro Series.  For more information, call (415) 703-0400, ext.225.TELEMAGIC TARGETS ACCOUNTANTS:  TeleMagic of Dallas has introduced theTeleMagic Professional Accountants Edition of its contact management software.The program contains templates for small to midsized accounting firms andincludes the book, "Build Your Practice."  Special screens have been designedfor sole practitioners and firms.  The price is $299.  For furtherinformation, call (214) 733-4292 ext.  2865.MACOLA ENTERS BTRIEVE AGREEMENT:  Macola Software of Marion, Ohio, will ship ashrink-wrapped client/server package using Scalable SQL or Btrieve databaseengines with Macola's Progression and Horizon Series software.  Macola can usethe Server Edition of Btrieve Technologies' Scalable SQL for NetWare, Btrievefor NetWare and Btrieve for Windows NT.  The two companies will have jointmarketing.  Technical support will be provided by Macola.  For information,call (800) 468-0834, ext.  297.CREATIVE SOLUTIONS FIELDS OIL & GAS MODULE:  Creative Solutions of Dexter,Mich., has introduced the Ultra Tax/Oil & Gas module, which offers fouroptions for calculating percentage of depletion.  It also works with bothUltraTax/1040 and 1065 and the built-in depreciation capabilities as well asUltraTax state programs, even for states not following federal oil and gas taxregulations.  For more information, call (800) 968-8900.SOLOMON RELEASES SOLOMON IV FOR WINDOWS NT:  Solomon Software of Findlay,Ohio, is shipping Solomon IV (Server Edition) for Windows NT.  Previously, theproduct was available only for NetWare.  A three-user license is priced at$1,295 per module; $2,795 per module for six users; and $5,095 per module for25 users.  A conversion utility is available for those using the NetWareversion.  For more information, call (800) 4SOLOMON.ABACUS DEBUTS 32-BIT PACKAGE:  Abacus Accounting Systems of Edmonton, Alberta,will release an accounting line based on the R:base SQL engine in the secondquarter.  The new line will be paired with Abacus' Web Order Taker, which willcapture order information on the Internet.  In March, Abacus acquired MicrorimSoftware, which developed the R:base database system.  For more information,call (800) 665-6657.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CONSULTING INSIGHTS:  Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96Crystal balls are cloudy.  But one part of the technology horizon for 1996remains clear:  it's a Microsoft (desktop) world.There are technology trends that accountants should consider, such as theevolution of color laser printing and imaging.  There are market trends,particularly the continuing consolidation of vendors, that will have morepractitioners buying more software from fewer suppliers.  But in operatingsystems and general desktop applications, there's little choice but Microsoft.Particularly among smaller firms, 1996 is the year to choose whether to moveto Windows 3.1 or to Windows 95.  There's no reason to stick with DOS unlessyou are using a computer you should replace, because both Windows 3.1 andWindows 95 will run DOS applications (Windows 95 runs them very well).If you are happy with Windows 3.1, stick with it.  There's no compellingreason for buying 95, although its long file names and improved memorymanagement are nice, just not critical.For larger firms, corporate America, consultants and resellers, the choice isbetween moving to Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The latter offers stability,robustness and security- pretty compelling reasons for making a businessdecision.  Once Windows NT gets the Windows 95 interface later this year, it'slikely to be the product of choice for heavy- duty users and some consumers.On the general application side, only in the accounting market is 1-2-3 stillking of the spreadsheet world, and that's not going to last.  Everybody elseuses Excel.  Anybody who attended shows such as PC Expo has got to wonderabout Lotus' (now IBM's) commitment to 1-2-3.  Both the product and name wereinvisible in a sea of Notes signs.And with Novell trying to sell WordPerfect, how many users want to bet on thatproduct's future in word processing?  The other choice:  WordPro, part ofSmart Suite.  Will that be Microsoft Word or Microsoft Word that your firmbuys?The major question left in operating systems is whether Microsoft's NT Servertruly will displace Novell's NetWare.  It looks like 1996 will still be a yearof NetWare dominance, with strong gains by NT and the grudging co-existence ofthe two products.The one possible chink in the Microsoft armor:  on-line services.  TheMicrosoft Network hasn't taken off yet and for professionals, CompuServe isstill a better service because there are more accountants to talk to on it.On the Internet, Microsoft would like to repeat its dominance, but here it maybe cut off at the pass by Sun Microsystems and Netscape, both of which supportthe Java programming language, an emerging standard.Market consolidationThere will be more tax and accounting vendors failing or being purchased, withtax preparation vendors particularly vulnerable.  The need to develop both DOSand Windows products will simply prove too much for some smaller players.  Addon likely tax law changes and some companies will simply count their cash andgo home.Consolidation is not just about changing the number of players.  It's changinghow practitioners buy software.  Instead of buying from many small vendors, itwill be possible to buy a complete tax and accounting line from one source.Look for the big to get bigger.  Intuit has been flexing its muscles withdevelopment of programs and services such as the Intuit Financial ProfessionalProgram for its Pro Series users.  That's the kind of power that one-productcompanies will find hard to match over the long haul.Movement towards suites will continue.  There is not a true accounting suiteon the market yet.  Micro Vision's Accounting Professional Suite is more of abundle of products with different pricing options.  However, true suites, withbuild-in interfaces between products, are on the way.Look for Computer Language Research, CCH Inc., Research Institute of America,and perhaps Arthur Andersen with its new VantageSource unit, as well as anumber of smaller players, to join this race over the next two years.The "I" wordEverybody is taking about the Internet.  Surprisingly, it isn't all hype.But, it remains tough to sell and market most products on the Internet, unlessyou are selling a specialty item.However, the Internet appears to have a bright future in support, distributionof upgrades and bug fixes, as well as good, old-fashioned electronic mail.One of the companies pointing to the potential here is SBT Accounting Systems.It accepts orders via its WebTrader, but since it sells on terms, it doesn'thave to worry about credit card security.More important, SBT pioneered what founder Robert Davies calls "the poor man'sEDI" (Electronic Data Interchange) and hopes to use the Internet to seriouslycut product returns.That combination of cost cutting and customer service represents the potentialfor 1996.  And many tax preparation vendors are also recognizing the backoffice/support potential.  Internet support is going to augment, if notreplace, some conventional bulletin board-based support systems.Technologies to consider:* Imaging.  Accountants are only now waking up to the cost of storingdocuments.  Imaging is beginning to make an impact at smaller firms which arethe early adopters of technology.  * Video conferencing.  This has been a hottopic in the broader computer market.  Pricing just hasn't come down enough.In 1996, it's not quite there yet for smaller businesses and firms.  *Hand-held computers.  If you didn't need them in 1995, you won't need them in1996.  * Color laser printing.  The price is not yet low enough to make colorindispensable.  But it's getting close.  It won't be long before we all wonderwhat anybody is doing with just a plain black ink printer.  * Wide areanetworking.  Any firm with more than one office should at least look atalternatives to plain old telephone service.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FASB rules on nonprofits' investmentsNORWALK, CONN.  - The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued a newrule on how not-for-profit organizations should account for certaininvestments.Statement 124, "Accounting for Certain Investments Held by Not-for-ProfitOrganizations," is effective for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.The statement is the fourth to result from the FASB's project to resolve areasof inconsistency in accounting and reporting by not-for-profits.Statement 124 requires not-for-profit organizations to report at fair valueinvestments in equity securities with readily determinable fair values and alldebt securities, with gains and losses reflected in a statement of activities.The statement also establishes standards for reporting losses on investmentsheld under a donor's stipulation to invest a gift in perpetuity or for aspecified term."Although a significant number of not-for-profit organizations currentlyreport all investments at fair value, inconsistencies exist because existingguidance permitted alternatives," said FASB project manager Susan Weiss.  "Theboard believes that fair value more accurately measures the resources anot-for-profit organization has available to provide its mission-relatedservices."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accountingWASHINGTON - Financial record keeping at the Department of Defense is in suchdisarray that the Pentagon can't account for more than $20 billion in militaryexpenditures.But that's the good news, Defense financial officers told Congress.  Asrecently as June 1993 the military had nearly $50 billion in "problemdisbursements" - payments which could not be matched with any obligations -and dramatic progress has been made since then, they said.As evidence, Pentagon officials noted that the department expects to overpaydefense contractors by "only" $270 million in FY 1995.  Two years ago,military overpayments to contractors were approaching $800 million annually,Defense Comptroller John J.  Hamre said in a letter to Congress.For their part, however, members of the House government reform subcommitteeexpressed little appreciation for the recent improvements in the department'saccounting systems.  Subcommittee Chairman Steve Horn, R-Calif., who summoneda parade of military accountants to explain the Pentagon's chronically mangledbooks, told Defense financial officers that in the private sector theirsubstandard accounting practices wouldn't pass muster even for "Mom and Pop"businesses.Democrat Carolyn Maloney of New York offered an even harsher appraisal,calling the department's bookkeeping practices "a disgrace to Americanfighting men and women."Military financial officers acknowledge the extent of these problems, but saythey date back to before their watch."When I arrived, I learned that the department had serious problems inmatching obligations and disbursements," Hamre said, but these difficulties"go back 50 years to the founding of the department."Defense Inspector General Eleanor J.  Hill traced the Pentagon's bookkeepingtroubles back even further, noting that during the Revolutionary War, Armyquartermasters balked at financial record keeping on grounds that the militarycould not be run like the "plain business of a common storekeeper."Now "here we are 216 years later in the computer age and we still cannotsupply Congress with an acceptable accounting of expenditures," she said.Further complicating the situation are the "flawed business practices thathave built up over the past 40 years" within the department's patchwork ofinternal accounting systems.When the department was created at the end of World War II there were morethan 250 major accounting systems in operation throughout the military.  Eventoday, those systems remain "largely incompatible" with one another, and onlythree of them comply with the Comptroller General's accounting principles andstandards, General Accounting Office assistant comptroller general Gene Dodarotestified.To make matters worse, the Pentagon adopted a policy authorizing any one ofthe department's 300 financial offices to write checks on behalf of anyoneelse in the department - a procedure that created a "cross-disbursing"nightmare throughout the military.As a result, checks were written without first verifying whether there was "aclear path back to the accounting record in one of those 250 accountingsystems," Hamre explained.  "The result was a business practice [and aculture] of 'pay now, account for it later,'" he said.Despite these problems, department's comptroller disputed allegations that"the department's finance and accounting systems are so flawed that you can'ttrust the budget we have submitted to you."Department officials also flatly deny suggestions that the military'sfinancial reporting mess is the result of any widespread fraud or misconduct.Although GAO's Dodaro told Congress that CFO Act audits have revealedcontinuing "breakdowns in the department's ability to protect its assets fromfraud, waste and abuse," Hamre disputed allegations of sinister intent."The bulk of our problems are the product of innocent mistakes inside a verycomplex system where typographical errors produce thousands of mismatchedrecords that require subsequent research," he said in his letter to Congress.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 19965 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishmentsby Glenn CheneyNORWALK, CONN.  - In 1995, the Financial Accounting Standards Board rode outthe turbulent wake of its stock compensation project and went on to pound outfive new standards and move several other projects into the public forum."All things considered, we made good progress this year," declares Dennis R.Beresford, chairman of the board.He has good reason for feeling satisfied.  In the first half of the year, theboard issued three new statements that would go into effect for fiscal yearsbeginning after Dec.  15, 1995.  Statement 120 established rules on theaccounting and reporting by mutual life insurance enterprises.  Statement 121established the accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets.  Statement122 deals with mortgage servicing rights.By the end of the year, two more standards would be issued, and a number ofproposed standards would be released for comment.Despite the progress, it was the stock compensation furor that attracted themost attention.  Until the standard was issued in October as Statement No.123, many companies, public accounting firms, certain commissioners of theSecurities and Exchange Commission and even the U.S.  Senate complained thatthe proposed standard was unfair.  The original proposal would have requiredcompanies to recognize stock option compensation as an expense.  The eventualcompromise required only a disclosure of the effects of such compensation.According to Beresford, however, the fundamental issue was not the recognitionof stock compensation but the recognition of the sanctity of setting standardsin the private sector, a process that should not be influenced by politics oreconomic effects."The question now is whether we are going to be commended for listening towhat a large majority said," he says, "or whether we will be condemned forbowing to pressure and encouraging future efforts to get around theprivate-sector standard-setting process."Once stock compensation was out of the way, the board approved its last finalstatement of the year.  It was a third standard in a series on not-for-profitorganizations.  Statement No.  124 requires reporting at fair value certaininvestments in equity securities and all debt securities.  The new standardwent into effect for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.Big October harvestIn October the board reaped much of what it had sown over previous months.  Afew days before issuing the stock compensation standard, the board issued anexposure draft on consolidated financial statements.  If adopted as proposed,the standard will prescribe when entities should be consolidated and howconsolidated financial statements should be prepared.A few days later, the board released a special report on hedge accounting andderivatives.  While it resolves none of the thorny issues that have hinderedprogress on this project, it pulls together and analyzes many of theprinciples and problems involved.  The board hopes to issue an exposure drafton this important topic by the middle of 1996.Then, within a week, the board issued an exposure draft of a proposedstatement on transfers of financial assets.  It resolves long-standingquestions about whether transactions should be accounted for as securedborrowings or as sales.Comments on the consolidation and transfers of assets proposals are due inmid-January.On a roll, the board issued an Implementation Guide on Statement 115,"Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities," inNovember and planned a draft on the decommissioning of long-lived assets bythe end of the year.  Originally the project had been dedicated to nuclearpower plants specifically, but in 1995 the scope was expanded to includesimilar costs, such as those involved at mining or oil drilling sites.International outlookIn 1995 the board continued to expand its efforts to shed international lighton FASB projects."Every project that we work on now has some significant interchange with ourcounterparts in other countries," says Beresford.  "This is no longersomething that happens every few years.  It happens constantly."The board ended the year with two exposure drafts of international scope thatare ready to go but on hold to keep them in step with offshorestandard-setters.  One, a proposed binational statement on disaggregateddisclosures, will not be issued until the board's Canadian counterpart isready to issue a parallel document.  The second, a proposed statement onearnings per share, is ready but waiting for the International AccountingStandards Committee to release a proposal on the same issue.In the third quarter of the year the board tackled a key new project oncomprehensive income.  Deliberations have just begun, but the board is alreadyconsidering working with standard-setters in other countries to work toward astandard with international compatibility.An important document still out for comment deals with the effectiveness ofdisclosures.  The board has been torn by conflicting complaints of burdensomedisclosure requirements and a perceived need for more information among theusers of financial information.The board is also issuing an Invitation to Comment which addresses issuesraised in reports produced by the Association for Investment and ManagementResearch and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.Comments will do much to determine which projects end up on the board's agendain future years."We think there are some awfully interesting ideas in both of these reports,"says Beresford.  "But there are so many ideas that we need to do some seriousprioritization."At year's end, Beresford concluded that 1995 had been productive and had setthe stage for rapid output early in 1996.  Public response to the variousexposure drafts work will do much to guide the board through the new year.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NEW PRODUCTSSOFTWAREPeachtree Accounting for WindowsPeachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5 features a multimedia setuproutine that includes video and audio clips.  By watching, listening andanswering the appropriate questions when prompted, small businesses canautomate their books quickly.  Over 75 sample business templates providedetailed examples of successful small business models.  Release 3.5 features agraphical forms designer, LIFO and FIFO costing and five pricing levels foreach product.Price:  $129.  Existing Release 3.0 users can upgrade for a $9.95 shippingcharge.  Other Peachtree users can upgrade for $99.Peachtree Software(800) 247-3224SBT's WebTrader 2.0SBT Accounting Systems' WebTrader 2.0 enables instant, secure sales processingdirectly on the World Wide Web.  The program lets businesses post order formsfor products or services on the Web and then automatically processes them andsends a customer confirmation via e-mail.  WebTrader initiates and completesthe sales process by providing a connection between vendor and customer.Price:  $1,295.SBT Accounting Systems Inc.(415) 703-0400PowerSolutions' PLANMakerPLANMaker Version 2.0 for Windows allows the user to create dynamic businessplans for businesses of all sizes whether start-up or existing.  PLANMaker isalso used by consultants to prepare professional business plans for clients.The software guides the user step-by-step, providing the best formats andnarrative in easy-to-use modules that may be tailored to a wide range ofenterprises.  Complete financial forecasts are also included.Price:  $129.PowerSolutions(800) 955-3337Mirasoft ForFUND/Govt Accounting for WindowsMirasoft's Release 2.0 of ForFUND/Govt Accounting for Windows adds full 32-bitsupport for Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The product includes general ledger,budgeting, project/grant management, cash receipts, bank reconciliation,accounts payable, purchase orders, accounts receivable, fixed assets, payroll,utility billing and business licenses.  The software is written for use by anysize not-for-profit organization.  ForFUND is developed in Microsoft VisualFoxPro database language.  The software includes 19 user-definable fields foreasy query and report generation; budget import/export; utility billing cashreceipt fast fill; automatic reversing of posted journal entries; accountspayable select/de-select process; enhanced print-preview and print-to-file.Price:  Starts at $2,500 per module.  Upgrades are provided at no charge forexisting Mirasoft users.Mirasoft Inc.(800) 414-FUNDTKR Time & Billing for WindowsTKR for Windows utilizes Microsoft Access, which allows access to data fromprograms such as Microsoft's Access, Word, Excel and other Windows-basedreport writers.  Features include built-in security levels; operator-specificdefaults for data entry; no month-end processing; standard text for invoices;bills that can be created and saved for review before being posted; automatedpreparation of "customized" statements, fixed fee invoices and regularinvoices; extensive management and profitability reporting; and CPE tracking.Price:  $395 single user version (one to five staff).E.  F.  Haskell Software(800) 732-3688Time & Profit 1.0 for WindowsBytePro's Time & Profit for Windows automates all time and billing recordkeeping requirements - clients, calendar, time, billing and accounting.  Theuser enters his or her schedule in the calendar register.  Time & Profit takesthis schedule and processes it all the way through billing, then places allnecessary entries into the accounting system.  All billing for the day, weekor month can be accomplished instantaneously.Price:  $269.BytePro Corp.(714) 622-0884Yardi's Real Estate Asset Management for WindowsThe Yardi Asset Management System, a suite of five integrated softwareproducts for asset managers, allows real estate asset managers to captureperformance, portfolio, analytical and operational data.  The system'sholdings reports consolidate financial and occupancy data in one entirelycustomizable report.  The product also provides full NCREIF reporting.Price:  $2,000 and up.Yardi Systems(800) 866-1144HARDWARETroy MICR Font and Toner KitsTroy MICR Font and Toner Kits provide "on demand" check printing capabilityfor users of LaserJet printers.  The kits include Troy's MICR toner cartridgeand Troy font single in-line memory module (SIMM) with MICR and other securityfonts.Price:  $399, HP LaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR SIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HPLaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit; $399, HP LaserJet 4si MICRSIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HP LaserJet 4si MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit.Troy(800) 944-6757Best Data Voice and Data ModemsThe Smart One Professional series, 288DSVD digital simultaneous voice and data(DSVD) modems support V.34 data and V.17 fax communications.  The 288DSVD hasvoice mail/audio capabilities and a duplex speakerphone.  The 288DSVDalternately sends and receives voice and data, allowing users to talk on thephone while sending files, a fax or receiving data.Price:  $349.Best Data Products(800) 632-2378Micro Express' MicroFLEX-686/133The MicroFLEX-686/133 , based on the Cyrix 6x86-P133 chip, performs comparablyto a 133-MHz Pentium, while running at 100 MHz.  The computer includes 16MBRAM, a 4X CD-ROM drive, 1GB hard disk drive, high-density 3.5-in.  floppy diskdrive, mouse and 15-in.  monitor.Price:  $2,499.Micro Express(800) 989-9900PUBLICATIONSEncyclopedic Dictionary of Business TermsPrentice Hall's Encyclopedic Dictionary of Business Terms (cloth, 542 pages)by Wilbur Cross provides up-to-date information on words, phrases and meaningsto over 500 business and industry-related subject areas.  The guide is aone-volume source of information on business topics, from historical andtraditional language to the latest terminology in technical communications.Readers will also find lists of associations, logos, periodicals, demographicsas well as financial and legal information.Price:  $29.95.Prentice Hall(201) 592-2000Tulane Tax Institute on Video from TotaltapeTotaltape Publishing Co., in cooperation with the 45th annual Tulane TaxInstitute, lets you attend one of the country's most prestigious andlongest-running tax planning conferences.  Totaltape offers eight hours ofcommercial broadcast quality video; all CD-ROM programs are multimedia andfeature video or audio - 18 hours of digitally recorded conference lecturesthat are fully edited.Price:  $649 (complete tooling).Totaltape Publishing Co.(800) 874-7877CCH Entity PlusCCH Entity Plus has three publications - the Limited Liability Company Guide,S Corporations Guide and Partnership Tax Planning and Practice Reports.  TheCD-ROM disc also has an integrated research module, the Entity OptionsSummary, for both broad comparative coverage of the major issues faced bythose considering and comparing business entities and a gateway to in-depthtreatment of each type of entity.Price:  From $395 to $888 for a one-year subscription.CCH Inc.(800) TELL-CCH, Dept.  4819PPC's Accounting and Auditing CD-ROM LibraryPractitioners Publishing Co.'s A&A CD-ROM Library includes 13 of the company'spractice guides, which can be accessed in any combination.  Each CD alsocontains PPC's GuideWare software, which permits the user to customize andedit the guides' practice aids to fit each engagement.Price:  Dependent upon the number of guides selected.  PPC book owners pay $45per title.  New customers pay from $121 to $175 per title.Practitioners Publishing Co.(800) 323-8724Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projectsNORWALK, CONN.  - After a busy season late in 1995, the Financial AccountingStandards Board is planning to wrap up as many projects as possible by Juneand then size up its future direction according to what needs to be done rightaway and what ought to be done over the next several years.June is a key month because two of FASB's seven board members will becompleting their terms at that time.  Who their replacements will be and wherethey stand on various issues is at this point quite unknown.  The board,therefore, is hurrying to complete most of its current projects whileforestalling work on anything new.One of the two departing board members, Robert N.  Northcutt, has served as avoice of experience in corporate accounting.  The other, Robert J.  Swieringa,comes from an academic background.  The trustees of the Financial AccountingFoundation are striving to find replacements from those same backgrounds."We're trying very hard to finish several of our most important projectsbefore the two Bobs leave so we don't lose all of the effort they've put in,"says FASB chairman Dennis R.  Beresford.  "In particular, we'd like to issuefinal standards on consolidation policy and procedures, and on transfers ofassets and servicing arrangements.  We also hope to issue an exposure draft onhedging and derivatives."A bit further into the future is the leave-taking of chairman Beresford, whoseterm expires in mid-1997.  If Beresford has any pet projects he'd like toescort through the long due-process of setting standards, he'll have to beginearly in 1996.The board has recently been dedicating itself to strategic planning, somethingthat was difficult to do during the last decade of responding to the immediateneeds of accountancy."We're pretty far along in our strategic plan," Beresford says.  "Over time,we expect to be more proactive in deciding where financial reporting should beheading, as opposed to what has primarily been a reactive process.  We'd liketo focus more on tomorrow's problems and less on yesterday's and today's."One aspect of the board's strategic thought is that the demand for and theimportance of financial reports seems to be declining."It has been suggested that instead of looking at nitty-gritty accountingissues we should be looking at where the financial information package isgoing and what part we should play in that," Beresford muses.  "I hope thatover the next year we will be able to develop our game plan for the next fiveor 10 years."Public guidance will come into play in the second half of the year as commentscome in on an Invitation to Comment.  The invitation is a report on actionthat has been recommended by the Association of Investment Management andResearch and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.  Theinvitation asks commentators to prioritize possible projects that the FASBmight add to its agenda.Six months of palpable progressBetween New Year's Day and the Fourth of July, the board hopes to makepalpable progress on a number of important projects.The comment period for an exposure draft on consolidations policy andprocedures ends Jan.  15.  Public hearings are scheduled for Feb.  20 and Feb.21, with a final statement possible in the second quarter.The exposure draft of a statement on transfers of financial assets andextinguishments of liabilities seeks comments by Jan.  22.  Public hearingsare scheduled for Feb.  26 and Feb.  27.  If all goes well, a final statementmay be issued by the middle of the year.The board is hoping that an exposure draft on the closure and removal oflong-lived assets - formerly the project on nuclear decommissioning - alsomight be finalized in June.  But, like all other projects, that depends on thenature of comments received.By June, the board also hopes to hammer out a long-awaited exposure draft onhedging and derivatives.The board plans to release two exposure drafts in January in conjunction withother standard setters.A proposed statement on disaggregated disclosures will be released inconjunction with the Accounting Standards Board of Canada, and a proposedstatement on Earnings Per Share will be released at the same time as aparallel document coming from the International Accounting StandardsCommittee.The FASB's project on comprehensive income was added late in 1995 and theboard has barely begun to grapple with the issues involved.  Nevertheless, anexposure draft could be issued fairly early this year because the issues arerelatively limited.The direction of the board in the second half of the year, then, should proveinteresting.  Two new board members will assume seats at the big table inNorwalk, Conn., and some strategic thinking may have begun to congeal by then.July 1, then, just might be springtime at the FASB.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  For better recruits, target professors, surveysaysAcross dozens of campuses nationwide, the battle for tomorrow's businessleaders has intensified.  Recruiting top talent has become more aggressivethan ever and the Big Six have recognized the need to bolster their marketingefforts.A consistent presence and favorable reputation with students is fundamental,but, in this competitive market for superstars, not enough.  To gain an evengreater edge on campus, firms need to strategically target not only thestudents, but their professors.Although the Big Six routinely spend millions of dollars on faculty relationsprograms each year, they are receiving a limited return on their investment.With the exception of Arthur Andersen, which has consistently fostered strongfaculty relations, and Coopers & Lybrand with its recent faculty initiatives,professors are not impressed.A new study that measures the effectiveness of these programs reveals thatonly a few firms are making a considerable impact.  These firms are spendingtheir dollars wisely and, in doing so, are positioning themselves to be thefirms of the future.Until recently, the only method the Big Six had of measuring their reputationamong faculty was through surveys that polled accounting faculty at a largenumber of schools.  This method ignores the changes in campus recruiting andthe concentration of resources.Instead of casting a wide net across hundreds of campuses, many firms arefocusing their recruiting efforts on selected top schools.  In 1986, forexample, one Big Six firm reported hiring just 16 percent of its incomingclass from these top schools.By 1990, it had hired 26 percent, and now it hires more than 45 percent of newrecruits from its focus schools.  Due to the Big Six's recent, morespecialized recruiting focus at key schools, the sweeping overview of datacollected in past surveys has become extraneous.In addition, the manner in which the data is collected has caused some firmsto question the survey's accuracy.  To reflect the focused concentration ofcampus recruiting and faculty relations, our firm conducted one-on-onetelephone surveys with 150 professors at 59 of the country's top accountingschools.  The sample included schools such as the University of Chicago, theUniversity of Illinois, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania andthe University of Texas.To measure the faculty's perceptions of the Big Six, interviewers askedstraightforward questions such as, "which firm has the best relationship withstudents and faculty on campus, which firm offers the best advancementopportunities, and which firm is most successful in growing its practice?"The study was first conducted in 1993 and repeated in 1995 with 70 percent ofthe respondents participating in both.Distinct tiers have developedAlthough the faculty considered all the Big Six firms to be highly reputableand, at times, difficult to differentiate, they regard Arthur Andersen as thetop firm overall.  Coopers & Lybrand solidified its second place ranking in1995 by more than doubling its overall score compared to 1993.  Deloitte &Touche also improved its overall score to place third, while Price Waterhouse,Ernst & Young and KPMG Peat Marwick all lost votes in 1995.Arthur Andersen's and Coopers & Lybrand's high rankings were no great surprisegiven the tremendous energy and resources both firms devote to campusrecruiting and faculty relations.  Faculty members noted that Coopers &Lybrand, especially, has increased their efforts to court professors.  Coopers& Lybrand was ranked as the firm with the best relationship with faculty.  Asa whole, the faculty commented that they appreciated Coopers & Lybrand'srecent efforts to keep them apprised of new technical information.Arthur Andersen was consistently regarded as the firm with the bestrelationship with students.  Faculty perceived that the strength of the firm'srelationship with their students was in direct correlation to the highoffer/accept rate among their candidates.  KPMG Peat Marwick's ranking droppedsignificantly compared to 1993, a reflection of their recent reduced campushirings.In the categories of "growing its practice" and "technical reputation,"faculty ranked Arthur Andersen as the top firm.  Some faculty connected thegrowth of Andersen Consulting to Arthur Andersen diversifying its practice.Faculty ranked Ernst & Young second in growing its practice, commentingfavorably on its May 1995 merger with Kenneth Leventhal & Co.  In terms oftechnical reputation, Price Waterhouse slipped in overall votes compared to1993, but still held its second place ranking.Ranking brands of milkFor the firms that do not have an overwhelming presence or reputation, thenews is somewhat encouraging.  Because the faculty viewed all the Big Six asreputable operations, they had some difficulty in rating the firms in areassuch as "best demonstrates technical expertise on accounting topics" or"offers best advancement opportunities."One professor commented that distinguishing between the firms in these areaswas comparable to "selecting their favorite brand of milk."In other areas such as "best use of technology," professors felt that they didnot have sufficient information on which to base an opinion.  From the facultypoint of view in these areas, the field is still level and wide open.  Forfirms willing to make investments in educating the faculty in these areas,their reputation on campus may see a considerable jump.The courtship of faculty is critical to building a firm's reputation andtalent pool for several reasons.  Fostering strong one-on-one relationshipswith faculty provides an alternative pathway for firms to communicate with topstudents.Including the faculty in an overall recruiting program provides firms withadditional campus visibility as well as a means to educate faculty aboutaspects of their firms.  When approached by students, professors will then beable to offer valued and well-informed opinions about the career opportunitiesavailable within any particular firm.Professors with strategic ties to a firm tend to incorporate its data andresearch more readily into not only their own personal research, but alsotheir curriculum.  Classroom exposure brings the firm to life and providesstudents - a firm's future managers or potential clients - with in-depthexamples of a firm's capabilities and specializations.In addition to financially supporting the accounting department, facultysuggested other key components to building strong faculty relationships.These include consistently recruiting and retaining their students, providingtechnical information to assist in faculty projects, inviting professors toparticipate in faculty-only symposiums, sharing leading-edge information andfostering individual relationships over informal lunches.  Faculty commentedthat a closer, working relationship allows for a more thorough flow of companyand recruiting information.To reap a strategic advantage on campus, Big Six firms need to take anaggressive approach in their faculty relationships.  Well-planned investmentswill, in the long run, be money well spent.  With greater visibility andreputation on campus, firms will be able to attract their future businessleaders and impress potential future clients.Thomas Oh is senior researcher at Hanigan Consulting Group, a New York-basedmanagement consulting firm that specializes in assessment and strategy designof campus recruiting programs.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996HOT TIPSSO GET SOME NEW MAGAZINES FOR THE WAITING ROOM:  For every complaint a medicalpractice receives, 26 others go unreported, Dunbar, Cook & Shepard is tellingclients.And according to the White House Office of Consumer Affairs, six of those 26complaints are serious, the Indianapolis firm says.  As if that isn't badenough, each of those 26 unhappy patients will complain to about 10 otherpotential patients.TO OUTSOURCE OR NOT TO OUTSOURCE:  While outsourcing may be an easy road tolower expenses and improved administrative methods, in the long run quality ofwork, confidentiality and staff morale may suffer, Duitch, Franklin & Co.  iswarning its law firm clients.Carefully weigh the benefits against possible drawbacks before decidingwhether to outsource, the Los Angeles firm advises.  Some issues to take intoconsideration include:* Credibility.  Any forthcoming vendor or freelancer will be happy to supplyyour firm with references from other clients.  Check them, and talk to otherprofessionals.  But above all else, trust your instincts, and if you areuncomfortable with a candidate keep the work in house until you find arelationship you are comfortable with.  * Contract and pricing.  Make sureyour firm can get out of a contract, especially if the vendor's work isunsatisfactory.  Review pricing structure - if it seems too good to be true,it probably is.  * Staff morale.  Taking work away from a staff member simplybecause he or she seems overworked may prompt fear rather than relief.  Firsttalk to the staff to see if any other alternatives may be more appropriatethan outsourcing.  At some firms, legal secretaries and administrativeassistants have banded together to form an "assistant pool" to help outoverworked coworkers in a pinch.  * Confidentiality.  Review your clientroster and caseload, and check off those clients who might object to theirwork being outsourced and those matters that are too sensitive for outsideeyes.  * Damage control.  No one source is perfect - consider how well thefirm can rebound should an outside vendor suffer a major equipment or businessfailure.  Determine the cost of salvaging an incomplete project.DON'T TRUST THAT CRAZY UNCLE LOU:  While forming trusts can steer you out ofsome sticky financial situations, naming a trustee can be tricky business,Gikow Bierman & Talesnick is warning clients.  The Roseland, N.J., firm offersa list of items to consider when choosing a trustee.* Name more than one trustee, including a professional adviser.  While afamily member or close friend provides sensitivity to the beneficiaries'needs, the professional adviser can provide financial accountability.  * Don'tword a trust agreement so that an individual trustee doesn't have to retain abond.  While waiving a bond may save the trust money, a bond is the onlyprotection against embezzlement or misuse of funds.  * Name a "trustprotector" - often a family friend - who can discharge a trustee under somecircumstances or veto some of the trustee's decisions.  * Allow for a changeof trustee in case beneficiaries move out of state.  For example, if thebeneficiaries move to a state that does not have income tax, they may stillhave to pay state income taxes if the trustee lives in a state with incometax.  * Write performance guidelines into your trust, allowing beneficiariesto change trustees if they fail to meet a reasonable performance standard.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q resultsKANSAS CITY, MO.  - Marketing and expansion costs contributed to H&R BlockInc.'s higher than expected loss of $8.3 million, or 8 cents a share, onrecord revenues of $223.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31,1995.That compares to a loss of $1.3 million, or 1 cent a share, on revenues of$172.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.The company had announced in August 1995 that it had launched a full-throttleexpansion of CompuServe, its computer services subsidiary."CompuServe's recent decision to lead the market in offering low-cost Internetsoftware and access and its agreement to become the exclusive on-line serviceoutlet for Time magazine are good examples of our aggressive focus," saidRichard H.  Brown, H&R Block Inc.'s president and chief executive officer."Our goal is to have nearly 5 million subscribers worldwide by summer."CompuServe's revenues for the second quarter increased 37.9 percent to arecord $188.4 million, compared to the prior year's second-quarter figures of$136.6 million.  The division's pretax earnings were $22 million, compared to$34.3 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.In the second quarter, H&R Block Tax Services reported a pretax loss of $34.4million, compared to $35.1 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.Revenues declined 0.5 percent to $27.6 million because of decreased enrollmentin the division's tuition tax school.  Brown noted that due to the seasonalityof the tax business, second quarter results are not indicative of the expectedresults for the entire fiscal year.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TAXING ISSUESIRS DISCUSSES LIFE IN A POST-TCMP WORLD:  Lou Carlow, Internal Revenue ServiceAssistant Commissioner (Examination) updated a Dec.  5 meeting of the AmericanInstitute of CPA's Tax Division on the IRS' plans for establishing auditselection criteria in light of the agency's decision to cancel its taxpayercompliance measurement program audits.  Carlow indicated that the IRScurrently has an internal task force"attempting to come up with a new system."Meanwhile, Carlow said, the IRS will continue to rely on three sources foridentifying returns for potential audit:(1) existing DIF(discriminatefunction) scores- derived from the last TCMP cycle in 1988; (2) informationfrom district and national office research projects; and (3) its emergingmarket segment specialization program activities.IRS FLIRTS WITH TAXABILITY OF FREQUENT FLYER MILES:  The IRS recently forayedinto the sensitive issue of whether the use of airline frequent flyer milesconsitutes the receipt of taxable income.  In a recent technical advicememorandum, the IRS concluded that an employer's air travel expensereimbursement plan didn't qualify as an "accountable plan" because itaffirmatively permitted employees to keep their miles.  Without "accountableplan" status, expense reimbursements are included in an employee's income,subject to withholding, and claimed by itemizers on Schedule A as amiscellaneous deduction subject to the 2 percent floor.  It is worth notingthat the plan in question specifically stated that employees were permitted tokeep the miles they accrued on business travel.  The TAM generatedconsiderable public and media attention, and subsequent to its release, IRScommissioner Margaret Milner Richardson is reported to have told a group ofpractitioners that the national office currently has no projects in the"frequent flyer" area.  (TAM 9547001)401(K) FRAUD TARGETED:  Labor Secretary Robert Reich announced a campaign bythe Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration to crack down on fraud in401(k) plans.  The anti-fraud effort includes both 300 pending investigationsand a consumer education program targeted against employer misuse of 401(k)funds.  Some of the "10 warning signs" contained in the consumer educationcampaign:late 401(k) statements, former employees having trouble gettingbenefits paid and contributions held by an employer for more than 90 days.FINAL PT PREGS ISSUED:  The IRS has released final regulations under CodeSection 7704 applicable to publicly traded partnerships (PTPs) that define"established securities market" and a "secondary market or its substantialequivalent."  The regulations also modify and extend existing safe harborsfrom PTP treatment.  The final regulations largely follow earlier proposedones.  The preamble to the final regulations also indicates that the IRS isconsidering guidance on definitions relating to the PTP exception for certainpartnerships with passive income, and has asked for public input on what theproposed guidance should look like.  (T.D.  8629)IRS DELAYS '96 WITHHOLDING FORMS:  The IRS has announced that it is delayingthe issuance of the 1996 Form W-4 due to the possibility of tax law changes inthe pending budget bill that may have an impact on an employee's withholding.The IRS is asking taxpayers to continue using, and employers to continueaccepting, 1995 forms.  The IRS said that it plans to issue new forms as soonas possible once legislation is finalized.  (Ann.  95-104)Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996J.D.  Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis lineDENVER - J.D.  Edwards, which specializes in AS/400 software, has joined theranks of companies seeking resellers for its financial line.Earlier this year the company released Genesis for companies with annualrevenue of $10 million to $100 million."It's relatively price competitive with PC-LAN [accounting software]," saidRick Byrne, director of Genesis operations.Genesis marks a departure for J.D.  Edwards, which had previously concentratedon selling enterprise-wide systems on the AS/400.  But it is in line with themovement of other higher-priced accounting packages into what is referred toas the middle market.  That market is roughly defined as companies withrevenue of from $10 million to $500 million.Genesis includes financial, distribution and manufacturing software that canbe sold as a suite.  The manufacturing suite includes distribution andfinancials.  Distribution software includes financials.  Byrne said a 20-userdistribution system would cost more than $50,000.Although many accounting consultants make sales in that price range, many arenot experienced in AS/400 software.  However, there are a few firms which willbe able to play in that arena."To play, you've got to have familiarity with that system and have grown upwith the System/34 and 36 world," said Jim Metzler, partner and consultant atGaines, Metzler and Kriner, of Buffalo, N.Y.  System/34 and 36 are the olderIBM minicomputers which IBM largely replaced with its AS/400.Metzler said only a handful of firms do AS/400 consulting, including his.Metzler's firm also sells the hardware.  He said that the AS/400 is "easierfrom a complexity perspective than many networks," but that historical pricepoints scare away firms.  He views the AS/400 as more cost-effective thanPC-LAN networks, especially for "clients who need multi-tasking and minimalcare and feeding."Metzler's firm resells and installs software from Daily & Wolcott, acompetitor of J.D.  Edwards.Genesis supports Windows clients and is Windows 95 compliant, Byrne said.  Thesoftware will operate in both PC and terminal environments.More recently, J.D.  Edwards introduced the OneWorld line, a follow-up to itsWorld software.  OneWorld is a client/server package, which expands support ofhardware to work stations running Microsoft NT Server.More expensive than Genesis, OneWorld is likely to be streamlined in the nextyear to 18 months for a version that will also be available to resellers.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programsSanta Claus left a bundle of new low-end accounting software packages underthe tree and visions of new programs for accountants danced in vendors' headsthrough the New Year.In time to welcome 1996, Intuit, Peachtree, BestWare, New England BusinessService, Computer Associates and DacEasy all introduced new versions of theirsmall business accounting packages.And those vendors who don't actively recruit CPA firms as resellers orrecommenders were eyeing how to structure programs in order to involve firms."We're working on a formal recommender program," said Drew Paxton, Intuit'sInternational Project Manager, Business Products Group.Similarly, David Dalton, director of marketing for 4Home Productions, said hiscompany will investigate a CPA program for its Simply Money.It's very clear what's at stake.  As NEBS introduced its One-Write PlusVersion 5.0 for Windows, it said that 50 percent of One-Write users say anaccountant recommended the purchase.  One-Write has been particularly strongin this group in supporting a consulting program.BestWare of Rockaway, N.J., already had an active channel program for itsM.Y.O.B.  Accounting software, but recently appointed its first ConsultantProgram manager.  DacEasy has about 300 certified consultants, many of whomresell.Rob Hartlage, a CPA who operates Asystants, a Sellersburg, Ind.-basedconsulting firm, said many accountants don't understand the opportunitieslow-end consulting offers."They [accountants] wonder why someone would pay $99 for a package and thenspend $500 to $1,000 to help use it," said Hartlage.  "They will."Hartlage consults for DacEasy software and does some limited work with Quickenand One-Write Plus.  He said despite all the effort to make accountingsoftware easier to use, clients need someone to help them get started.Paxton's comments came as Intuit introduced new versions of its line withQuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0.  There's one change, though- Intuit hasdropped its claim that QuickBooks is bookkeeping software and now aggressivelytouts it as accounting software.Although Intuit claims more accountants recommend QuickBooks than any othersoftware, the company has not formally enrolled firms in the process.That's likely to change.  Intuit has already established its Intuit FinancialPartner Program, which seeks to give referrals to CPAs.  The first year was abit slim:  10,000 firms signed up, but Intuit only got 7,000 referrals.  Thecompany hopes to triple referrals this year.4Home Productions, the small-business, consumer software arm of ComputerAssociates, is also looking at establishing a consulting or recommenderprogram or both, according to David Dalton, director of marketing.Low-end accounting software is getting more robust, particularly morecustomizable, and supposedly easier to use.  But forays into vertical marketsby these vendors may offer accountants more chances to develop consultingopportunities.Most of these products allow the user to modify fields in reports or entryscreens or both and to pick from sample charts of accountants from differingtypes of businesses, which can be used as templates.  Particularly popular isthe ability to reorder or hide fields.Drag and drop editing of fields is increasingly popular.  Simply Accountingfor Windows 4.0 from 4Home productions use drag and drop on the home screen.M.Y.O.B.  6.0 from BestWare supports drag and drop modification of reportfields while DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95 offers the capability for forms.This is one of the few areas where the competitors are ahead of QuickBooks,which requires the use of a dialogue box to rename fields.Easier setup is also a common goal.  With the Windows version of One-WritePlus, users set up companies through an interview process.  Intuit of MenloPark, Calif.  also has adopted the interview form with QuickBooks andQuickBooks Pro, while Peachtree Software of Norcross, Ga., carried theinterview setup into the world of multimedia with video and audio clips.BestWare has used the interview approach since version 4.0 of M.Y.O.B.In DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95, DacEasy of Dallas, takes a page fromWindows in offering the Easy Setup Wizard.QuickBooks Pro is trying to claim unique customization abilities to allowusers to tailor documentation and features for more than 20 differentindustries.Users, said Paxton, "are looking for something that can be made specific totheir businesses."  While other packages provide charts of accounts that canbe used as templates, QuickBooks offers custom documentation for niches, suchas construction.To a certain extent, 4Home is simply trying to keep pace.  Dalton admitted hiscompany fell behind its development cycle.  But he added, "I think we'll comeback strong."Simply Accounting adds the ability to store both prior and current year'sfiscal data and print comparative financial reports.Besides its customization features and set-up interview, Nebs expanded on-linehelp and provided expert definitions of financial and accounting concepts.DacEasy lays claim to being the first of the group to design its system forWindows 95.  It offers 100 business templates and offers report customizationthrough a Report Wizard.  Like QuickBooks, the latest DacEasy software alsoincludes time and billing and contact management features.M.Y.O.B.'s report customization is similar in offering more than 100 templatesand enabling drill-down analysis.  It provides time and billing informationless directly, offering the Timeslips Accounting link to pull time and billingdata from Timeslips.  M.Y.O.B.  has also added the ability to import data fromQuicken.Low-end accounting softwareDacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95Price:  $109DacEasy Inc.Dallas(800) 322-3279M.Y.O.B.  Version 6.0Price:  $79.95 to $139.95 depending on platform and payroll option.BestWareRockaway, N.J.(201) 586-8986One-Write Plus Version 5.0 for WindowsPrice:  $69.95New England Business Service Inc.Nashua, N.H.(603) 880-5100Peachtree Accounting for Windows Release 3.5Price:  $129Peachtree SoftwareNorcross, Ga.(800) 228-0068QuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0Price:  QuickBooks 4.0 3.5-in.  disk, $99, CD-ROM, $129 (Windows); $119(Macintosh)QuickBooks Pro:  3.5-in.  and CD-ROM, $189, all versions.IntuitMenlo Park, Calif.(415) 329-6926Simply Accounting Version 4.0 for WindowsPrice:  $69.954Home Productions(Computer Associates International)Islandia, N.Y.(800) 773-5445Note:  All prices reflect estimated retail prices.Source:Accounting TodayBack to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ACTION IDEA:  How to have a successful seminarEven if you've managed to attract half the business community to your seminar,your efforts are far from finished.  Not only do you want the attendees toenjoy the session, but enjoy it enough to attend another one.  Here are sometips:* The place - The room should have no distracting elements, and shouldaccommodate your guests when seated as well as gathered on breaks.  Arrangeseating so attendees participate.  Lighting must be adequate.  Offerrefreshments.  * The program - Distribute handouts so the audience can followalong.  Humor goes a long way toward holding interest; so does audienceinteraction.  Schedule regular breaks, about every 45 minutes.  * The followup - Distribute and collect evaluation forms, and respond personally to anyextremely positive or negative evaluations.  Make sure all attendees in yourmarketing database receive firm correspondence.Source:  Rex Meighen &Co., Tampa, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Budget worries kill workload relief billWASHINGTON - The chance that workload compression relief will come to smallCPA firms soon is slim.A provision that would have allowed partnerships and S corporations to choosetheir own fiscal year didn't survive the final conference budget bill Congresshanded to President Clinton."It was a major disappointment," said Gerald W.  Padwe, vice president of taxfor the American Institute of CPAs.The AICPA had been the major backer of the provision, which would have allowedthe pass-through entities to make quarterly estimated tax payments on behalfof their owners.  The owners would be relieved of quarterly payments if theircompanies paid for them.While the proposal was included in the House of Representatives version of thebudget, its price tag probably forced it to be dropped during conference billdiscussion.  According to Padwe, the AICPA was told the provision would havecost $335 million through five years.  Another estimate quoted by Lindy Paull,majority staff director of the Senate Finance Committee, said the bill wouldcost $355 million over seven years.Either way, it's not a phenomenal total when you consider the size of thebudget.  But it was worth enough to be used as part of the budget bargainingbonanza.  Padwe speculated that the provision was axed when Rep.  Bill Archer,R-Texas and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, had to find ways to payfor making the proposed capital gains tax cut retroactive to Jan.  1, 1995.Rep.  E.  Clay Shaw, R-Fla., the original sponsor of the provision, has toldAICPA leaders he'll try to get the proposal reinstated if they can devise away to make the workload compression plan revenue neutral.  Padwe, however,takes a fatalist's view on Shaw's chances."We would love to see it come back," Padwe said, "but as a practical matter,they say when something has fallen out of a bill it's hard to get it back in."Although the AICPA's outside economist projected that the workload compressionproposal wouldn't drain tax dollars from the system, the Joint Tax Committee'sprognosticators came up with the $355 million mark.  The reason?  According tothe terms of the current provision, the quarterly estimated tax payments wouldbe made at the 34 percent level.  If a taxpayer owns all the shares of an Scorporation and is in the 31 percent bracket, why would he want to make thepayments?  On the other hand, if the same taxpayer were in the 39.6 percentbracket, he would be more than happy to pay the 34 percent."He'd say, 'I'm getting the use of that money until next April,'" Padwe said.That's what ends up costing the government those millions.  (The AICPA is nowproposing to increase the tax to 35 percent.)Padwe still hasn't given up hope.  This year the 104th Congress is still incontrol, so the AICPA doesn't need to find another champion for the bill.Unfortunately a presidential election year isn't the best time to find a taxbill, which is the typical vehicle to attach this provision to."It's not a bill you'd expect to stand alone," Padwe said.  "It's going to behard to find 500 congressmen to say, 'This is the most exciting thing I'veever seen.  Quick, let's pass it.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Congress passes tort reform bill with veto overrideWASHINGTON -- Much to the relief of the American Institute of CPAs, Congressvoted to overturn President Clinton's veto of securities litigation reform.The president had vetoed the legislation, which shields independentaccountants from abusive liability damage awards.  The veto shocked billsupporters, including the AICPA.The bill sailed through Congress last month as the House and Senate raced toadjourn the 1995 legislative session.  Final passage of the bill - a toplobbying priority for the Big Six accounting firms during each of the past twoCongresses - was "testament to the widely held belief that the tide offrivolous securities litigation in this country must be stopped," AICPAofficials said.A key provision of the bill for the accounting profession places newrestrictions on the ability of plaintiffs to use the "joint and several"standard of liability for extracting huge damage awards from CPAs when otherdefendants in the case are unable to pay their portion of the damages.Instead, the legislation establishes a system of "proportionate liability"under which accountants and other peripheral defendants will be expected topay only their fair share of a judgment.That proportionate liability shield isn't completely bullet-proof, however.Small investors will continue to be allowed to sue based on the "joint andseveral" liability standard, and accountants who knowingly participate in asecurities fraud will remain subject to full "joint and several" liability.Additionally, even in the proportionate liability cases, CPAs would berequired to pay up to 150 percent of their proportionate share of damages whenanother defendant is insolvent.At the same time, the legislation also contains a number of provisions toensure that accountants and other business advisers are held accountable incases where they knowingly permit their clients to engage in securities fraud.The final version passed by Congress amends portions of the U.S.  SupremeCourt's controversial 1994 Central Bank decision to restore Securities andExchange Commission authority to bring "aiding and abetting" cases againstCPAs for knowingly violating federal securities law.A separate provision of the bill codifies a key recommendation byinvestigators of the savings and loan crisis that would require outsideauditors to disclose suspected client fraud to the appropriate enforcementagency.For his part, AICPA President Barry Melancon called the final bill "a fairbalance between the rights of truly defrauded investors and those start-upcompanies and outside professionals who have become victims of a small groupof entrepreneurial lawyers abusing the legal system."Passage of the legislation drew a sharply different reaction from critics oflitigation reform.Consumer Federation of America Chairman Howard Metzenbaum attackedcongressional supporters of the bill for "carrying the ball for some veryspecial interests who only have a selfish financial interest to protect."The securities industry, accountants and corporate insiders are far less inneed of protection than is the small investor in the marketplace," he said.In contrast, congressional advocates of the litigation reform measurecontended that the legislation would have increased investor control of classaction securities suits "so that settlements benefit the plaintiffs and notjust the plaintiffs' attorneys."According to representatives of Sen.  Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., the bill'schief sponsor, under the current system "investors generally receive only 7 to14 cents per dollar of loss, and only after the plaintiffs attorneys taketheir fee off the top."To address this problem, the bill eliminates the "lodestar" approach tocalculating fees, under which "attorneys get to skim right off the top of asettlement award," they said.  Instead, lawyers will be allowed to pocket only"a reasonable percentage of the award they obtain for their clients."In addition, the legislation includes provisions to:* create a uniform pleading standard by adopting guidelines established by theU.S.  Second Circuit Court of Appeals; * restrict the use of "professionalplaintiffs" in class action securities lawsuits; * require more completedisclosure of settlement arrangements to enable plaintiffs in class actionsuits to make informed decisions about attorney's fees; and * encourage moremeaningful corporate financial projections by establishing a new SEC-supported"safe harbor" for forward looking financial statements.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TAX PRACTICE:  Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep watersRICHMOND, VA.  - Rob Stepp went from looking for submarines to searching fortax deductions.The former Navy chief petty officer bought one Jackson Hewitt Tax Servicesfranchise and purchased the rights to open four more offices in the Richmondarea five years ago.  He's also planning to open a kiosk at his local Wal-Martthis tax season and to add two more storefronts by next tax season.After a decade in the Navy as a sonar technician, Stepp found that hisenthusiasm for accounting hadn't waned."All my life, I've loved numbers," Stepp said.  "Math was my favorite subjectin school.  I never used a calculator."Stepp was still in the Navy, stationed in Virginia Beach, Va., when he wasinducted into the Jackson Hewitt system.  Because he received computertraining in the military, a friend in town asked if Stepp could help iron outa few technology bugs at her tax practice.  His assignment was supposed tolast a few days, but ended up growing into a part-time job.Stepp caught tax preparation fever, which led him and his wife, Helen, toacquire the existing Richmond office and open four new locations in nearbyneighborhoods."We wanted these surrounding territories because they had no competition foryears," Stepp said.  "There were only H&R Block, CPAs and accountants.  Theaverage taxpayer doesn't need a CPA or accountant to do his taxes."But the Navy didn't equip Stepp with the practical skills needed to run abusiness."You get into the military and you've got a sure paycheck," Stepp noted.  "Youwon't get laid off.  The biggest thing you have to do is show up."The hardest part was hiring a staff, Stepp recalled.  Finding qualifiedcandidates and going through the interview process was a chore.  Anddetermining a salary scale was a nightmare."If they had experience working at H&R Block, it wasn't fair to pay thembeginners' wages," Stepp said.  "In the military you don't have that.  You'repaid according to your rank."The first months were tough.  At the time, some of Stepp's more than 60employees had a lot of experience, some had "just basic training" and some hadtax knowledge, but no computer training."It was quite a year," Stepp said of his May 1991 to early 1992 adventure."I'm glad it's over."In retrospect, Stepp said he should have taken more time to expand hisbusiness, which now employs 90 workers in tax season and eight after May 15.Stepp's offices handled 5,800 clients during the 1995 tax season.His advice to first-time business owners:  Find someone experienced who canwork as an assistant.  He also suggests that novice business owners advertisein their local newspaper.Stepp credits his practice's success - he won Jackson Hewitt's annual customerservice award - to the cheerful atmosphere in his offices."We hire happy, upbeat receptionists," he said.  "If you get a bad reception,you can forget about seeing that client."In the interest of customer satisfaction, Stepp and his staff spent lastsummer calling all their clients to ask if they had any problems with thepractice's service during the 1995 tax season.  Nationwide, taxpayers sufferedthrough refund delays because of fraud checks involving the earned income taxcredit and Social Security numbers.Those who said they had a problem were asked for suggestions on how theservice could be improved.  The clients also received a certificate for thefree preparation of one tax return."People were angry at all tax preparers," Stepp said about the 1995 taxseason.  "Once they found out that we didn't know that the Internal RevenueService kept these procedures under wraps, they were OK.  Their biggestcomplaint is, 'I want a bigger refund.'" Even the Navy couldn't help customerswith that one.Dealing with customers also was new territory for Stepp to explore when heleft the Navy.  And while he succeeded in civilian life, Stepp concedes thatit's not always easy for those leaving the military to find a fulfillingsecond career."The real work is difficult to handle," Stepp said.  "In the Navy, someone wasalways there to tell you what to do."Editorial:Flunking the testThe CPA exam needs reformThe night before accounting school grads take the CPA exam, they should prayfor one of two things:  acute accounting knowledge or the luck to take thetest with a pack of boneheads.Either way, they'll do fine.  That's because the American Institute of CPAs,which administers the Uniform CPA Examination, uses a quota system to rate CPAcandidates.  First, those scoring 75 percent correctly on the test areautomatically in the CPA club.  But, if those scoring 75 and above are notequal to 30 percent of the test takers, grades often in the 60s are simplyrounded up to 75 to meet the 30 percent quota.It sounds like a strange way to introduce a new crop of young adults into aprofession that prides itself on precision and integrity.  The exact mechanicsof it all even escapes the comprehension of two out of three state regulatorssurveyed by the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy.But the results of the May 1995 exam have sent the issue to the front andcenter for many state regulators.  In last spring's exam, grades were adjustedto make 62 the pass point on two sections of the test, but no adjustments weremade for candidates who scored less than 75 on two others.  By one estimate,6,000 of the 61,650 candidates who might have passed the test were flunked sothe AICPA could make its 30 percent target.The South Dakota board complained that it is only a matter of time before alegal challenge is made to this procedure.  The board is right.  It would betough to explain to a candidate that he or she flunked just because he or sheis smarter than only 69 percent of those taking the test.It's time that NASBA and the AICPA put an end to the quota system.  Bothgroups should work together to create a new system involving, first, a testthat reliably measures proficiency year after year, and second, a definitivepassing score that requires no curving to meet an arbitrary, monopoly-imposedquota.Every candidate must be assured of a fair test.LETTERS FROM EXAM CANDIDATES:Exam results 'tough to swallow'Thank you for the shocking revelation about the CPA exam ("Fight over CPA examtests the testers," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995).  I was greatly disturbed anddeeply saddened after reading your report, because I could have been one ofthe 6,000 candidates who otherwise would have passed the test with gradeadjustment.  I scored 67 on the May 1995 Financial Accounting Section - mylast paper to pass, on which, according to your report, 66 was the passingpoint after grade adjustment.Despite the fact that I hit 68 a few times in other papers, I never questionedthe grading system.  I forced myself to admit that somebody did better than I,therefore, I did not deserve to pass and had to study harder.The May 1995 result was very tough to swallow, even more so after I read yourarticle last night.  I feel most sorry for my wife and two children, for allthe sacrifices, understanding and encouragement they put in for me.David P.  Sin Scarborough, OntarioI was a November 1995 candidate for the Uniform CPA Examination.This was my ninth time taking the exam due to the fact that I have been out ofcollege for more than 10 years.  However, through studying for and by retakingthe exam, my scores have shown a certain degree of improvement toward the 75percent passing score.My reason for contacting you is that I have become very concerned about thegrading process which is used to determine the actual percentage that isdeemed passing or failing on the exam and how that percentage is determined.Most CPA review course admininstrators tell their students that a 67 through69 score is graded upward to a passing 75 percent, yet, on the May 1995 exam,I received a score of 69 on the Business Law section.In a recent special report in Accounting Today, (Fight over CPA exam tests thetesters," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995) the following points were brought to myattention as a CPA exam candidate:* It is stated that "if less than 30 percent of the candidates score 75percent, the failing grades are curved upward to assure that at least 30percent pass."  * A 65 might be a passing grade in one year but not in thenext.  * On the 1993 exam, candidates answering only 65 percent of thequestions correctly on the Accounting Theory exam were given grades which werecurved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the 1992 exam, a 52 score wascurved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the May 1995 exam the grades wereadjusted to a make the passing grades 62 on the Accounting and Reportingsections and 66 on the Business Law and Auditing Sections.  Thirty-fivepercent were allowed to pass on this exam.With reference to this article, on the May 1992 exam, I scored over 52 onthree sections of the exam.I would like to know what criteria is used to determine which candidates areto be included in the 30 or 35 percent passing rate and how the subjects inwhich they are allowed to pass are determined.I have become very concerned about the grading procedures due to the fact thatmy grades have only increased by a very small margin in six of the nine timesin which I have taken the exam.  In at least three instances, my grades werealmost exactly the same.  I was a little concerned at this point.After receiving my scores for the May 1995 exam, and also after reading thearticle, I became very disturbed that only a percentage of candidates areallowed to pass the exam, even if a 69 through 74 score is obtained.  I amsure this is also very disturbing to other candidates who have scored in thisrange.What is even more alarming is that no one knows how, in any given year, thepass point is determined.  Personally, it makes me feel as though I amshooting in the dark, yet never hitting anything.As important as this exam is to accountants and to entry into the profession,I feel that as a CPA candidate and, certainly, one who has studied in order tomaster this area of learning, there needs to be a better understanding of thegrading system which is used to determine our career paths.Marlene Parham-Murphy ChicagoEditor's Note:  A copy of this letter was sent ot the National Association ofState Boards of Accountancy.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employeesWASHINGTON - A new study suggests that the potential annual private sectorovertime liability for misclassification of exempt status under the Fair LaborStandards Act is $1.8 billion per week, or $95 billion annually.The Employment Policy Foundation's study is based on Census Bureau wage andhour data and assumes that all white collar employees now classified as exemptwere in fact non-exempt.Kenneth L.  Deavers, the author of the study and the conservative group'schief economist, notes that such an outcome might be considered to be extreme,"but was seriously considered by the Minimum Wage Study Commission in its 1981report."In a more immediate and consequential sense, the study shows that potentialemployer liability for overtime pay could be substantial, the group said.Because employers found to have misclassified non-exempt employees as exemptare liable for two years back pay under the FLSA, the liability for back paycould be $1.9 billion for each 1 percent of the white collar workforce foundto be non-exempt.  And, if the violations were found to be willful, the backpay liability extends to three years and the award is doubled.Deavers describes the existing Department of Labor definitions and tests fordetermining exempt status as "so arcane and subjective they lend themselves toemployer misunderstanding and possible administrative manipulation."Deavers goes on to say that "if firms incorrectly categorize employees asexempt, or in some other way disqualify employees from exemption, they areliable for back pay for overtime and, in some cases, punitive damages.  It isthese potential costs that motivate firms to push for clear-cut rulesdetermining exempt status under the FLSA.""The definitions used to determine who is an exempt employee have not changedfor nearly 50 years, despite the revolutionary changes in the workplace,"according to Edward Potter, the group's president.  "Under the present systemof subjective definitions, an employer never knows whether it has properlyclassified employees until after an administrative review lawsuit.  Clearly,the FLSA exemption should reflect the characteristics of modern-day work:increasingly knowledge based, requiring independent judgment on the part ofthe workers."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AICPA, AT&T cite businessesDETROIT - The American Institute of CPAs and AT&T Capital have awarded $50,000in grants to three local entrepreneurs to help finance their businesses.The Partners for Growth grants were given to a new basketball facility forinner-city teenagers, the owner of a bookstore and coffee house dedicated toincreasing cultural awareness within the African-American community, and tothe president of a minority-owned environmental chemistry consulting firm.Partners for Growth, which began in 1994 as a pilot program in Houston andPhiladelphia, provides financial assistance to new businesses that demonstratea positive social impact.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Expect the unexpected:  Trends to watchHang on.  1996 is going to be bumpy ride.  Start with a late-to-press tax codeand finish with a presidential election.  In between, add management-by-chaosat the American Institute of CPAs and wild card court decisions on CPAregulation.  And 1996 is sure to be wild and unpredictable.But that hasn't deterred Accounting Today's fearless prognosticators.  Herethen are the top trends to watch in 1996:Inroads by non-CPAs:  Four of the top 10 fastest-growing tax and accountingfirms are hardly your traditional, CPA-owned businesses.  They includefranchises like Jackson Hewitt or conglomerates like American Express.  EvenCPA insiders say the days of CPA-owned monopolies are numbered.But beyond direct threats, look for new competition from unexpected sources:Baby Bells are offering start-up business services.  Consumers and smallbusiness are buying new business and accounting software at a blistering pace.Bankers are end-running accountants with consumer-like matrices for businessloans and on-line record keeping services.CPE gets a makeover:  Some leaders of the profession are openly questioningthe value and purpose of mandated continuing professional education.  But moreimportant, computer-based training using multimedia programs, on-line chatsessions and just-in-time delivery could radically reshape how CPAs choose,use and pay for CPE.  Some of the products that will point the way arescheduled for 1996.Tax system overhaul:  If the flat tax started to loom seriously for the firsttime in 1995, then the 1996 presidential election year seems sure to keep italive.  No matter who's elected, the next president will have run on aplatform of tax reform.CPA advertising:  With the American Institute of CPA's $10 million adcampaign, even tradition-bound, rank-and-file local CPA firms are testing themedia waters for the first time.AICPA/state society coordination:  Under attack to consolidate services andcut duplicative costs, AICPA chief executive Barry Melancon is leading a drivefor the profession's trade groups to end hostile rivalries.  Look for advancesin CPE and health insurance.Value billing:  With clients becoming increasingly cost conscious andtechnology reshaping the underlying economics of traditional hourly billing,tax and accounting practitioners are increasingly turning to alternativepricing policies, for instance:  Tax prep priced by the form, consultingengagements priced by the percentage of savings, standard accounting servicespriced as part of a bundle of products.  Hot books on the subject:  Lastyear's "Innovative Billing and Collection Methods That Work" by Charles andJoseph Larson, published by Irwin Professional Publishing; this year's"Breaking the Paradigm" by August Aquila, from the AICPA.New work place solutions:  In this new era of diminished expectations, a newgeneration of professional is striking a fresh balance between career andpersonal fulfillment.  Large firms like Ernst & Young are 'hoteling' staffers- providing home office workspace only when needed.  Midsized firm CliftonGunderson is offering partner-level flextime.  Local firms are going virtual -like CPA Janet Caswell in Bloomfield, Mich., who sent her staffers to work athome with laptops, e-mail systems and an 800 phone number.Trade show power shift:  The AICPA and state societies have long held a lockon the pace-setting conferences in the CPA business.  But declining attendancerevenue and increasing vendor competition are adding a new element ofcommercialization to the conference schedule.  As the accounting professiongets increasingly technology-driven, watch for technology vendors to take moreactive and visible roles.  For instance:  This year the AICPA will launch thePractitioner's Symposium, consolidating three old conferences and makingvendors an integral part.  The National Society of Public Accountants isconsidering a technology show.  Microsoft is investigating a number of ways ofestablishing its own conference presence.  And Tom Davis, a CPA consultant andAccounting Today software reviewer, is planning a software show for AmeliaIsland, Ga.  The SoftEx show, long aimed at big companies, will be adding asmall-business focus this year.Consulting takes the driver's seat:  After a year of tremendous double-digitpercentage gains in management advisory services, consulting has clearlyemerged as the driving force at the Big Six.  Ernst & Young could be garneringhalf its fees from consulting by 1999.Financial planning:  With tax work becoming more of a commodity andmarginalized, an increasing number of tax professionals are turning topersonal financial planning.  Membership in the AICPA's financial planningdivision has surged with the recognition of the rival certified financialplanner designation.  The number of registered advisers is booming.  And witha flat tax, planning could be all that's left.Outsourcing:  Re-engineering and rightsizing are driving staff andadministrative functions into the waiting arms of accountants and businessadvisors.  Over the next three years, outsourced assignments could jump from26 percent of the world's 300 largest corporations to 42 percent, according toArthur Andersen, one of the most aggressive information technology providers.Even the level of controversial internal audit outsourcing could more thandouble.CPA firm diversification:  KPMG Peat Marwick's creation of Baymark, a captiveinvestment bank, was just the tip of the iceberg as firms grapple for newsources of income.  Ernst & Young is aiming to become a major player inhospital administration.Related trend - Expansion goes vertical:  Firms are acquiring skills andpractices in strategically important niches.  Among smaller firms, forexample, Yergen & Meyer in Portland, Ore., has acquired TGS, a local boutiquefirm with Pacific Rim connections.IRS hunkers down:  With much of the momentum for a flat tax fueled by simplehatred at the IRS, the agency can be expected to pull in its horns.  Withoutthe taxpayer compliance measurement project, for example, watch for the IRS topick new audit targets using computerized statistical techniques.Related trend - Go ELF yourself:  By going on-line as much as possible, theIRS could soon be circumventing established electronic filing services.Non-financial performance measures:  With the traditional audit in decline,expect a slew of ideas for providing new assurance services.  KPMG PeatMarwick is rolling out its Business Measurement Process to augment the audit.The AICPA has a committee developing more.Related trend 1 - CPAs create new system of product development:  But evenmore important, the profession could be forging a totally new system ofcreating CPA-only services.  Instead of writing cookbooks detailing every stepof the new process, standard-setters might only mandate results, leaving themethodologies to innovators in the CPA marketplace.Related trend 2 - Plain-paper financial statements:  Whether the AICPAapproves so-called assembly statements or not, clearly many CPAs believesmall-business clients are clamoring for simplified reports.  Watch for CPAsto find products to compete with low-end or non-CPA competitors.Windows sets the standard:  Although the accounting market may lag behind therest of the world, it is inevitable that Microsoft's Windows will become thestandard software platform.  The expenses of rewriting DOS software coulddrive many smaller software vendors out of the business.Related trend - Intuit, armed with TurboTax, becomes a standard of its own inelectronic commerce.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Quotables, 1995"An accused mass murderer has more rights than a taxpayer fingered by the IRS.Jeffrey Dahmer was considered innocent until proven guilty, but Mom and Popsmall business owners ...  are not afforded this protection."- Rep.  James Traficant, D-Ohio,leader of the charge for new "taxpayer rights"legislation to a House Ways and Means subcommittee."It's been a brutal year.  We have had 10 times the number of threats.  It's akill-the-messenger mentality."- John Hewitt, president of Jackson Hewitt, a Virginia Beach, Va.-based taxpreparation chain, on the delayed refunds during the filing season from hell."Looking for logic in the IRS code is kind of like looking for love in asingles bar.  You may find a little bit of it somewhere, but it's unlikely."- Paula Cozzi Goedert, tax attorney with Chicago's Jenner & Block, on the IRScrackdown on unreported income for nonprofits."There's no such thing as an economic reality audit.  They don't exist."- IRS deputy commissioner Michael Dolan, responding to the National Society ofPublic Accountant's concerns.Buckley simply "decided he didn't want to do it anymore.  He just wasn'thaving fun."- H&R Block spokesman on chief executive Harry Buckley's retirement."Sometimes the attitude is, 'Well, we're Peat Marwick, and this is the waywe've always done it.' Then you have to answer, 'Well, who bought who, baby?'- Curt Mingle, senior executive partner of Clifton Gunderson & Co., at anAICPA conference, referring to a Big Six mentality that would occasionallycrop up in the three offices Clifton had acquired from Peat."During my confirmation hearing, I was surprised at how few people knew how wewent about our business."- IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, when warning a new Congress notto make laws that are impossible to administer.The taxpayer compliance program "is my definition of mixed emotions.  I feelbad for the client, but the fees are pretty good."- Jeffrey Raymon, member of the AICPA small business taxation committee, onthe since-killed TCMP audits."You know how they say it ain't over till the fat lady sings?  Well, the fatlady hasn't even gotten on stage yet."- Real estate consultant and CPA Stephen Roulac, on his pending charges offraud and request for punitive damages in a suit against Deloitte & Toucheclaiming breach of fiduciary duty and breach of contract.  Roulac had alreadybeen awarded $1.25 million in damages.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995BARRY WHO?  - "Barry Melancon, please," said the caller to the AmericanInstitute of CPA's New York office."Who?"  asked the receptionist.  "I'm sorry, I don't have that name in thedirectory.""But he's the new president of the AICPA," the caller said."Oh, you mean Me-lahn-KON?  He won't really be here until, like, July.""Ok, thank you.  I guess I'll try him in Louisiana."TV NEWS SHREDS CPAS BECAUSE CPAS DIDN'T - A bevy of Chicago accountants werecaught red-faced on the 11 o'clock news for failing to shred many confidentialclient documents before trashing them.A local television station news crew from WMAQ unearthed all sorts ofinteresting records by going through the dumpsters of major CPA firms andfinancial institutions.Unused checkbooks, bank statements and tax returns were just a few of theitems dug up.WE WOULDN'T TOUCH THAT WITH A 10-FOOT POLL - San Diego CPAs felt the bite ofAmerican Express Tax & Business Services after sending a survey to members ofthe local chapter of the California Society of CPAs.The survey asked if CPAs thought American Express reps were "snakes in thegrass who have no business being a part of our meetings."  AmEx didn't taketoo kindly to being compared to reptiles.  "To be referred to as snakes seemsmean-spirited at best and defamatory at worst," wrote AmEx counsel SarahMcKenzie to San Diego chapter president Doug Obenshain.  Obenshain apologized,but that wasn't good enough for McKenzie, who requested he either retract thecomments or publish his letter of apology in the next chapter newsletter.I JUST WANNA SHOP - All it took was a Hindu monk and a good accountant tostraighten out the Yin and Yang of singer Gino Vanelli's life.Vanelli became an overnight sensation in 1978 when his hit record "I JustWanna Stop" sold a million copies, making him a multimillionaire.But apparently a million dollars doesn't go as far as it used to, and Vanelliquickly racked up quite a debt, supporting friends and relatives and buyingnew homes.Vanelli began a spiritual journey, seeking direction from a world ofphilosophies.  He spoke with Benedictine monks in Big Sur, Calif., Incapriests in Peru and Zen priests in Japan, finally meeting a Hindu monk nearMalibu, Calif.The monk closed his eyes, opened them and gazed far into the sky.  After amoment of silence he said the words that would bring about Vanelli's financialsalvation:  "What you really need is a good accountant."LIFE IS LIKE A BOX OF LAWSUITS - Paramount Pictures Corp.  has resolved itsfinancial differences with "Forrest Gump" author Winston Groom.The studio had claimed it hasn't cleared any "net profits" for the blockbustermovie, and gave Groom only $250,000 for his work.  The movie reportedlygrossed $341 million in the United States.The settlement came soon after Groom retained attorney Pierce O'Donnel, thesame lawyer who represented writer Art Buchwald in a similar dispute againstParamount regarding the Eddie Murphy movie "Coming to America."In addition, Paramount agreed to buy the sequel.  This time Groom got anundisclosed seven-figure sum.FROM THE HOME OFFICE - Concerned about his viewers' finances, CBS "Late Show"host David Letterman offered a few signs that you've hired a bad accountant.Among them were:* You hear him on the phone saying, "Have I ever let you down, Leona?"  * His"short form" looks suspiciously like a cocktail napkin.  * He used to be somekind of financial big shot in Orange County.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Rogue AAA 'Club' demands changeSARASOTA, FLA.  - A small but influential group within the American AccountingAssociation has officially challenged the governance of the organization,claiming unfair representation and poor management.Informally calling themselves "The Reform Club," the disgruntled college anduniversity faculty have gained enough support to propose threenear-revolutionary bylaw changes and bring them to a vote before themembership of less than 10,000.Although even the reformers doubt they'll win, the battle is rocking anotherwise staid association of college and university faculty.  It is alsoposing a first challenge to new executive director Craig Polhemus.  He tookover from Paul Gerhardt, who retired after two decades of service last summer.The proposals would open up the executive committee to a broader nominatingprocess, encourage the proliferation of sections within the organization, andallow members to receive one of the section journals as part of membershipdues.Critics of The Reform Club reject the charge that the organization isundemocratic or that its highest echelons are closed to small-school faculty.They criticize the club's proposals as vague, with the potential to fragmentthe association.Describing the AAA's executive committee as dominated by 10 or 12 doctoraldegree-granting schools, Paul Williams, a professor at North Carolina StateUniversity, said the panel has ignored member needs."Most members are at schools like N.C.  State, and the AAA is not responsiveto the types of problems we encounter," Williams says.  "Our primary job is toteach and only in the last couple of years have we had a teaching section.'The Reform Club' agenda1.  Open ruling executive committee to nominations.  2.  Foster new andsmaller special-interest sections.  3.  Impose market discipline on journalpublishing.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Get real, AICPA tells flat taxersby Sandy HockCORONADO, CALIF.  - As an American Institute of CPAs committee prepares torelease a 225-page report on alternative income tax systems, the committee'schair challenged those touting reform to get real."You're dealing with theoretical rhetoric and missing the realities that weaccountants tend to revel in," said Byrle M.  Abbin, chair of the AICPA'sconsumption tax task force.Economists from all sides "are so far apart that I don't trust either end ofthe spectrum," Abbin, a retired partner from Arthur Andersen & Co., told the420 conferees at the AICPA Fall Tax Division meeting here last month.Abbin's committee report, scheduled to be released this week, is not intendedto be a policy statement on each reform proposal.  Abbin said, however, thatthe AICPA doubts that substituting a flat tax, the most talked about taxreform proposition, would "appreciably simplify" the system for manytaxpayers.Since 70 percent of individual filers use the standard deductions, Abbin wrotein the back-up material provided for the conference, the loss of itemizeddeductions does not change their situation.Further, whether standard or itemized deductions are used, any individual withtaxable income of less than $100,000 can get his or her tax liability fromForm 1040 instructions."For them, the effect is the same as having one flat rate, at least withregard to the complexity of calculating the tax," Abbin wrote.And the flat tax was just one of the areas touched on when Abbin moderated analternative tax panel discussion that featured a member of former RepublicanCongressman Jack Kemp's Tax Reform Commission and a Democrat offering theparty's response to the commission's work.Speaking for the Kemp commission, Loretta H.  Adams, a San Diego businessowner, said the current level of tax complexity "is more than just a hassleand drag on the economy."  In fact, Adams said U.S.  companies spent $127billion and individuals spent another $65 billion complying with tax laws.Losing that $192 billion to tax compliance and preparation is the equivalentof "taking General Motors' output and dumping it in the ocean."After attending public hearings in eight cities and hearing from 125witnesses, the Kemp panel came away with one message:  The current tax systemshould be replaced.  The commission drew up six principles tax reform shouldpromote:  simplicity, stability, neutrality, visibility, economic growth andfairness; taxes shouldn't be hidden.While Adams said the Kemp committee will release its report early this year,John Buckley, the minority chief tax counsel for the House Ways and MeansCommittee, is already speculating that the commission will back a flat tax."It may be the flat tax as proposed by [Rep.  Dick] Armey would be what isrecommended," Buckley said.  "If it is, I think I can say the Democrats willoppose it."In short, Armey, a Texas Republican, calls for a flat tax rate of from 17 to20 percent.  It's known as the proposal that will allow taxpayers to filetheir returns on a postcard.Buckley argued that calling the Armey plan a flat tax is "misleading."  Forindividuals, the flat income tax would be levied on wages and retirementdistributions.  Dividends, on the other hand, would be exempt."There would be a substantial shift of tax burden down the income scale,"Buckley maintained.A flat tax would repeal the earned income tax credit, which would contributeto increasing taxes on the lowest 20 percent of working Americans, he added.Self-employed individuals would not be entitled to a standard deduction sothey would be paying the 17 to 20 percent rate "from dollar one," Buckleysaid.  And since the Armey plan would allow employers to deduct wages, but notemployees' fringe benefits, it would give companies an incentive to drophealth insurance in favor of salary increases.In addressing the other tax proposals bandied about, such as the nationalretail sales tax plan endorsed by Sen.  Richard G.  Lugar, R-Ind., Buckley wasequally lukewarm."Retail taxes are a small part of the economy," he said.  And only threestates have tried to tax services, which is a large segment of the economy, headded.Abbin gave a thumbnail sketch of each of the major tax proposals.  Heexplained that the plan furthest along in the thought process is the unlimitedsavings allowance proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and Pete Domenici,R-N.M.  That bipartisan plan favors savings and taxes consumption.  Armey'sproposal is a five-page bill that extracts certain segments of the InternalRevenue Code, Abbin said."It leaves a lot of questions," he added.And all that is concrete about the plans of Rep.  Bill Archer, R-Texas, todismantle the Internal Revenue Service and overhaul the tax system areinterviews with the press.But he did offer some opinions about the proposals.  Here are a few snippets:National retail sales tax:  "They'd have to control cascading [taxes on top oftaxes].  ...  [The plan's backers] want a killing off of the IRS.  I call themthe tax militia.  They think Republicans who favor the flat tax orNunn/Domenici are ultra-liberal."Flat tax:  "The key element is for international trade.  Everything made inthe United States is taxed, even if it is exported.  If there's no taxation onoperations outside the United States the whole nature of international taxplanning goes out the window."USA plan:  "Exports will have border relief, but exports will be taxed."Value-added tax:  "A credit invoice system will never happen here.Politicians don't like that obvious nature."  In other words, taxpayers wouldsee how much their government costs them.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Geo.  S.  Olive acquires local health care consulting firmINDIANAPOLIS - In a move that doubles its fees in the health care niche andestablishes a consulting arm, regional firm Geo.  S.  Olive & Co.  hasacquired local boutique Kimmerling, Myers & Co.Now the largest health care practice in the state, GSO is poised for evenfurther expansion in the niche, managing partner John Harris said."Our effort is to become part of the health care industry, not just to serveit," Harris said, adding that the firm will become more involved with tradeassociations and seminars, and will even develop some products - such asbenchmarking statistics - useful to the industry.  "Our goal is to become thelargest health care consulting firm in the Midwest."GSO's $2 million health care practice had consisted mainly of compliance work,while the $2 million Kimmerling, Myers is virtually all consulting.  GSO,which ended fiscal year May 1995 at $43 million, expects to jump to $50million by May 1996, Harris said."They were servicing clients we didn't have access to," Harris said.  "Wedidn't have the consulting experience.""GSO had physician clients, while Kimmerling, Myers served facility clients,"said Jeff Kimmerling, managing partner of Kimmerling, Myers.  "It made senseto put our work together.  We expect to double the health care practice in twoyears."GSO's health care practice will operate out of Kimmerling, Myer's Indianapolisoffice under the name Olive Health Care Consulting.  The division will beheaded by Kimmerling, who joins GSO as a partner along with James Myers,Michael Merkel and Michael Craig.  KM's 20 staff members also joins GSO.With 10 offices throughout Indiana and Illinois, GSO now has 70 partners andmore than 600 staff.  The few people comprising GSO's existing health carepractice will move into the Olive Health Care Consulting office, Harris said.Ten new hires have been made to supplement that office, Harris added.PRACTICE MANAGEMENT:  AICPA woos college students with interactive CD-ROMNEW YORK - It may not stir quite as much interest as a keg party, but theAmerican Institute of CPAs has created a funky-yet-informative CD-ROM aimed atencouraging college students to become CPAs.The second phase of the AICPA's two-level campaign to encourage new recruitsto the profession, "Room Zoom:  The CPA SourceDisc," offers students a varietyof windows into a CPA's world.  The interactive CD contains about 20 minutesof video, audio and still photos, plus a large body of text and plenty ofgraphics."We needed the proper medium," said John Daidone, AICPA manager of recruitingprograms.  "CD-ROM offers the best approach to illustrate the CPA professionas being technically proficient."The AICPA has produced 5,000 CDs which will be sent to the state societies,the recruiting contacts at larger firms and several colleges and universitiesacross the nation, Daidone said.  The state societies are encouraged todistribute the CDs directly to local colleges as well.  Additional copies ofthe CD will cost $5 each, with discounts if more than 10 are ordered.  TheAICPA spent $300,000 on the production and distribution of the CDs and theaccompanying posters.The CD opens with a young resident of a home office welcoming her "guest."The user is told to make herself at home while the host runs out for a minute.As the user moves the mouse across the screen, different cartoon-like bubblesappear, displaying one of the gateways that provide more information.  Forinstance, when moving the mouse to the bookshelf, the user is offered theoption of investigating library resources.  Choose the safe and learn aboutsalaries; a calendar leads to "a day in the life."  Other gateways include"career opportunities," "ladder of success," "human resources," "tools of thetrade" and "organizations."The career opportunities gateway features CPAs in various segments of theprofession offering insights on their career successes.  Human resources shedslight on key issues such as balancing personal and professional life andcareer opportunities for women and minorities.  The library featuresinformation on the Uniform CPA Examination and a directory of more than 800institutions across the United States that offer accounting programs.The AICPA stepped up its recruiting efforts after a 1990 poll found studentsunimpressed with the role of accountants.  "That's why we made this effort,"Daidone said.  "In general we found that a lot of negative stereotypes aboutaccountants came out in the survey.  They thought accountants were boringnumber crunchers who worked alone."The first phase of the recruitment effort was aimed at high school and earlycollege students.  A video produced in 1993 introduced viewers to theaccounting profession."The first phase of the program, 'Accounting:  One degree with 360 degrees ofpossibilities,' was designed to attract students to the study of accounting,"Daidone said.  "In this second phase we're taking it up one more level andtrying to attract students to become CPAs."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence'by Ken RankinWASHINGTON - Responding to criticism that some Internal Revenue Serviceregions are conducting a witch hunt against businesses that classify workersas independent contractors, top tax service officials are preparing newinstructions to discourage such heavy handed enforcement tactics.According to IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, new trainingmaterials under development for IRS examiners will "emphasize the principlethat using independent contractors can be a legitimate business practice thatwill not be challenged by the service."A new headquarters policy embodied in the training materials will requirefaster resolution of worker classification disputes and uniform standards fordefining independent contractors throughout the country.Testifying before Congress late last year, Richardson said she hoped to havethe new worker classification materials finalized in time to permit retrainingof all IRS examiners by the end of this month.The new training aids are the latest in a series of moves by the IRS to defusemounting criticism from accountants and small businesses that the agency'scrackdown on the use of independent contractors is improper and abusive.Adding to the concerns are the stiff penalties for businesses charged withviolating the current standards.Employers accused of incorrectly classifying W-2 workers as independentcontractors can be required to pay 100 percent of both the employer's and theemployee's share of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes, plus all ofthe federal income taxes that would have been withheld had the contractor beenclassified as a salaried employee.If the IRS declares the classification error to be intentional - a finding theagency is not required to prove - the business can be hit with an additional100 percent penalty, plus interest for previous years.Delegates to this summer's White House Conference on Small Business identifiedreform of IRS independent contractor ground rules as their No.  1 priority,and during subsequent House hearings on the problem, CPAs from across thecountry called for legislation to set simpler rules governing workerclassification.Shaken by the backlash against the agency's current enforcement strategy, IRSofficials placed much of the blame on overzealous field examiners.To ensure uniform treatment of all businesses under investigation forindependent contractor violations, the IRS adopted new procedures requiringregional and local personnel to secure approval from the national office inWashington before undertaking any large worker classification projects.The program will be based on the following series of principles whichRichardson said would govern future IRS policy in worker classification cases:* Worker classification issues should be resolved as quickly and as early inthe administrative process as possible.  * Worker classification issues shouldbe resolved uniformly throughout the country.  * Resolution of workerclassification issues should take into account a taxpayer's past compliancewith section 530, as well as the common law standard (governing workerclassification).  * The IRS compliance programs should encourage correctclassification and correct reporting of payments to workers.  *Reclassification of workers who have legitimately been treated as independentcontractors must be avoided.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Audit & Accounting:  Change Of AuditorsUS 1 SHIFTS FROM DELOITTE TO COOPERS:  Deloitte & Touche was dismissed asindependent accountant for US 1 Industries after helping the client correct aseries of internal control problems ranging from unrecorded transactions toinadequate computerized accounting systems.Over a year ago, Deloitte informed officials at the Gary, Ind.  company thatUS 1's management was "unable to close the accounting records and producereliable financial statements within the time frames required for publiccompanies.""Significant transactions had occurred that had not been recorded on the booksand records of the company, including sales of property, repossession ofequipment, and contingencies related to broken lease commitments and othercontractual agreements," the client told the Securities and ExchangeCommission.In addition, "supporting documentation for a significant number of sales, costof sales, cash receipts and other general ledger journal entries could not belocated."Although accountants at Deloitte concluded that the company had adequatelyaddressed each of these issues, US 1 elected to replace that firm with Coopers& Lybrand.CANADIAN ACCOUNTANTS SOUR ON WINCANTON FOLLOWING QUESTIONABLE DEALS:  Canadianaccountants at KPMG Peat Marwick Thorne resigned as auditor for Reno,Nev.-based Wincanton Corp.  after informing the client that they were"unwilling to be associated with the financial statements prepared bymanagement."KPMG's concerns were stirred by a series of recent transactions, including thesale of stock in the company's Tradesman Industries subsidiary to WorkRecovery Inc.  for shares of that corporation valued at some $2.5 million.The accountants also raised questions about a $9.6 million consulting fee paidto Work Recovery in connection with the sale of cargo bed and tailgate systemstechnology to that company.In disassociating themselves from the client's financial statements, theVancouver-based accountants said they couldn't obtain sufficient appropriateaudit evidence on the propriety of these transactions.Form 8-K filingsAll For a Dollar (Springfield, Mass.), from Coopers & Lybrand.American Bancshares Inc.  (Bradenton, Fla.), from Varnadore, Tyler &Hawthorne, P.A.  to Coopers & Lybrand.Avant!  Corp.  (Sunnyvale, Calif.), from Coopers & Lybrand to KPMG PeatMarwick.Assisted Living Concepts Inc.  (Portland, Ore.), from Price Waterhouse to KPMGPeat Marwick.Chicago Miniature Lamp Inc.  (Canton, Mass.), from Arthur Andersen to Ernst &Young.Electro-Kinetic Systems Inc.  (Pennsauken, N.J.), from Axelrod & Co.Four Seasons Fund II L.P.  (Manakin-Sabot, Va.), from Deloitte & Touche toArthur Andersen.Franklin Ophthalmic Instruments Co., Inc.  (Romeoville, Ill.), from Marinelli& Scott to BDO Seidman.Gaming World International Ltd.  (Ellwood City, Pa.), from Grant Thornton toS.R.  Snodgrass, A.C.Global Telemedia International, Inc.  (Atlanta), from Kaufman, Rossin & Co.to Tauber & Balser, P.C.Innovative Shipping Systems Inc.  (Sarasota, Fla.), from Natherson & Co., P.A.to Bobbitt, Pittenger & Co., P.A.Interactive Technologies Corp., Inc.  (Melbourne, Fla.), from Lumsden & Co.to Turner, Stone & Co.Just Toys Inc.  (New York), from Richard A.  Eisner & Co.  to Ernst & Young.Laser Photonics Inc.  (Orlando, Fla.), from Coopers & Lybrand to Corbin &Wertz.Lucor Inc.  (Boca Raton, Fla.), from Goldstein Lewin & Co.  to KPMG PeatMarwick.Magnivision Corp.  (Wall, N.J.), from Lawson, Rescinio, Schibell & Assoc.,P.C.Medmarco, Inc.  (Salt Lake City), from Bradshaw, Smith & Co.  to ArthurAndersen.Microelectronic Packaging Inc.  (San Diego), from Price Waterhouse to BDOSeidman.Micro One Direct Information Services Inc.  (Beaverton, Ore.), from PriceWaterhouse to Deloitte & Touche.MSB Bancorp, Inc.  (Goshen, N.Y.), from Nugent & Haeussler, P.C.  to KPMG PeatMarwick.The New World Power Corp.  (Lime Rock, Conn.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to PriceWaterhouse.Nth Canada Inc.  (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), from Madgett, Roberts,Marlow, Hurren & Partners to Ernst & Young.NuOasis Gaming Inc.  (Irvine, Calif.), from C.  Williams & Associates, P.C.to Raimondo, Petit & Glassman.N-Viro International Corp.  (Toledo, Ohio), from Ernst & Young.OncoRx Inc.  (New Haven, Conn.), from Richard A.  Eisner to Ernst & Young.Porter McLeod National Retail Inc.  (Denver), from Lehman, Butterwick & Co.,P.C.  to Ehrhardt Keefe Steiner & Hottman, P.C.Sentech EAS Corp.  (formerly Lorry, Bay & Co.)  (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), fromSobel & Co.  to Spear, Safer, Harmon & Co., P.A.Seventh Generation Inc.  (Colchester, Vt.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to Coopers& Lybrand.The Singing Machine Co.  Inc.  (Pompano Beach, Fla.), from Ernst & Young toMillward & Co.Vicom Inc.  (Eden Prairie, Minn.), from Misukanis & Dodge to Lurie, Besikof,Lapidus & Co.Wahlco Environmental Systems, Inc.  (Santa Ana, Calif.), from Ernst & Young toArthur Andersen.Wincanton Corp.  (Reno, Nev.), from KPMG Peat Marwick ThorneUS 1 Industries Inc.  (Gary, Ind.), from Deloitte & Touche to Coopers &Lybrand.Source:  Securities and Exchange CommissionBig Six ScoreboardReported Auditor Changes at Public Companies in the Last 12 WeeksClient Gains Client LossesArthur Andersen 1 10Coopers & Lybrand 5 5Deloitte & Touche 7 24Ernst & Young 10 14KPMGPeat Marwick 6 2Price Waterhouse 3 5Others 17 19Total 49 79Note:  Form 8-K filings as reported in Accounting Today from Oct.  9, 1995 topresent.PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  Looking ahead to the year 2001:  A sales odysseyWANTED SALES MANAGER FOR BIG 4 FIRMLocal office of Big Four firm seeks experienced sales manager for midsizedoffice.  Must have CPA and at least three years sales management experience ata large CPA firm.  Responsibilities will include oversight and development ofexperienced staff of three client-relators as well as penetration ofnon-client accounts.  Send resume to Box 1234.This ad was spotted in the Feb.  9, 2001, edition of The Wall Street Journal.Surprised?  You shouldn't be.  Impossible?  Don't bet on it.  Unlikelyprediction?  Hardly.  Some local offices of Big Six and regional firms arealready employing salespeople.Our profession has never been more competitive, and the new millennium willhave a great deal of change in store for accountants.Here are some more predictions:* Non-CPA firms will continue to encroach upon our "turf."Did you know that four of the 10 fastest growing accounting firms in theUnited States are not CPA firms?  Most people don't - including your partners.American Express just won its federal suit against the state of Florida,permitting non-CPA firms to employ CPAs.As other states look to this case, reviews and audits may fall to non-CPAs.After all, why shouldn't non-CPAs perform these same services?  If they passthe peer review process, wouldn't this open up a monopoly to more competition,and wouldn't the consumer ultimately benefit from lower costs?  Accountingcould be next in the line of industries the government has alreadyderegulated, like telephone companies and airlines.I hope it happens.  Just as we are driving much better cars today than 20years ago because of the competition from the Japanese, clients will receive amuch higher level of service when CPAs compete in a marketplace against realbusiness people, not just other accountants.* Big companies will increase efforts to attract the best clients of theirsmaller rivals.Competition will increase not only from below - non-CPAs - but also fromabove.  Many big firms have stagnant revenues and will increase their emphasison obtaining regional and local firms' "A" clients.  This trend has developedsteadily in some markets for the last five years, and will continue to grow.* Competition will increase as CPAs leave stagnant firms to take more controlover their careers.Sharp managers and young partners realize they are often held back by partnerswho won't let go of the management reins and allow the firm to prosper andchange.These rainmakers are already leaving firms in droves, taking some of theirclients.  This trend will continue as these hotshots realize many of them arebuying into firms that have been drained of assets by greedy partners facingretirement, with no desire to invest in technology, training or clientrelationships.These changes will affect our profession in numerous ways by the turn of thecentury.  For instance:* A formalized sales management function will control the development ofbusiness.Firms will hire salespeople.  CPAs will be highly valued, and recruitedspecifically for sales.  Some will drop out of the technical side as they seethe road to partnership open only to those who bring in business.  Many firmswill see hiring salespeople as a panacea for stalled growth, since theirpartners don't want to be involved in the selling process.* The technical aspect of our profession will be relegated to the "back room."As our profession becomes more competitive, business development, rather thanthe quality of technical work, will be recognized as the life blood of theprofessional firm.Firms will focus on garnering new business.  Firms that don't shift emphasiswill merge or perish.* Dramatic decreases in fee structures will hit the profession across allservice lines.As the increased emphasis on marketing prompts clients to become more aware ofalternatives, fee competition will escalate.  Fees will be cut in all areas ofservice, not just in audit and accounting.* Only people with existing books of business will be promoted to fullpartnership.Technicians will no longer be able to share in the fruits of full partnershipas firms finally realize that it is far easier to acquire technical abilitythan entrepreneurial talent.  Just as industrial companies raid competitorsfor successful salespeople, CPA firms will vie for rainmakers.* The profession's image of trust and respectability will be tarnished asclients equate CPAs with other sales-types that they deal with.CPA salespeople will fall into the same grab bag for dollars as othersalespeople.  Clients will view them with the same disdain as printing andinsurance salespeople.* CPA firms will use consulting as the main inroad to new clients.Even small accounting firms will offer free consulting work just to get theirfoot in the door.* The most successful firms will not employ salespeople, but will havedeveloped a solid core of practicing entrepreneurs.Some firms will have decided early on to succeed in a much more competitiveenvironment without resorting to a separate force of salespeople.  Realizingthat marketing and selling is just as important as technical skill, thesefirms will have invested in growing the business development skills of theirmost likely producers.  Their reputation as trusted business advisors willremain intact.So where do marketing people fit in?Marketing directors still play a powerful role, whether establishing aformalized sales function or creating an internal culture of entrepreneurship.In either case, somebody still has to manage the marketing aspects, enhancethe sales process and help bring in the actual opportunities to sell.  Merelyhiring salespeople will not work without a comprehensive, integrated marketingplan so that all are pursuing the optimal targeted clients and markets.In some cases, the marketing director will also assume the role of salesmanager, as many firms will be too small or too cheap to hire someone separateto manage that function.In firms that decide to shun the salesperson route by becomingentrepreneurial, marketing directors will have to take on the role of internalsales manager.What can you do now?CPAs who turn their backs on this undeniable trend towards increasedcompetition will watch their firms disintegrate.There are, however, certain preemptive tactics your firm can employ to avoidthe oncoming onslaught:* Establish a beachhead in the marketplace that is difficult to penetrate.Chrysler is a great example of what can happen in a changing marketplace.  Foryears, Chrysler and their Detroit rivals ignored the increased competitionfrom the Japanese.  Fat and sassy, they believed people would continue to buycars the way they always had.  Caught off-guard by a dramatically changedmarketplace that demanded small, well-made, fuel-efficient cars, they lost asignificant piece of market share that they've never made up.  Chrysler almostwent out of business.In order to survive, Chrysler had to get smart.  In the early '80s, theyintroduced a new vehicle - the minivan - and created a new marketplace.  Astheir competitors jumped on the bandwagon, they pressed forward, leading theway in design and features.  By the time their competitors had established aposition in the market, Chrysler was so entrenched that they still sell moreminivans than ever.* Make sure your firm has a strategic marketing plan.Amazingly, even many of those firms with marketing directors have no strategicmarketing plan that delineates where and how they are going to go to marketfor the next three to five years.  If you don't know where your business isgoing to come from, how can you get it?* Get your people trained to sell and market.Personal marketing and selling skills do not come naturally to the vastmajority of CPAs, but many firms expect CPAs to somehow learn these skills byaccident.  Identifying clients and prospects' needs and wants and persuadingpeople to do business with you are far greater skills than being an auditor ora tax person.* Concentrate on client service.It's time the accounting profession learned to service the clients in the waythey want to be served.  Since this subject still isn't taught in accountingschool, it's up to you to drive the message home internally.  If you don't getyour people up to par in delivering exemplary service, remember that someoneelse will.Establish monthly client service meetings, where the only subject discussed ishow to better serve your clients, helping them be more successful.* Help your people establish and pursue niches.Our profession is the last to realize the importance of marketingspecifically, not generically.  It is obvious to the real business person(i.e., your clients) that there is more value in dealing with someone who isan expert in their field.* Help your people set goals for practice development.Everybody must have their own goal for new business, otherwise how can theytell if they've been successful?* Change the compensation and review process.What's in it for your non-partners?  Practice development must be rewardedfinancially and psychologically, or it won't happen.Only the most successful CPAs embrace change - the great majority have theirnoses to their computers, happy to leave things as they are.  It's up to youto educate your partners on all that is happening in the marketplace.  Andyou'll need to keep telling them until they finally get the message.  Stirthings up now and take control of your firm's destiny.  If you don't, yourcompetition will do it for you.Allan S.  Boress, CPA, CFE, is author of "The I Hate Selling Book" and aconsultant to professional firms for over 15 years.  He is based in CoralSprings, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SOFTWARE REVIEW:  Budgetary moves add steam to fund accountingThe current balanced budget debate in Washington signals that many servicescurrently provided by the federal government may soon pass to the states andthe private sector.This trend will translate into new opportunities for accounting firms, becausethe not-for-profit sector will expand rapidly, as states look tonot-for-profits to administer displaced programs.  And new nonprofitorganizations will develop to handle programs no longer conducted by thegovernment.Not-for-profits will look to CPAs for the management accounting servicesrequired to implement new control systems and to measure operating results.To take advantage of these opportunities, accounting firms must becomefamiliar with the software tools that are available for this complex area.Fund accounting is not an easy area in which to work.  Issues and concepts innot-for-profit accounting differ from those found in the profit sector.Accountability with specific program and grant provisions is critical andrequires extensive departmentalization of information.  Multiple accountingperiods must be considered, as information will be reported not only by fiscalyear, but by program or grant period.Necessary reports include traditional reports needed by management, as well asthose required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, grant providersand other regulatory bodies.This article evaluates five not-for-profit software systems from ExecutiveData Systems, Blackbaud, American FundWare, Micro Information Products andKenrick Technologies.  The last year has seen fund accounting software vendorsaccelerate their move into Windows.  All the vendors in this review have aWindows program on the market or will offer one during this year.The move to Windows has been slow and for good reason.  Many nonprofitorganizations have older equipment and tight budgets which preclude rapidupgrades to new technology.But moving to Windows should provide clients with smoother links to otherapplications, if for no other reason than vendors most often rewrite theirpackages in Microsoft or other standard languages.For example, MIPS Fund Accounting for Windows utilizes C++, Microsoft's VisualBasic programming languages and the Microsoft Access database engine.  Thismove to Microsoft standards has been seen in general accounting packages andis accelerating in all desktop applications.Critical issues to be considered when selecting fund accounting softwareinclude account structure handling, report presentation capabilities,ease-of-use and non-accounting features such as fund-raising support andmailing list capabilities.Flexibility in account number format is important to meet the needs of manydifferent clients.  Account numbering schemes generally determine thedepartmentalization of information.  The more flexible the format, the lessneed for changing a client's existing account numbering system.  Also, moreflexibility means easier filtering of data for reporting purposes.Also important is that all fund accounting packages should meet therequirements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Statements ofFinancial Standards 116 and 117.  All the packages reviewed here are compliantwith these standards.There is more to an accounting system than just accounting information.  Inthe profit sector, modules such as accounts receivable, accounts payable andpayroll provide capabilities that may be more critical than the generalledger.  For a not-for-profit business, you must add modules for fund-raisingand grant information requirement compliance.Fund accounting concepts and accounting systems are not just complex to theaccountant/consultant.  The staff of a not-for-profit organization may alsofind them difficult.Therefore, ease-of-use should be a primary criterion in the selection processand should encompass the system's look and feel, data entry conventions,documentation, on-screen help capabilities and vendor support.Special system features that will make the accountant's/ consultant's jobeasier and more profitable should also be considered.  Reporting features thatprepare financial statements and workpapers in formats that can be used aspart of the compilation, review, or audit process can greatly reduce the timespent on these engagements.Also, if the fund accounting vendor offers special programs for theaccountant/consultant for support or reduced pricing, these engagements willbe more profitable.It is in reselling or consulting that CPAs will make the real money on suchsoftware.Except for Blackbaud, which uses only direct sales, all the vendors reviewedhere offer reseller programs.  Generally, these programs offer productdiscounts and special incentives on promotions and technical support.  Kenrickoffers both reseller and consulting programs, the latter for non-sellingfirms, although other vendors also support consultants.Fund AccountingSoftware Series, Executive Data SystemsFund Accounting Software Series from Executive Data Systems is a DOS-basedsystem with a Windows interface for module and process selection.This approach allows the FASS to be used in organizations with both DOS andWindows workstations.  The latest 5.5 release of FASS introduces two Windowscomponents, FASS Access and the Export module, which facilitate data transfer.FASS Access offers the export of information to Access.  In Access, you canthen perform advanced data queries and prepare on-screen and printed reports.Access data is easily used with other Windows applications such asspreadsheets, word processors and report writers.The Export module also exports information in 20 file formats such as Lotus,Quattro Pro and Paradox.  This module also includes an Excel compatiblespreadsheet and graphics package.  It features extensive preformattedfinancial statement reporting capabilities.  FASS financial statements can beconsolidated by "wild-card" selection or by using user-defined fund groups.The Multi Fiscal Year Project Reporting module allows the preparation offinancial statements for any range of dates, including multiple fiscal years.The Custom Report Generator can access FASS accounting and donor informationbased on user defined criteria to prepare management reports and graphs, andto export to other applications.The FASS Donor Records module maintains an extensive database of theorganization's members, donors, alumni and volunteers for reporting andmailing purposes.  This module integrates with General Ledger and will trackpledges, dues payments, donations and matching gift data.  More than 30user-definable data fields can customize the information captured for eachdonor.Transaction detail can be maintained as long as desired.  The system supportsmultiple, overlapping fiscal years for grant and project reporting.  Grant andproject reporting is independent of the organization's fiscal year.Data entry is accelerated through the use of "code tables" for automatictransaction descriptions, and the user can define transaction entry modes tosave keystrokes.Executive Data Systems features toll-free support and offers a service to setup the client's chart of accounts and financial statements.  The cost of thisservice varies with the amount of data involved.Blackbaud Accountingfor Non Profits, BlackbaudBlackbaud's current offerings include the DOS-based application, Blackbaud NotFor Profit Accounting, Windows versions of its Raiser's Edge fund-raisingsystem and its Paragon planned giving software.The company plans to release Windows versions of business applicationsbeginning in April.  Current purchasers with software maintenance agreementswill receive a Windows upgrade at no charge.Blackbaud features a table-driven chart of accounts that breaks down eachaccount by fund, account number, account type, department/cost center,category and object of expenditure.  A visual chart-of-account organizer thatallows you to see and rearrange the chart of accounts makes setting up andediting accounts a simple task.Accounts for new funds can easily be created by copying sample charts ofaccounts for similar funds.  General ledger information can be maintained fortwo years.  The current year need not be closed to work on subsequent year'sinformation.  The year-end close can be delayed for up to twelve months whileawaiting final audit adjustments.The Raiser's Edge supports the organization's gifting development program.Paragon provides the planned giving professional a tool for easily calculatingand graphing the outcome of planned gifts.  Both products are available inWindows versions.  The Raiser's Edge also comes in a DOS version.Windows capabilities are often only marginally advantageous in data entry.However, The Raiser's Edge and Paragon demonstrate the advantages of thegraphical interface over a text-based application in the area of data reviewand editing.  Reviewing and updating information is very easy and intuitive.Entry of new information is enhanced with pull-down menus and keystrokeshortcuts.The system has extensive on- screen reporting capabilities featuring veryreadable reports.  The system features very flexible report-writing tools.Reports can be segmented to provide information about projects and grants andcan be either date- or period-driven to support varying reporting periods.Workpapers can be prepared from system information by saving reportinformation in a spreadsheet format.FundWare on Windows, American FundwareAmerican Fundware offers an extensive suite of applications to meet theaccounting needs of not-for-profit organizations.  Fundware offers 17 moduleson multiple platforms and three Windows specific modules.Fundware runs on a variety of operating systems including DOS, Windows, Unixand AIX.  The system can consolidate not-for-profit transactions as well asany for-profit enterprises the entity may operate.American Fundware has just released FundWare on Windows, which has the abilityto run multiple sessions simultaneously through the FundWare on WindowsSession Manager.A File Viewer makes it easier to access the Windows Print Manager utility,improving printer selection and making it possible to preview reports prior toprinting.Monarch for FundWare is a version of the Datawatch Monarch Windows data accessand analysis tool specifically designed to run with FundWare.  With Monarchfor FundWare, you can use spooled report file information to view, query,analyze and export information.Essentially, Monarch is a report generator in reverse.  Report information isconverted into Monarch data, which can then be "mined" to meet specificreporting needs using spreadsheets and report generators.The FundWare Corridor improves FundWare's data connectivity with otherapplications by providing open access to the FundWare database.  Informationis presented in Microsoft's Open Database Connectivity standard.  ODBCcompliance allows the data to be accessed by other ODBC-compliant applicationssuch as Excel, 1-2-3, Access and Crystal Reports.FundWare allows you to design your own account structure of up to 18 digits,or you can use a predefined chart of accounts.  Two aliases can be assigned toeach account to easily look up accounts that have different descriptions indifferent funds, accounts, grants or projects.  General ledger information canbe retained for an unlimited amount of time.  The system provides up to fouradjustment accounting periods for segregating year-end and audit adjustmentsfrom the normal posting periods.The Allocation Management System automates transaction allocation and can beused to extract information for reallocations.  American Fundware does nothave a fund-raising module, but it links to donor packages from PledgeMaker,Donor Perfect and others.It also features an allocation management module for handlingmulti-fund/department allocation of transactions.  This feature is used toautomatically allocate recurring transactions among multiple accounts, fundsor projects.The Budget Forecasting module extracts historical information into a separatedatabase for creating and revising the entity's budget.  This module willtrack up to 60 budget revisions and allows the updating of historicalinformation without changing budget data.A separate Budget Control module monitors budget compliance and warns when anaccount approaches or exceeds its budget.  Report capabilities include macrosto group reports for batch printing.  Masks are employed to filter reportinformation by fund, grant and project.The Extended Report Writer prepares reports from any journal and any periodmaintained in the system.  This module also maintains an extended database ofinformation such as population, grant dates and number of clients served.  Theinformation can be used in combination with other financial data to producereports.MIP NonProfit Seriesfor Windows, Micro Information Products Inc.MIP's NonProfit Series for Windows, introduced in November, is designed usingnon-proprietary tools:  C++, Microsoft's Visual Basic programming language andthe Access database engine.  MIP also released MIP Fund Accounting for DOS,Version 9.0 at the same time.The Windows release began with the General Ledger module and will be followedby Accounts Payable, Budgeting and Payroll modules in the first six months ofthis year.  Other modules will continue to be released this year, includingFund Raising.MIP offers many ease-of-use features such as Wizards for information setup,customizable tool bars, and Windows-compliant screens, menus and help.  MIPalso features extensive security capabilities that define security for eachuser, module and organization.  Security also can be defined for any menulevel.The system supports complete GASB and FASB reporting and reports can cover anytime period.  The software features many standard reports that are thebuilding blocks for customized reports.  Reports are customized by the rowsand columns of information that the user wants included in the report.The system's design allows the use of data with other applications such asdatabase tools, spreadsheets and word processors.  For example, it supportsdirect query, with proper security, from within Microsoft Excel or Word.MIP allows an unlimited number of user-definable general ledger accountsegments which can be up to 255 characters in length each.  Field size anddata formatting within fields can be user-defined.  An Account Setup Wizardmakes it easy to set up new information and to model new accounts fromexisting information.MIP Fund Accounting does not have its own fund-raising module, but supportslinks to Donor Perfect, Donor$ and Softrek fund-raising packages.  Transactioninformation can be exported to other applications in ASCII, Delimited ASCII, .WKS and DBF formats.The system features strong context-sensitive help tools.  The complete usermanual can be viewed on screen.  With maintenance, all upgrades are free.The company guarantees a new release of each product every 18 months.  MIPguarantees a two-hour response time for customer support calls.Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Kenrick TechnologiesKenrick Technologies was scheduled to ship Version 2 of its Fund Accountingfor Windows this month.  A true Windows application, the new product expandsupon the company's DOS version 4.1's use of C language source code, thusbenefitting from the original source code's maturity.Release 2.0 features several new ease-of-use features.  Journal Genies areused to integrate journal information from a variety of data sources into thegeneral journal.  Using Genies, information in spreadsheet-prepared workpaperscan be the source of journal transactions.Another new feature, Two-Way Spreadsheet Journal Entries, allows the softwareto furnish information for spreadsheet workpapers.  Kenrick uses Dynamic DataExchange linking to exchange information with other Windows applications.The chart of account structure is divided into components for account code,department and fund.  There are as many as 17 segments and virtually unlimitedsub-accounts within the account number structure.  The number of digits of thecomponents of the account number structure can be varied to meet the needs ofeach nonprofit entity.  The minimum length is five characters; the maximum,20.When new funds or departments are added to the system, the accounts for thenew addition can be mirrored from the existing chart.  Transaction informationcan be maintained indefinitely.  Kenrick's approach to grant accounting makesgrant (or project) identifiers a component of the general ledger accountstructure.Grants and projects can also be handled separately from the chart of accountsby entering grant and project code information at the transaction level.  Thissimplifies the setup of short-term projects and grants and allows morecomprehensive reporting on grants and projects.Reports can be prepared for any accounting period, regardless of the entity'sfiscal accounting period.  The KenQuery feature offers fast searches of systemdatabase information for sorting and printing data.  Custom reportingcapabilities are provided via a dBase style report writer.One unique feature is Kenrick's 990 tax return support.  The system willtransfer revenue and expense information directly into the Arthur AndersenA-Plus Tax 990/990PF program.Kenrick offers very flexible budgeting features.  The Projects and Grantsmodule allows for unlimited project/grant lives and multiple budgets for anypart of the organization.  This information can be grouped for any date rangeat any time.  The system maintains budget data for the last budget period, thecurrent period and the next period approved budget.The system offers extensive on-screen help capabilities.  All informationfound in the paper manuals is in on-screen help.  The company also offers dataconversion, training and related network support.SummaryCPAs and consultants are in for a bonanza with not-for-profit organizations.As more services move from the federal government to the states and privateorganizations, the need for tax, financial reporting and consulting serviceswill rapidly expand.  The addition of Windows versions by many fund accountingsoftware vendors will also increase the opportunities for CPAs.DOS users will be interested in moving to the more powerful Windowsapplications.  This will offer the opportunity to provide new and profitableservices.Also, the new Windows applications offer expanded connectivity features.Consultants will be able to provide on-going services for developing reportsand information systems that link fund accounting software information toother applications.Fund Accounting SoftwareBlackbaud Accounting for Nonprofits Blackbaud Charleston, S.C.  800-443-9441Pricing:  1 user NetworkGL, AP, PayrollPurchase OrderStudent Billing (each) $2,000 $2,500Payroll Direct Deposit $500 $500Fund Accounting Software Series,Version 5.5Executive Data Systems Inc.Marietta, Ga.800-272-3374Pricing:1 User 2+ users Support/yr.General ledger $850 $1,275 $225AR, AP,InventoryManagementInvoicing(each) 600 900 100Payroll 750 1,125 175FundWare Version 5.5American FundwareDenver800-551-4458Pricing:Module prices range from $695 to $2,395, depending on the platformrequirements.  Average price is $995.Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Release 2.0Kenrick Technologies Inc.St.  Louis800-659-2022Pricing:Single User Pricing:  DOS WindowsGeneral Ledger withBudgeting $1,295 $1,995AP, AR, Payroll, each 895 $1,395Projects and Grants 795 $1,195PO/Encumbrances 795 $1,195Multi-user network pricing:  Based on the number of concurrent active users.MIP NonProfit Series for WindowsMicro Information Products Inc.Austin, Texas(800) 647-3863Pricing:General Ledger and payroll each, 1 user:  $1,500AR, AP, budget reporting, embranches/purchase order, each, 1 user:  $1,000Second concurrent user:  $1,000Additional users:  $500Source:Accounting TodayBack to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996COMING EVENTS-JANUARY-1-31:  Financial Literacy for Youth Month; National Endowment for FinancialEducation.  Contact:  (303) 220-4847.5:  1995 District Director's Conference - IRS; Long Island University;Brooklyn, N.Y.  Contact:  (718) 488-1070.11-12:  1996 National CPA Health Care Advisers Association; Pencor Marketing &Publications; Bally's Casino Resort, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.11-12:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:(312) 464-8765.14-16:  IAFP Broker-Dealer Conference; IAFP; San Antonio.  Contact:  (800)945-IAFP.15:  1996 Manufacturing Services Association; Pencor Marketing & Publications;Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.15:  1996 Not-for-Profit Services Association; Pencor Marketing &Publications; Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.18-19:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; Ritz-Carlton, San Francisco.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.21-22:  1996 National Litigation Support Services Association; PencorMarketing & Publications; Houstonian Hotel, Houston.  Contact:  (800)869-0491.22-24:  Direct Marketing to Business Conference; Dun & Bradstreet InformationServices; The New Orleans Marriott, New Orleans.  Contact:  (203) 857-5660.29:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Wyndham Franklin Plaza,Philadelphia.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.29-30:  Conference on Regulation and Continuing Professional Education; NASBA;Westin Canal Place Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (212) 490-3868.29-30:  Consolidated Returns; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:(212) 435-3161.29-30:  Introduction to International Taxation; World Trade Institute; SanFrancisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.31-Feb.  2:  Intermediate Seminar on International Taxation; World TradeInstitute; San Francisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.-FEBRUARY-1:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Santa Clara Marriott, Santa Clara, Calif.  Contact:  (312)464-8765.1-2:  Reducing European Tax; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:(212) 435-3161.5-6:  Compensation Planning '96; Tax Management Educational Institute; LeMeridien Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (202) 728-7902.7-8:  SOFTEX in Accounting & Finance; Interactive Information Services; LosAngeles.  Contact:  (415) 842-7373.15:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (312)464-8765.15-16:  CERCA Membership Conference; Council for Electronic RevenueCommunication Advancement; Key Bridge Marriott, Arlington, Va.  Contact:(312) 644-6610, ext.  3232.22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Airport Marriott, Houston.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.26-27:  Tax Aspects of International Acquisitions and Reorganizations; WorldTrade Institute; World Trade Center, New York.  Contact:  (212) 435-3160.-MARCH-5:  Corporate Derivatives; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago DowntownConference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.6:  Defined Contribution; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago DowntownConference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.7:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Plaza San Antonio, San Antonio.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.7-8:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:(312) 464-8765.12:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, New York.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.13:  Advanced Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, NewYork.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.14:  Communicating Asset Allocation Concepts; Ibbotson Associates; MarriottEast Side, New York.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Radisson, Salt Lake City.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.25:  Mutual Fund Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.26:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.27:  International/Alternative Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, SanFrancisco.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.28-29:  Portfolio Management; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.Back to Headline List WT02-B37-37IA086-000616-B019-291http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122004204 text/html 133985HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:38:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:32 GMTContent-length: 133797Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi10.html Sample Issue Copyright AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet January 02, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TODAY'S NEWS (431 words) COMMUNITY BANKING WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANK (730 words) EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEAS (582 words) SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLAND (184 words) AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95 (772 words) CREDIT UNIONS COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVER (368 words) SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISES (1042 words) CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMS VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMES (529 words) MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANK (120 words) NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LET ALONE (922 words) GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECS (159 words) NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESS (336 words) REGIONAL BANKING SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96 (577 words) LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FOR FIRST INTERSTATE (523 words) COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALS (655 words) STRATEGIES: 1995 IN REVIEW LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTS (693 words) LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN (450 words) GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONS (330 words) THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95 (311 words) MORTGAGES AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROW (429 words) PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARES (445 words) HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995 (173 words) INVESTMENT PRODUCTS NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVED (398 words) COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE IT (837 words) TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKS (705 words) WASHINGTON HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOT CONGRESS (1331 words) NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUIT (432 words) MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FED (582 words) COMPANY INDEX (318 words) FINANCE ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITS (604 words) CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALES (757 words) TECHNOLOGY/OPERATIONS STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96 (622 words) DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70M (312 words) MORTGAGE SECURITIZATION LEADERS (1047 words) CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996TODAY'S NEWSWASHINGTON:   NATIONSBANK asked a federal judge to deny class-action status fora pending fair-lending lawsuit. Page 2   REGIONAL BANKING:   SKEPTICS are having a field day with the prediction of a TVcommentator that Glendale Federal will be sold this year. Dan Dorfman saidGlenfed's chairman was rumored to be pushing hard for a deal worth $1.2billion or more. Page 6   LOS ANGELES "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for First Interstate, themayor and city council president told the Fed in a letter. Page 6   MORTGAGES:   HOUSE BANKING Chairman Jim Leach has asked the chairmen of FannieMae and Freddie Mac to persuade loan servicers to cut some slack forfurloughed government workers who miss mortgage payments. Page 13   AS MORTGAGE BANKERS prepare for a new refinancing wave, they arestruggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict newemphasis on the bottom line. The signs were everywhere last year.   Pages 12, 13   CREDIT UNIONS:   1995 WAS A BANNER YEAR for credit unions, as capital levels hithistoric highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline. Too badnobody noticed. Instead, the industry made an embarrassing spectacle ofitself. Page 7   COLORADO BANKERS are going to the courts to block a credit unionexpansion. Page 7   COMMUNITY BANKING:   FARM LENDERS had a fairly good 1995, but not everywhere or with everyproduct. Problems in such sectors as the cattle industry could continue,and Congress is likely to reduce subsidies. Page 10   THE MASSACHUSETTS Independent Bankers Association is waking upfrom a long hibernation, abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor ofhelping members boost profits through cooperative efforts.   Page 10   INVESTMENT PRODUCTS:   NATIONAL BANKS with trust departments operating in several statesmay soon get a break on the cost of doing business. Page 14   AFTER THREE MONTHS of fine-tuning, the National Association ofSecurities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new frameworkfor bank-affiliated broker-dealers. The proposal now goes to the SEC.   Page 15   CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMs:   VISA has introduced a guaranteed car-rental reservation servicefor peak travel times. The goal is to discourage consumers from bookingwith multiple renters and then becoming no-shows. Page 17   FIRST DATA's remittance processing business is being acquired by aNational City subsidiary.   Page 16   TECHNOLOGY:   STOCK PRICES of bank technology firms soared  last year. Gains forthe companies tracked by American Banker averaged 34%.   Page 18   ACKNOWLEDGING that its future lies more in electronic banking,check printer Deluxe Corp. said it would take a $60 million to $70 millionrestructuring charge partly related to the closing of printing plants.   Page 18Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANKBy Paul NadlersThe family-owned and family-run bank seems like the ultimate incommunity banking.   "I bank at Smith Bank" or "I've been banking with the Jones family allmy life, and so did my father" are typical comments in many communitieswhere a grandfather or even great-grandfather started a bank and son afterson took up the mantle.   But all is not sweetness and light in the family bank tradition, eventhough it has great deal to offer.   One problem is that people in town expect the banker to always say yes."Your father served my father," is the line. "How can you turn me downnow?"   I remember talking to a small group in one town where the banker wasbragging about his family tradition. One customer piped up that he too hada family banking tradition. "I am a third-generation check kiter."   A more serious question for a family bank, though, is whether the newgeneration wants to work at it.   When I was an undergraduate, a speaker at college told us: "Half of youin this room are Republicans because your fathers are Republicans. And halfof you are Democrats because your fathers are Republicans."   Among my proudest achievement as a teacher has been talking students outof being accountants or lawyers or bankers just because their fathers were.   "It's awful," parents tell me. "My son became a chef (or whatever)instead of going into banking."   "Is he happy?" I ask.   "Absolutely."   "Then why are you moaning?" I say. "You should be cheering."   When it is a family business, however, taking a different path is harderto do - even if your heart isn't in becoming a bank president.   And following in your father's footsteps is also not easy. I know.   My father was one of the most famous bank economists of his day. Everytime I did something right, people would say, "What do you expect fromMarcus Nadler's son, with all the help he has received." And when thingswent wrong, the comment would be, "Wow, you let your father down."   Maybe it's the problem of following your dad that has made so manysecond- and third-generation bankers take chances to show theirindependence - chances that in a number of cases have seriously damagedtheir banks, or killed them.   But what if you basically inherit a bank presidency and really want thejob? How do you learn to do it well?   There are three basic training grounds, and each has its drawbacks:   Your own bank. Being trained there limits the opportunities for growth.   All too often a young heir apparent is trained by putting him underGridley, a greybeard with 40 years' experience. Unfortunately, manyGridleys actually have one year's experience 40 times. Under them the newbanker learns the adage "never do something the first time."   Being trained by your dad the CEO has similar pitfalls.   Money-center banks. Heirs apparent used to have this second routeavailable - working for the family bank's correspondent bank. The money-center would be delighted to take the CEO's son aboard for several yearsand teach him banking. It knew this would cement the relationship with thefamily bank, insuring correspondent business for years ahead.   But many money-centers are now giving up correspondent business, becausethe balances have been reduced sharply now that respondents' requiredreserves must be kept with the Fed. As a result, correspondent balancesmust come from money that otherwise could be lent or invested.   Banker schools. There are complaints that they treat all students alike.   What's wrong with that? The gripe is that those who'll wind up runningtheir family banks don't get the instruction and insight they'll need -that instead they learn what a lending officer in a larger regional needsto know, or a branch manager of a major bank.   This, some critics say, is why the major banking schools are not drawingthe students they used to. Ignoring their own marketing courses, theschools fail to segment the markets for their programs.   Despite these problems, the family-run bank is not dead. But like othertraditions that have made community banking unique, it is becoming less ofa force. And the urge to merge is only one reason.   Mr. Nadler is a contributing editor of the American Banker and professorof finance at Rutgers University Graduate School of Management.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEASBy JONATHAN D. EPSTEINA Massachusetts bank trade group is waking up from a long hibernation,abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor of helping its independent bankmembers boost their bottom lines through cooperative efforts.   After several years of inactivity, and hardly any meetings, theMassachusetts Independent Bankers Association is seeking to draw communitybanks together to exchange policies and ideas related to lending, humanresources, and marketing.   In particular, officials want the association to establish common creditcriteria to make loan participations among members easier, without havingto work with a larger bank that "might look to take the customer away,"said association president Jim D. Carey, president of Slade's Ferry Bank,Somerville.   "We felt that independent commercial banks have a few common interests,"Mr. Carey said. "There are a few things that we can do together to help ourbottom line."   By sharing policies and practices relating to employee benefits andmarketing, the banks will help those smaller members who can't afford tohire full-time staffs or pay advertising agencies to develop campaigns, heexplained.   Mr. Carey said the wave of consolidation sweeping the industry has onlystrengthened the belief among community bankers that they will survive andprosper because they can better serve customers. But "I think we need tohelp each other with the burden of regulation and the management of bottomlines."   "It's going to be much more one on one, trying to assist each other andmanaging our institutions in the marketplace to preserve our independenceand share our common management concerns and solutions so that we don't endup fading out of existence," he said.   In the past, the group, which was formed about 25 years ago and is anaffiliate of the Independent Bankers Association of America, focused itsattention on influencing banking legislation on Beacon Hill in Boston andon Capitol Hill in Washington. But as the group's members were gobbled upby mergers, its influence and activity dropped off.   Last April, in response to a push from IBAA officials to restart thegroup, officials from about 13 banks met to discuss the organization'sfuture.   Richard D. Driscoll, president of the Massachusetts Bankers Association,said he was unaware of the Massachusetts Independent Bankers' recentactivities.   "If there is a need for one more group, they'll get members," he said."But if banks don't feel there's a need, they won't join."   He added that the Massachusetts Bankers has added about 15 new small-bank members in the last two years. In fact, he said, every commercial bankin Massachusetts is an active member except Mr. Carey's bank.   Still, Mr. Carey said the Massachusetts Independent members concludedthat the group should no longer try to provide lobbying or educationalservices to its members anymore, because the Massachusetts BankersAssociation and other organizations already filled that need better thanthe independent bankers group could.   "Their expertise is in the legislative efforts and the educationalefforts, and we believe you should render to Caesar what is Caesar's," Mr.Carey said. "They're every good at what they do, and our thrust is a littledifferent."   Mr. Carey said the group has stressed to the Massachusetts BankersAssociation that it's not trying to compete. Already the associationincludes 20 banks, with 13 other potential members, all with less than $250million in assets.   Mr. Carey said officials haven't ruled out cosponsoring a seminar with alarger organization, but "that's not our thrust. There are organizationsthat do that well."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLANDHARTFORD, Conn.The Small Business Administration ranked FirstNational Bank of New England the largest lender of SBA-guaranteedcommercial loans under its flagship 7(a) program in New England.   The agency, in releasing its 1995 fiscal year figures, shows FirstNational Bank of New England as the region's largest 7(a) lender by a widemargin. First National Bank originated 85 loans during the year, for atotal of $40.7 million. Based on dollar volume, the bank, which has itscorporate headquarters in Hartford, Conn., ranks sixth in the nation. It isthe leader in New England for the second consecutive year.   "Most of our clients are privately owned manufacturers and distributorswho use the SBA-guaranteed loans to invest in equipment, facilities, ormarketing programs that make them more globally competitive, " said BrianJ. Charlebois, executive vice president and head of commercial banking.   Only two other New England-based banks ranked in the top 50 on the SBA's1995 list. The bank's SBA loan volume, for instance, was five times that ofBank of Boston, which was ranked 43d. First New Hampshire Bank was ranked23.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95By BARBARA F. BRONSTIENLast year was a fairly good one for farm lenders.   The year "turned out to be generally quite good for Americanagriculture," said Marvin Duncan, chairman of the agricultural economicsdepartment at North Dakota State University, Fargo. "Prices are ... highenough so there will essentially be no government subsidies in the form ofdeficiency payments."   But in agriculture, you take the bad with the good. Farmers and lenderssaw individual areas hit with weather- and disease-related woes andindustry-specific troubles, such as the cattle industry's price dip.   And so, this year farm bankers will have a keen eye on thestruggling areas such as the cattle industry. And they await with mixedfeelings word on the 1995 farm bill from Washington.   Cattle producers face additional years of low prices as supply exceedsdemand and producers begin selling off breeder animals to ultimately reducesupply. However, this liquidation initially will increase the supply evenfurther.   "It's going to be a pretty tough time in '96, '97 for the cattlesector," said Bill Helming, an agricultural consultant in Olathe, Kan."We've got the prices below the cost of production already, and we haven'teven started liquidation. That's going to add insult to injury."   The dairy industry also has not seen price increases in several years,said Alec Bridges, president and chief executive of $240 million-assetSulphur Springs (Tex.) State Bank, who has numerous dairy customers.   "The performance is not as good as it's been," Mr. Bridges said. "We'renot having any real horror stories. We had tightened our underwritingstandards and made sure that they performed to the point that we could gowith them when things weren't as good."   On the other hand, grain prices rose this year, a result of a wet springand early frost that brought a "short" crop, reducing supply.   "Most farmers who are producing and selling grain have less grain tosell, but they're going to have the opportunity to sell it for a higherprice," Mr. Helming said.   If he were a lender, he said, he'd be encouraging his customers "to takeadvantage of these higher prices and sell into it. Farmers typically don'tsell when the market's going up; they sell when the market's low. I know itdoesn't sound logical, but that's the way it's been done for 50 years."   Mr. Helming said that although the tendency of farmers to sell at theworst time has improved - more farmers are using better farm marketingtechniques to reduce the risk of price fluctuations - it's still a problem.   "When the market's going up, they think it's going to go higher," hesaid. "When the market's going down, they're reluctant to sell. And by thetime they sell, it's a lot lower."   The higher prices also made the industry less anxious over the yet-to-be-determined government farm program, said Larry Knutson, president ofState Bank of Blomkest, Minn., and current president of the Upper MidwestAgricultural Credit Council.   "We're cautiously optimistic about next year," Mr. Knutson said."Production looks like it's going to be a pretty good year."   Still, farmers and lenders alike continue to wait for the 1995 Farm Billto learn what government policy will be on farm subsidies.   "There was lots of discussion about the Farm Bill, and we still don'thave it," said Philip M. Burns, president of Farmers and Merchants NationalBank, West Point, Neb., and the current chairman of the American BankersAssociation's agriculture lenders committee.   Practically speaking, Congress should implement a Farm Bill in Januaryor February so farmers - and lenders - can organize their 1996 planting,Mr. Helming said. "There are a lot of decisions to be made in planting asyou get into the spring," he said.   The consensus is that government subsidies to farmers will bediminished, whatever the ultimate bill.   Mr. Helming expects the legislation to take the form of the Freedom toFarm Act. "That's what bankers ought to plan for, which means theircustomers are going to end up being totally dependent on the real-worldsupply and-demand forces in the marketplace, as opposed to the safety netof the government."   This development has led farm bankers, already a conservative bunch, tobecome more cautious, said Mr. Duncan of North Dakota State.   "More risk is going to be placed on the shoulders of the farmer than inthe past," he said. "They will want to have a full understanding of therisk management techniques that their customers are going to be pursuing.The bottom line for the next one to five years is substantially greateruncertainty in agriculture."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVERBy JAMES B. ARNDORFERColorado bankers are going to the courts to block a credit unionexpansion.   The Colorado Bankers Association is suing the state banking agency forpermitting $84.4 million-asset Gates Credit Union to expand its membershipbase to include the southern metropolitan area of Denver - nearly 300,000people.   Craig Umbaugh, a lawyer representing the bank trade group, said theexpansion runs roughshod over state laws that restrict community expansionsto no more than 25,000 or to the regulator's discretion.   "The Department of Financial Institutions has exceeded the clearlanguage of the statute," Mr. Umbaugh said. "I think this expansion haswiped away half the statute."   The association filed suit last Thursday against the ColoradoFinancial Services Board, which has some oversight over the Division ofFinancial Services. The five-member board - which includes three creditunion executives - approved the Gates expansion on Nov. 28 despite bankers'objections at a public hearing.   "It's not unexpected," said David L. Paul, commissioner of the division."They had been fairly forthright with our legal counsel that that's wherethey were headed."   Steve Newell, chairman of the Financial Services Board and president ofColorado State Employees Credit Union, said the board considered all theevidence, including that submitted by bankers in Gates' proposed expansionarea, when it approved the expansion.   "The issue boiled down to whether or not the area of expansion was adefined community," he said. "Overall, the board felt that the credit unionitself should be able to define what they consider to be a community."   Gates Credit Union was seeking to expand out of uncertainty over thefuture of its membership base, employees of Gates Rubber Co., said CarrollBeach, president of the Colorado Credit Union League. The company had beencutting employees for years.   Bankers object to the size of the expansion, saying it does notrepresent a distinct community, as required by statute.   Donald Childears, president of the Colorado Bankers, said the creditunion's new membership base included several political districts and aspectrum of income and demographic groups.   Robert Wilson, a Denver lawyer who represents Gates Credit Union, wouldnot comment on the bankers' objections.   "We're still in the process," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISESBy JAMES B. ARNDORFER1995 was a banner year for credit unions, as capital levels hithistoric highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline.   Too bad nobody noticed. Instead, the industry busily set about making aspectacle of itself for most of the year, beginning with the collapse of$1.6 billion-asset Capital Corporate Federal Credit Union - Cap Corp - inJanuary.   And both the industry and its regulator added to that debacle with flubsthroughout the year.   Before 1995 was over the industry and the National Credit UnionAdministration came under fire during congressional hearings. The CreditUnion National Association and the industry's top regulator were at eachothers' throats. The chief executive of the industry's primary liquidityfacility resigned under a cloud and warned of looming problems.   And to cap the year off, CUNA president Ralph Swoboda was deposed by thetrade group's board and state leagues.   But in interviews with several industry leaders, the Cap Corp situationemerged repeatedly as the single most important event of the year.   It's not hard to see why.   The largest failure in industry history triggered a series ofcongressional hearings in which lawmakers - particularly in the Senate -browbeat the industry for speculating in collateralized mortgageobligations and ripped the NCUA for allowing it.   "The most important thing was the closing of Cap Corp because it broughtcredit unions into the light," said Charles O. Zuver, director ofgovernmental affairs for the Credit Union National Association. "Itgenerated legislation in the Senate and dissension in the credit unionmovement."   Chastened, the NCUA in April issued a regulation limiting corporateinvestments that was so unpopular that the agency withdrew it even beforethe comment period expired. The regulator has since been crafting a newplan with the corporates that has the industry's liquidity centerssignificantly more comfortable.   "We're very encouraged" about the agency's willingness to cooperate,said Richard M. Johnson, chief executive of Western Corporate FederalCredit Union, San Dimas, Calif. "We think the regulator is going to be morecomfortable with us because he's taken a hard look at us."   A rule affecting corporate investments alone would have a powerfulimpact on the industry, but now the agency also is looking to tighten theinvestment regulations of regular credit unions. Part of the inspirationwas the agency's finding that many institutions failed to understand therisks of collateralized mortgage obligations - the same instruments that,indirectly, led to the fall of Cap Corp - in their portfolios.   Some industry experts have already slammed the proposal as requiring toomuch paperwork.   Mr. Swoboda, the former CUNA president, predicted that the struggle toset new investment limits for the industry will be the pivotal event ofthis year.   "There'll be a stir over the investment regulations for natural personcredit unions and corporates," he said.   The NCUA's decision to seize Cap Corp intensified the already hostilerelations between the NCUA and the industry - sparking a dissent on theNCUA board from board member Robert Swan. Many in the industry -particularly Cap Corp depositors that lost money - believed the regulatorcould have saved the corporate if it had so desired.   Acrimony was already present between segments of the industry and theNCUA because of a rule approved in 1994 that would end trade groupmanagement of corporates. The CUNA and the National Association of StateCredit Union Supervisors sued the agency in February in an effort to killthe rule.   But in September the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District ofVirginia ruled in the agency's favor. CUNA decided to drop its suit, butstate supervisors are pursuing their case against what most observersconsider to be heavy odds.   At the same time, the agency and some industry figures have said theythink the federal court's decision might provide an opening for betterrelations.   "That's behind us now," said NCUA Chairman Norman E. D'Amours."Relations have been improving dramatically toward the latter part of theyear."   That, however, remains to be seen: Pentagon Federal Credit Union, whichlost $1.1 million in Cap Corp, in October sued the NCUA to try to obtaindocuments detailing the agency's reasons for imposing conservatorship onCap Corp.   When credit unions weren't taking shots at the regulator, it seemed theywere fighting among themselves.   Competition among credit unions became a big issue, with manyinstitutions protesting the proposed merger of the aggressive PatelcoCredit Union, San Francisco, and First Technology Federal Credit Union,Beaverton, Ore. The complainants appeared to have the sympathy of Mr.D'Amours, who has stressed the need for cooperation among credit unions,and the merger was called off once it became clear NCUA wasn't going to letit happen.   And, the industry's largest trade group went through a meltdown duringthe year, leading off with a management shakeout at the industry's mainliquidity center, U.S. Central Credit Union, which CUNA controlled.   Early on, former U.S. Central president James R. Bell and blamed CUNA-appointed board members for problems suffered by the company. A few monthslater the Overland Park, Kan., institution was slapped with a lowperformance rating by the NCUA.   The industry's largest trade group was bruised on other fronts. Facing arevolt from its affiliated state leagues, the association flip-flopped -first supporting, then opposing - a Senate bill to strengthen NCUA'soversight of state-chartered credit unions, a move that irked the bill'ssponsor, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.   After this setback, Mr. Swoboda announced a sweeping review of theassociation's structure, and the state leagues began gunning for him, tradegroup sources said.   To make matters worse at the trade group, losses blossomed at the CardServices division of CUNA Service Group, a CUNA subsidiary.   The board and other CUNA interests apparently believed that new bloodwas the only cure for its problems. In October, it fired Mr. Swoboda, who,before his departure, sacked some of his lieutenants.   Even if credit unions continue to thrive this year, some of the uglyevents of 1995 are expected to work themselves to resolution - someprobably tortuously.   "Credit unions have done very well; the confusion has all been in thesuperstructure," said Ken Robinson, president of the National Associationof Federal Credit Unions.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMESBy MICKEY MEECEAt the behest of major car rental companies, Visa U.S.A. has introduceda guaranteed reservation service for peak travel times.   Visa said the service was available beginning Monday at participatingrenters, including Hertz, Avis, National, and Budget. Cardholders who givetheir account numbers at the time of their reservation can be assured thata car will be awaiting them.   To attack a growing "no show" problem, the rental companies will offerguarantees when demand is high, mainly around holiday periods and specialevents. The service will be similar to the hotel late-arrival guaranteesthat customers can secure with credit card numbers.   Visa, the first of the major card groups to introduce the car-rentalconvenience, said users will no longer have to book cars at a number ofagencies to make sure they get one. By reducing the number of no-shows, therental companies should be able to manage their fleets better.   As a byproduct of the guarantees, renters would penalize no-shows. Visano-shows would have to pay as much as a one-day rental fee if they do notcancel reservations at least eight hours before the scheduled pickup.   American Express Travel Related Services Co. is developing a similarservice, which a spokesman said could be available in the first quarter. Ano-show penalty of up to two days would kick in if a reservation was notcanceled 48 hours in advance.   MasterCard International does not have a rental guarantee in the works,a spokesman for that association said, because "we haven't seen a greatdeal of interest in something like this."   Visa said the service is voluntary. Cardholders can still reserve carsin the customary manner.A guarantee ensures that customers whose rental cars cannot bedelivered in an hour will be transported to their destinations, providedwith cars within eight hours, and given a free day's rental.   Under American Express' proposed plan, if a rental company overbookedand did not have the customer's vehicle, it would have to secure acomparable one from another firm. If it could not do so, the rental agencywould provide an alternative vehicle at a rate no higher than the originalcar and it would waive the first day's fee.   American Express and Visa, which are first and second, respectively, incar rental charge volume, said the rental companies came to them this yearseeking a solution to the no-show problem. No-show rates go as high as 70%during peak periods.   Not all rental agencies have committed to the guarantee service. Aspokeswoman for Alamo Car Rental said the company is evaluating it and hasnot made a decision.   Janet Maizner, a spokeswoman for Value Rent a Car, said, "We normallytake a wait-and-see attitude" to any new service that other agencies adopt.   "Overall, it's a good move for the industry," Ms. Maizner said, addingthat it is hurt by "double and triple booking."   Visa also is introducing an advance deposit program, allowing customersto charge a deposit for rentals of up to 14 days. The association plans tochange its rules and procedures to permit the car rental deposits, similarto an adjustment made in 1989 for hotels.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANKBeth PiskoraCincinnati-based Midwest Payment Systems has signed a contract withNational Bank  of Sumner, Ill., to provide electronic funds transfer andJeanie network services.   By joining the Jeanie automated teller machine network, Sumner offersits customers 24-hour access to more than 1,200 ATMs in Ohio, Kentucky,Indiana, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, Florida, Tennessee, RhodeIsland, and North Carolina. Sumner has only one ATM of its own.   In addition, Sumner will be participating in the MasterMoney program,the MasterCard off-line debit program that enables consumers to use theirJeanie ATM at more than 12 million MasterCard-accepting merchantsworldwide.   Midwest Payment Systems is the data processing subsidiary of Fifth ThirdBancorp, a Cincinnati-based banking company with $17.2 billion of assets.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LETALONEBy LISA FICKENSCHERMarketers' obsession with buying and building massive customer databases has created a seemingly contradictory subspecialty - removing thenames of people who prefer not to be on mailing or telemarketing lists.   It has become the law for direct marketers of everything from creditcards to long-distance services to respect consumers' desires to be letalone. But the advent of several companies in the "list suppression"business indicates there is profit in it.   "Honoring a customer's request is just good business," said DickGallagher, president of the Signature Group, a company that offers creditcard enhancements, has added a service called "Do Not Solicit."   Indeed, businesspeople are coming around to the view that privacy - andthe publicity they get from disseminating privacy protection policies - canbe a valuable commodity.   "Privacy protection is going to become increasingly a service in Americafar beyond list suppression," said Alan F. Westin, editor and publisher ofthe newsletter Privacy and American Business.   A handful of companies, including a list broker working on the WorldWide Web of the Internet, are apprising direct marketers of the names ofpeople who don't want to be solicited as sales prospects.   The Signature Group's "Do Not Solicit" list helps companies comply withthe Telephone Consumer Act. A rule that the Federal Trade Commission addedto that legislation in August requires telemarketers to maintain lists ofpeople who don't want to be called again. The rule went into effect onSunday.   The Schaumburg, Ill.-based Signature Group claims to be the only companythat electronically gathers such information and will compile a list for aclient marketer within 48 hours. That could significantly shorten theprocess of removing names from a mailing list, which the group saysaverages 45 days in the banking industry.   Consumers get angry if they're called after asking for their names to bestruck off marketing lists, said Fanette Singer, a spokeswoman forSignature Group. They want their names removed promptly, she said.   The Direct Marketing Association has been providing a telephonesuppression service for its members since 1985. But Patricia Faley, vicepresident of consumer affairs for the Washington-based trade group, pointedout that its service is not required by law.   About 600,000 consumers are on the association's telemarketingsuppression list, and three million are on a mail suppression list that wasbegun in 1971. Consumers who appear on those lists are not solicited by avariety of marketers; in contrast, the Signature Group provides its serviceto one client company at a time.   The Signature Group tracks people who are contacted by companies that,for example, sell merchandise to bank customers. As the list provider, thebank is legally responsible for compliance with the telemarketing law, eventhough it may not be calling its customers directly.   Another service, Buyer's Choice, has tapped into a different type ofconsumer who is willing to be solicited for products and services but wantsto control who does the soliciting.   "People are soon going to say, here are the news, the marketing, and thepeople I want to reach me, and I don't want anyone else to reach me," saidMr. Westin.   Buyer's Choice, a division of the Polk Co. of Detroit, seems to beresponding to Mr. Westin's vision of the future. Polk, a provider ofdemographic and lifestyle data, sends out consumer surveys asking people tocheck off categories of products and services that interest them and thosethat do not.   Half a million people have completed the surveys. Keith Wardell, vicepresident of Polk, expects the list to reach two million in a year.   Buyers Choice has been gathering consumers' preferences for five yearsbut only recently have the surveys begun probing what kind of mail peopledon't want to receive. About 20 major mailers, including cataloguecompanies and travel clubs, are participating in a test of the service,which Mr. Wardell said will be launched formally in the second quarter.   Mr. Wardell estimates that people who complete the surveys will receiveabout 20 pieces of mail annually from marketers subscribing to Buyer'sChoice, while 100 to 200 pieces of mail will be suppressed.   The theory behind the service is that most people want to receive somemail offers. The smallest opt-out category, for example, is women'sapparel, and the least popular offer are money market funds.   To keep the list accurate, Buyer's Choice sends out its survey every sixmonths to people who have completed it.   "Part of our intent is to stay in touch with those consumers," said Mr.Wardell.   Aurora, Ohio-based DM Group began compiling a list about four weeks agoof people who don't want to be bothered by unwanted solicitations andadvertising, but its communications method is electronic mail.   Robert Hicks, president of the five-year-old company, said he launchedthe service because DM Group "came under a lot of heat when it came outthat we were managing E-mail lists."   DM Group rents lists with about 250,000 names to marketers who want toreach people via E-mail.   But interest in the suppression list has been tepid so far, said Mr.Hicks.   Still, Mr. Westin believes the service is a significant developmentbecause it recognizes that "E-mail deserves equal treatment with mail andtelephone preference (services), allowing people to opt out."   "I think the DM Group has the right idea," added Mr. Westin. But hesuggested that companies put a question "up front" at their Web sitesgiving surfers the opportunity to opt out of further unsolicited contact.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECSBeth PiskoraTAMPAGensar Technologies Inc., the point of sale processingsubsidiary of Gensar Holdings Inc., has added two senior vice presidents toits technology and sales team.   William J. Kouser Sr. was put in charge of strategic planning andproduct development, and John M. Gallagher of national supermarket sales.   Mr. Kouser joins the technology team after 30 years in systemsdevelopment and design for the insurance and banking industries. While atthe Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, he developed and implemented acheck processing system. He was also instrumental in the construction ofthe on-line consumer financial services system that CoreStates FinancialCorp. uses to track account activity and customer banking relationships.   Mr. Gallagher spent 25 years at CoreStates in its electronic paymentsbusiness. For the past four years he has worked for Buypass Corp., thepoint of sale processing subsidiary of Electronic Payment Services Inc.,the Wilmington, Del.-based company that also operates the MAC electronicbanking network.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESSBy BETH PISKORANational City Processing Co. has agreed to acquire the remittanceprocessing business of First Data Resources Inc.   Under terms of the agreement, the Omaha-based card servicing unit willoutsource all of its clients' remittance activities exclusively to NationalCity. These functions include the opening, extracting, recording, andposting of credit card payments with paper invoices.   "This represents a 30% increase on our base of business," said Tony G.Holcombe, chief executive officer of Louisville, Ky.-based National CityProcessing, a subsidiary of $35 billion-asset National City Corp. ofCleveland.   "The additional transaction volume will bring us to 500 milliontransactions annually" in the remittance processing area, added Mr.Holcombe.   Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. It is expected to closewithin 60 days.   "With the acquisition, NPC will be the largest remittance processingcompany in the United States," said David R. Zook, executive vice presidentof corporate services for National City Processing.   "This is an exciting opportunity for us to build upon our existing baseof remittance processing business while further enhancing the serviceprovided to clients of First Data Resources," he added.   The agreement includes a long-term arrangement for First Data Resourcesto continue to market the remittance business to its clients, with theNational City unit serving as processor.   "First Data is not a major player in this area and we felt our clientsdeserved the service and competitive advantage only a leader such as NPCcould provide," said a spokeswoman for First Data Corp., the Hackensack,N.J.-based holding company for First Data Resources.   The spokeswoman said the remittance deal with National City was notprecipitated by First Data's recent merger with First Financial ManagementCorp.   "We were simply trying to find the best solution for our clients, andNational City Processing is a true leader in remittance processing," shesaid.   First Data Resources will continue to offer card embossing, cobrandingand relational data base marketing services, home banking, smart cardservices, and processing for credit, debit, and commercial cards.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96By BARTON CROCKETTDoes CNBC commentator Dan Dorfman have the inside word on the next bigCalifornia thrift merger?   He certainly gave that impression on his Dec. 21 "Dorfman Report" whenhe singled out $15.9 billion-asset Glendale Federal Bank as a "sure-firetakeover within the next 12 months."   Mr. Dorfman said Glenfed chairman Stephen J. Trafton is rumored to be"aggressively shopping the company at over 30 bucks a share." He alsoquoted "takeover forecaster" Steve Kroll, managing director of Monness,Crespi & Hardt, as saying a takeover of Glenfed is likely at $30 a share,for a total price of $1.2 billion.   Potential buyers were said to be California thrifts Great WesternFinancial Corp., H.F. Ahmanson & Co., and Golden West Financial Corp.   Even on the basis of fundamentals, Mr. Dorfman said, Glenfed would be agood buy. He quoted Mr. Kroll as saying Glenfed was likely to win in 1996 a$1.5 billion lawsuit against the government over regulatory goodwill - avictory that would boost earnings $10 to $12 a share. Mr. Kroll reportedlyset a 12-month price target of $23 to $24 in the absence of a buyout or avictory in the lawsuit.   The report forced a half-hour halt in trading of Glenfed's stock andspurred a $1 rise, to $17.87. This was its high for the year, and more thantwice its 52-week low of $8.50 late in 1994. .   A Glendale Federal spokesman said the bank would not comment on the"Dorfman Report" item, as a matter of policy. In recent months, Mr. Traftonhas said in interviews that Glenfed is open to a takeover but isn'tcounting on one.   Many stock analysts, thrift executives, and investment bankers werehighly skeptical of Mr. Dorfman's analysis.   They noted that Mr. Dorfman was hardly unique in predicting that a bigCalifornia thrift is likely to be acquired in the next year. Most analystsexpect a wave of takeovers to commence as soon as buyers are convinced thatthe California economy has rebounded and that California thrifts' balancesheets are on solid ground.   "The possibility of Glenfed being a takeover candidate is certainly notbrain surgery," said Gary Gordon, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. But heand other sources said that the $30 price seems toohigh unless Glenfed wins the goodwill lawsuit, which is far from certain.   These observers also said they see no signs that a big merger involvingGlenfed is in the works. It is more likely, they said, that Mr. Traftonwill focus on improving the company's performance over the next year inorder to get a higher price in a subsequent takeover.   "Our read is that Trafton is looking to aggressively add value to theGlendale franchise and then sell," said Gregory A. Mitchell, senior vicepresident of Hovde Financial Inc., aninvestment banking firm. There is "no question" that Mr. Trafton will waitat least a year to sell Glenfed, Mr. Mitchell added.   "It doesn't feel like anything's imminent," said a senior thriftexecutive with a big Glenfed rival, who asked not to be named.   Many observers said they see much to recommend in-market mergers ofCalifornia thrifts, including a combination of Glenfed with any number ofother Southern California institutions. But they said they doubtedany of the three thrifts Mr. Trafton mentioned would be willing to pay thekind of premium he'd be seeking in a takeover, or that Mr. Dorfman saidwould be likely.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FORFIRST INTERSTATEBy BARTON CROCKETTRichard J. Riordan is standing up for First Interstate again.   The mayor of Los Angeles has teamed up with the president of his citycouncil to urge the Federal Reserve Board to reject Wells Fargo & Co.'sapplication to acquire First Interstate Bancorp.   The city "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for control of Los Angeles-basedFirst Interstate, Mr. Riordan and Council President John Ferraro wrote in aletter dated Dec. 18.   The letter, filed during the public comment period that ended late lastmonth, escalates the unusual level of political involvement in the battleover First Interstate.   Local politicians are typically silent about bank mergers, or else focustheir energies on trying to minimize office closings and layoffs.   But Mr. Riordan and other prominent California politicians are openlysupporting the deal that First Interstate prefers - a merger with FirstBank System Inc. of Minneapolis.   Speaking at an outdoor rally in November, Mr. Riordan professed "love"for the chairmen of First Interstate and First Bank and said, "We lookforward to working with you for many, many years to come."   The letter to the Fed details Mr. Riordan's reasons for opposing Wells'bid while putting California's largest city in the position of trying toinfluence federal policymakers.   The Los Angeles officials said consumer banking services in Californiawould "be irreparably harmed" if San Francisco-based Wells bought FirstInterstate. They said Wells' plans to close hundreds of traditionalbranches and rely more on supermarket branches, automated teller machines,and personal computers would benefit the well-to-do at the expense of thepoor.   Lower-income communities "are chronically underserved by most retailbusinesses, including supermarkets and banks," the letter said. "Theresidents of these communities cannot afford expensive home computers andoften feel uncomfortable accessing ATMs in high-crime areas."   The writers also warned that competition would suffer, as it was"clearly diminished by the 1992 merger of BankAmerica Corp. and SecurityPacific Corp."   "The proposed Wells Fargo/First Interstate consolidationwould have a similar impact," the city officials said.   Raising concerns about broader economic impacts, Mr. Riordan and Mr.Ferraro said Southern California would sustain "the vast majority" of the7,000 to 10,000 job losses from a such a merger - an especially cruel blowto Los Angeles County, where the 9% unemployment rate is already well abovethe national average.   Real estate markets would also suffer, they argued. First Interstateowns or leases nearly 1.3 million square feet in four major buildingsdowntown, an area where vacancy rates are high, at 20%. Office closures"could completely destabilize (the Los Angeles) real estate market,resulting in huge financial losses to owners and lenders throughout thecountry," the letter said.   Mr. Riordan and Mr. Ferraro also claimed that First Interstate would bea better corporate citizen as part of First Bank than as part of Wells.   "We have no doubt that Wells Fargo is prepared to make new commitmentsto Los Angeles as part of its pending application," they said. "But we areconvinced that these commitments will inevitably fall well short of theservice and community involvement that Los Angeles enjoys today from FirstInterstate Bank."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALSBy CHARLES B. WENDELThe title "corporate lender" has begun to disappear from the commercialbanking nomenclature in favor of the term "relationship manager."   The relationship manager has significantly broader responsibility thanfinding, underwriting, and monitoring loans. Ideally, he or she is acoordinator of the sales process who evaluates customer needs, matches themwith the bank's products and services, identifies the most likely sellingopportunities, and brings in product specialists as needed.   Unfortunately, this is largely a fantasy. It is still a distant goalmany banks have for relationship managers. Scratch the typical relationshipmanager and what you find underneath is a traditional lender. Therelationship manager may sell cash management and other deposit services,but it is rare to see the sale of products from other groups in theorganization.   We estimate that among their best small and middle-market customers,banks capture only a 5% to 10% "wallet share" of financial servicesbusiness. For example, no more that 60% of small-business owners whomaintain a commercial deposit account have their personal account at thesame bank.   The gap between the intent of the relationship manager's job and itsreality needs to be addressed quickly and decisively. Among the reasons:Many companies view lending as a commodity and not the basis fordifferentiating one bank from another. But to achieve growth targets, banksmust emphasize wallet share over market share in many markets.   Few senior managers would argue against the importance of buildingcustomer relationships. Yet few banks are on the right path. There are fourmajor reasons:   *Wrong messages. In a recent speech at a Robert Morris Associatesconference, Norwest Bank regional banking executive Scott Kistingunderscored the importance of communicating effectively with staff aboutnoncredit products. He said banks need to "celebrate" these sales to thesame extent they congratulate bankers for new loans.   *Wrong or meaningless measurements. A banker at a well-respectedregional company told a story that is all too typical: He and his bosswould agree on annual goals for credit and noncredit product sales, butduring the year performance is never measured against those goals. And 12months later, a new set of goals is agreed on, with the manager believingthat he is fulfilling his supervisory role.   *Wrong products. Banks have not challenged themselves enough inevaluating noncredit offerings from the customer's perspective. Are theirproprietary 401(k) investment options really as good as those offered bynonbank competitors? Have cash management or custody products beenleapfrogged by others? Too many product developers are playing a game ofwishful thinking when it comes to product assessment.   *Wrong people. Even after reengineering and downsizing, many banksremain dominated by traditional "good old boys," not aggressive andsophisticated financial consultants and salespeople. Upgrading relationshipmanager staffing, either by improved training or replacing personnel,remains critical to meeting market demands and exploiting opportunities.   Ironically, within the small-business segment it is a nonbank that bestemphasizes the capturing of entire relationships. Merrill Lynch & Co.focuses on meeting customer needs as opposed to a product demand, and itspeople are rewarded for cutting across the organization to meet thoseneeds, whether personal, commercial and credit, investment, or risk-controlrelated. Through superior customer service, they are also skimming thecream off the market.   Bank managements must get beyond their delusions about relationshipmanagers by giving them a clear focus and setting priorities. In the nearterm, a small centralized marketing unit can provide the expertise thatindividual relationship managers may not possess. Management must rethink,reduce, and in certain instances eliminate the relationship manager'sresponsibility for maintenance, monitoring, and underwriting.   Performance goals must be viewed as commitments. A higher level ofincentive compensation will widen the gap between the total compensation ofexcellent and merely adequate performers. The alternative is to riskbecoming a provider of commodities and increasingly irrelevant to thecustomer.   Mr. Wendel is president of Financial Institutions Consulting, New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTSBy SNIGDHA PRAKASHAs mortgage bankers prepare for a new refinancing wave, they arestruggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict newemphasis on the bottom line.   The signs were everywhere last year.   In December, PNC Mortgage, Vernon Hills, Ill., announced it would nolonger buy loans from wholesale brokers, which wrote up to 20% of all PNC'sloans. The company said it was paying too much for low-quality loans, andpreferred to focus on writing loans through its own loan officers.   Earlier in 1995, GE Capital Mortgage discontinued its retail lendingprogram, through which mostly small lenders had written GE loans. Theprogram had never generated large volumes, and reportedly did not makeenough profit to satisfy a more cost-conscious approach at GE.   Some players chose to exit the mortgage business altogether. Notably,Prudential Life Insurance Co.'s mortgage unit was put up for sale, andWells Fargo hired Norwest Mortgage Inc. to write its home loans.   Industry executives say that a host of factors conspired to create a newemphasis on cost cutting in a hitherto more relaxed business.   The mortgage industry, which expanded to write a record $1 trillion ofloans in 1993, continues to be too large for current volumes - estimated at$654 billion last year, and $765 billion this year. Fierce competition hasdriven down prices, forcing a new focus on costs.   And the influx of new capital, primarily from commercial banks, ischanging the economics of the industry. The largest lenders can afford tobuy, and constantly improve, expensive computer systems to originate andservice ever larger volumes of loans. At these companies, the costs oforiginating and servicing each loan is consistently going down, andeveryone must strive to keep up.   "The name of the game is keeping your costs down on everything, everylittle operation - the cost of borrowing money, the cost of distribution tothe public," said David Loeb, chairman of Countrywide Credit Industries,Pasadena, Calif.   Within that context, Mr. Loeb and other executives said PNC's decisionto abandon the wholesale purchase of loans from mortgage brokers makeseminent sense.   "There's no money in wholesale lending. The brokers get everything andthen some," Mr. Loeb said. Countrywide is building up its direct businesswith consumers, in order to decrease its reliance on third parties, hesaid.   Fees to mortgage brokers have climbed in the last few years, as lendersjockey for volume by offering lucrative deals to brokers. Brokers thesedays get not only all the origination fees but also a portion of theservicing release premium, noted Saiyid T. Naqvi, chief executive of PNCMortgage.   In addition, loans made by brokers tend to be refinanced more quickly,he said. When rates go down, brokers are quick to resolicit theircustomers. These and other factors led PNC to abandon the wholesalebusiness, Mr. Naqvi said.   PNC's exit from wholesale lending is the latest sign that the mortgagebusiness is rationalizing, said Luke Hayden of Chemical ResidentialMortgage. In other words, players are adjusting their strategies to matchthe real costs and profits of the mortgage business.   So do the largest lenders, such as Countrywide, Chemical, and Norwest,plan to follow PNC's lead?   Not anytime soon. To exit wholesale lending or any other channel meansthat you give up a whole segment of the market to your competitors, saidMark Korell, group president of lender and investor services at NorwestMortgage Inc., Des Moines. That's something that a really large lender justcannot afford to do.   Still, Mr. Korell warned that if brokers charged too much, the pressureto cut back on wholesale lending would mount.   "Brokers have to compete with other forms of production, don't they? Ifthey take too much out of the equation, they're not going to be able tostay in business," he said.   "The moral of the story here is that the mortgage banking industry, likeevery other industry, over time will act in a rational way," Mr. Korellsaid. "Capital is movable. Not too many people are going to stay in abusiness where they can't make adequate returns to their shareholders."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWNBy KAREN TALLEY and HEATHER TIMMONSTwo key lawmakers have asked the federal housing agencies to persuadeloan servicers to cut some slack for furloughed government workers who missmortgage payments.   In identical letters sent Dec. 28 to the chairmen of Fannie Mae andFreddie Mac, House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach urged that theworkers be "protected from unintended consequences of the budget impasse."   The same day, Rep. Rick Lazio, chairman of the banking panel's housingsubcommittee, urged Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisnerosto extend forbearance to borrowers whose mortgages are held in Ginnie Maepools.   The lawmakers were responding to the second government shutdown in sixweeks. Tens of thousands of government workers have been left withoutpaychecks because Congress and the Clinton administration are logjammedover the budget.   Observers don't expect the budget impasse to drive up delinquency ratesdramatically. Even so, federal employees run the risk of missing payments,forcing lenders to decide what actions, if any, to take.   Lawmakers "send out similar letters for natural disasters, so I guessthey put this in the same category," said Brian Chappelle, staff vicepresident for the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.   In his letters, Rep. Leach asked Fannie and Freddie - formally theFederal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan MortgageCorp. - to advise companies that collect and process mortgage loan paymentsof options for dealing with delinquent borrowers.   Specifically, he said, the agencies should instruct servicers toconsider borrowers' attitudes toward the debt and the reasons for missedpayments before declaring accounts in default.   John Gibbons, a senior vice president at Freddie Mac, said that when itreceived Rep. Leach's letter it was already notifying servicers that reliefis warranted under existing guidelines.   A spokeswoman said Fannie Mae would decide this week how to proceed withRep. Leach's request. "We are very sympathetic to the situation and willaddress the request," she said.   Representatives from Ginnie Mae - a unit of HUD that is formally knownas the Government National Mortgage Association - could not be reached;they are on furlough as part of the government shutdown.   Lenders, meanwhile, said they have already snapped into action. GECapital Mortgage got hold of the lawmakers' letters on Dec. 28. Itimmediately undertook a case-by-case review of defaults by federalemployees, a spokeswoman said.   Capstead Mortgage Corp. said it is prepared to extend forbearance tocustomers who ask for extra time to make payments, said Bill Ruduff,executive vice president of servicing.   Some banks have begun broader programs to help federal workers throughthin times. United Jersey Bank, for instance, is offering unsecuredpersonal loans to people furloughed from the Social SecurityAdministration.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONSBy JULIANA RATNEROne of the most striking developments on the mortgage scene in 1995 wasthe decision by GE Capital Mortgage Services to stop originatingresidential loans directly to consumers.   For years, the Raleigh, N.C., company's hallmark had been its presencein virtually every aspect of the home loan business - insuring mortgages,servicing them, originating mortgages through correspondent lenders, andmarketing loans directly to the public.   Its retreat in August was seen as an acknowledgement that GE Capital,despite its prowess in wholesale originations, had not grabbed enoughbusiness to be a force in the retail business. In the first half of 1995,retail loans accounted for only 7% of the company's originations, whichtotaled just under $1 billion.   "There are certain lines of business in which a company either has tobecome a major player or leave," said Rolland Johannsen, president ofFurash & Co., a Washington-based consulting firm.   Mr. Johannsen said that, unlike banks, finance companies such as GECapital don't have to worry that customers will leave if they can't choosefrom a wide array of financial services. In short, GE Capital has theluxury of picking the services it offers.   "Because they don't have to consider mortgage originations in terms of acustomer relationship, it becomes a straight decision on how they willallocate capital," Mr. Johannsen said.   To be sure, GE Capital still casts a big shadow in the mortgageindustry. The company continues to originate home loans through brokers andsmaller lenders, and to sell mortgage insurance products. Also, it servicesa portfolio of loans that totaled $110 billion last June 30, second only toNorwest Mortgage.   A spokesman for GE Capital declined to comment for this report.   Industry observers said it's unlikely that many companies will follow GECapital's lead.   "For most companies retail is the appropriate road because they controltheir own destiny in a very cyclical business," said David Lereah, chiefeconomist at the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95By SNIGDHA PRAKASHSobered by the last refinancing boom, the nation's largest thriftsdecided in 1995 to plunge into the fixed-rate market.   For more than a decade, most thrifts have stuck to making adjustable-rate mortgages to hold in their portfolios -  a strategy aimed at earninginterest income while guarding against swings in market rates.   But last year they decided they couldn't afford to sit out future fixed-rate lending booms, and began to offer 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. As atmortgage banks, the loans were intended for sale to the secondary market.   "We're trying real hard to be competitive in those product lines, and toget the word out to our realtors that they can come to us for things otherthan just (cost-of-funds index) ARMs," said Fredric  J. Forster,president of Home Savings of America, Irwindale, Calif.   Mr. Forster said the thrift, which derives interest income from a $53billion portfolio, wants fee income to bolster its bottom line. Incomederived from servicing mortgages - including those sold to other investors- was seen as a natural fit.   Beyond that, thrifts were keen to retain their market share and keeptheir loan officers busy during periods when falling rates draw consumersto fixed-rate loans. But as 1995 progressed, thrifts continued to lagbehind the overall market in fixed-rate originations.   Sam Lyons, senior vice president at Great Western Bank, Chatsworth,Calif., pointed to the "heart-wrenching discipline" of mortgage banking.Mortgage bankers originate every loan knowing that it has to be sold intothe secondary market, he said.   "It's kind of like salmon swimming upstream - they know where they aregoing and what the goal is," Mr. Lyons said. By contrast, the focus atthrifts is divided between originating loans to hold in portfolio and tosell in the secondary market, making it more difficult to generate largefixed-rate volumes.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROWBy KAREN TALLEY1995 was the year Norwest Mortgage broke into the most exclusive clubin mortgage banking, becoming one of just four companies with a servicingportfolio topping $100 billion.   Acquisitions have fueled most of the Des Moines company's growth,helping it to more than double its servicing assets in two years.   The Norwest Corp. unit plans to continue expanding this year. But now itexpects much of the growth to come from its own marketing efforts.   Norwest Corp.'s chairman, Richard M. Kovacevich, contends that banks cangrow most efficiently by mining their customer bases for salesopportunities.   "The most effective way to gain revenue and profits is to cross-sell tocustomers," he said.   Norwest's focus on internal growth is likely to spread this year. Bigbanking companies that bought mortgage businesses in the merger andacquisition frenzy of the past two years are finishing the job of absorbingthese operations. The next step is to deliver on the cross-marketingpotential.   For Norwest Corp., that means offering credit cards, consumer loans, andprivate banking services to the mortgage unit's 1.2 million customers - andoffering mortgages across equally diverse product lines.   Mr. Kovacevich said the mortgage unit's involvement is key to the cross-selling blitz. Norwest customers - from mutual fund investors to checkingaccount users - often need mortgages, he said.   And mortgage loans are the kinds of profitable products that Norwestneeds to stay ahead of competitors, Mr. Kovacevich said. "The war we are inwill be won on the field of revenue."   Norwest Mortgage's president, Mark Oman, says it will take tremendouscooperation among operating units for referrals to begin flowing. "The keyto success is how well the group works together as a team," he said.   Observers agree. "Cross selling is still in its early stages," said StanRoss, managing partner at E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate Group, LosAngeles. "So far there has been limited success."   Much depends on whether banks can reach a lot of prospects withoutsacrificing the personal touch that keeps customers coming back, hecontinued.   "You look at their approach," said Mr. Ross. "Did they use a personalapproach or a mailer? Bankers have to be very proactive in making sure thecustomer understands the service."   Because Norwest has a broad network of mortgage offices, it has a strongshot at making its aspirations a reality, said Moshe A. Orenbuch, bankinganalyst with Bernstein Research.   With its hundreds of mortgage offices, Norwest could create "anationwide financial services network" that offers a range of retailproducts, Mr. Orenbuch said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARESBy KAREN TALLEYFinding new ways to deliver an old product - the mortgage loan - was abig theme in 1995, and perhaps no company exemplified it better than PNCMortgage.   In February, the PNC Bank Corp. unit teamed with Coldwell Banker Corp.in a joint venture to market mortgages directly to homebuyers in realestate agents' offices. The move gives PNC access to customers in 2,400Coldwell Banker offices nationwide.   Seven months later, PNC cut its ties with the 200 outside brokers thathad formed the backbone of its wholesale program, citing too much time andexpense in return for too little profit.   Both strategies are too new to have proved their worth. But they typifythe creative approaches mortgage lenders are experimenting with these days.   PNC isn't alone in testing new techniques. In September, for example,Wells Fargo & Co. stopped extending mortgage loans to its customers,handing this task off to Norwest Corp.'s mortgage unit.   Changes like these don't always proceed smoothly. For PNC, the decisionto revamp distribution channels was swiftly followed by a shake-up in itsexecutive ranks. In November, the company unexpectedly promoted itspresident, Saiyid Naqvi, to chief executive, replacing Walter C. Klein Jr.   PNC said Mr. Klein resigned to pursue other opportunities. But industryobservers said he was eased out after PNC Bancorp decided its mortgagegroup didn't need two top executives.   Mr. Naqvi clearly has high hopes for the Coldwell Banker venture, dubbedHome Mortgage Network. In an interview last year, he said he expects theventure to originate about $3 billion of loans annually. PNC Mortgage'soriginations totaled $2.3 billion in the first six months of 1995.   The decision to scrap the wholesaling effort, meanwhile, got positivereviews from observers.   PNC is better off, because margins are "very thin" on the wholesaleside, said James M. Schutz, senior bank analyst at Chicago Corp. Thecompany, he added, already "has a great distribution network" through itsown loan officers and PNC bank branches.   Industry observers agree that independent brokers are harder to keeptabs on than in-house sales representatives. Brokers may also lack the kindof loyalty that would compel them to present very good credits to theirwholesalers, some observers said.   "It's incumbent upon brokers not to foul the system up by throwing inbad-quality loans," said Walter W. Vail, executive vice president atGraystone Mortgage Corp., Boston.   Still, he said, PNC's decision to drop its broker network probably won'tbe widely followed.   "For every one that drops out another five get in the wholesalebusiness," Mr. Vail said. "The only way larger institutions will get tosmaller guys in communities is through brokers."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995January   Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac post record 1994 profits, despite a sharpdrop in residential lending.   February   PNC Mortgage unveils plan to offer mortgages through 2,400 ColdwellBanker realty offices.   March   NationsBank buys a $25 billion servicing portfolio from KeyCorp, thebiggest mortgage deal to close in 1995.   Prudential's residential mortgage unit becomes the largest put on theblock to date.   April   Citicorp slashes 100 jobs in mortgage securities, reflecting sluggishvolume on Wall Street.   Spring   Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae introduce automated underwriting systems,drawing mixed reviews from lenders.   June   Countrywide links with Intel Corp. to connect homebuyers and loanofficers via video conferences.   September   Underscoring how tough the terrain is for lenders, once-mighty LomasFinancial puts itself on the auction block.   Serious mortgage delinquencies take their biggest jump in nine years.   November   Freddie Mac raises the maximum size of loans it will buy to $207,000.Fannie Mae keeps its limit at $203,150.   November/December   The budget impasse forces lenders to struggle through two furloughs offederal workers who process their paperwork.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVEDBy WILLIAM PLASENCIAAfter three months of fine-tuning, the National Association ofSecurities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new frameworkfor bank-affiliated broker-dealers.   The proposal now goes to the Securities and Exchange Commission forfurther review. Final approval is expected by midyear, industry lawyerssaid.   "These rules are intended to eliminate any confusion between uninsuredsecurities products of broker-dealers and insured deposit products offinancial institutions," said John E. Pinto, executive vice president ofregulation at the NASD. The association, based in Washington, setsprofessional standards for the brokerage industry.   The plan contained few surprises, apart from its size. It came in at1,235 pages.   "I think the meat of it will be in the first 65 pages," said Sarah A.Miller, senior government relations counsel for the American BankersAssociation. She said the NASD, which took its first crack at the rule inNovember 1994, had addressed most of the banking industry's concerns.   The initial draft drew bankers' wrath, with many saying it conflictedwith or duplicated existing rules of bank regulators.   Mr. Pinto said the association had "honestly taken into account thecomments made by our members. We've tried to insure consistency with theguidelines that have already been issued by bank regulators."   The proposal, issued last Thursday, did leave intact certain provisionsthat banks had lobbied hard to change.   For example, the NASD kept a provision that prohibits brokerages fromdirectly compensating bank employees for referrals. And the agency stillrequires that bank customers give written permission before informationabout their finances can be shared with brokers.   Under the proposal, banks would be able to share customers' names,addresses, and telephone numbers, as well as credit reports, withaffiliated brokerages. Bankers had argued that such information sharing iscrucial to their cross-marketing efforts.   Ms. Miller said the NASD still needs to clarify some points. Forinstance, the proposal limits investment sales in areas "where retaildeposits are taken," but does not explain exactly what this means, shesaid.   But for the most part, bank brokerage executives could find little tocomplain about.   "It almost appears that everything we took exception to was stricken,"said Joel Calvo, president of PNC Brokerage Corp., Pittsburgh.   For instance, Mr. Calvo said he was pleased that the NASD dropped arequirement for brokers to give a lengthy explanation of how SecuritiesInvestor Protection Corp. insurance works.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE ITBy TED S. BERNSTEINTrust departments are confronting substantial liability associated withthe life insurance policies held by trusts under their management.   However, few banks recognize the potential liability they face. Thestakes are huge, with a potential price tag of tens or even hundreds ofmillions of dollars.   At issue is the estimated $1 trillion in face value of life insurancepolicies held by irrevocable trusts.   Most of these policies were purchased to generate funds to satisfyfederal estate tax liabilities. However, insufficient management of thepolicies and today's volatile insurance and financial markets have put thevalue of many policies at risk.   In addition, trust departments are solely responsible for managingassets in the best interests of the trust and its beneficiaries. If thepolicies under a trust department's control fall short, it will bedifficult for banks and trusts to escape liability when beneficiariescontend that insurance policies were managed inefficiently.   Already, Crown Life Insurance Co. and New York Life Insurance have paid$50 million and $65 million respectively to settle lawsuits claimingvanishing premium fraud. In the suits, disgruntled policyholders contendedthat the insurers had promised that premium payments would end after aspecific period. But when policies failed to perform as expected, insurersdemanded additional premiums to keep policies in force. These consumerissues undoubtedly will spill over into trust management, and banks couldbe the focus of policyholders' wrath.   It is important to understand that trust officers at most banks andtrusts lack the training to review or manage life insurance policies. Inaddition, over the past 15 years the life insurance industry has introduceda variety of products that make purchase decisions more complex.   Many trust officers try to minimize their liability by holding insurancepolicies from carriers with excellent credit ratings. However, it's justnot that simple. The lawsuits being filed today are not claiming damagesdue to carrier failures; the basis for these lawsuits is policyperformance.   Three scenarios most likely to expose banks and trusts to liabilityinclude:   *Failing to analyze the difference between vanishing premiums and levelpremiums.   *Holding inappropriate or obsolete life insurance policies.   *Failing to purchase enough life insurance for the premiums paid.   Beneficiaries and their attorneys could evaluate these issues todetermine whether a policy has performed in accordance with its objectives.   One situation commonly overlooked by trust departments is adverse healthratings applied when a policy was first issued.   Assume that in 1988 an overweight nonsmoking male purchased a $5million, 15-year level term policy owned by an irrevocable trust. Becausehe was overweight, the annual premium payment of $15,000 was 33% higherthan the standard rate.   Now, seven years later, the insured - no longer overweight - would pay$10,000 annually for the same death benefit. Or he could maintain hispremium at $15,000 but purchase $1.75 million in additional coverage.   When the insured dies and the trust begins distributing its funds, thebeneficiaries review the policy and discover that the trust could havepurchased $1.75 million in additional life insurance without increasingpremiums. They decide to sue the bank or trust for mismanagement.   However, the beneficiaries do not seek $5,000 - the difference in annualpremiums. They seek $1.75 million in damages - the difference in deathbenefit.   Considering that some banks manage as many as 4,000 trusts, thepotential liability is staggering. This example represents one of the manypotential issues banks and trusts confront.   However, today's prudent-investor laws provide these institutions withthe ability to limit their exposure and liability - particularly if theyobtain the necessary expertise to review the policies of each trust.   Banks and trusts can significantly reduce their exposure to liabilitythrough several steps.   Establish corporate policy. Banks should determine whether to absorb thecost of a policy review or pass the cost along to the trust. And if therisk associated with life insurance policies is too great to manage, theyshould get out of the irrevocable trust business.   Determine how often policies will be reviewed. Most banks reviewpolicies at least every two years.   Select an experienced insurance consultant or firm to assess the lifeinsurance policies held by trusts. To keep the consultant's recommendationsimpartial, banks and trusts should prohibit consultants from selling lifeinsurance policies to the trusts they evaluate.   Demand more service from insurance companies. Have them provide theratings they receive from every service that evaluates them. Also, ask forinformation about the junk bonds and troubled real estate held in thecompany's portfolio as a percentage of its net worth.   Policy reviews can generate significant client good will. By conductingthe reviews, banks and trusts help policyholders fully understand theirspecific policies, often for the first time.   The reviews also allow trust departments to demonstrate their activemanagement of trust assets. Finally, reviews help banks and trusts reducetheir exposure to liability.   It's a "win-win" situation for all parties involved.   Mr. Bernstein is president of Trustee Consulting Corp., a Chicago-basedfirm that advises on personal trust issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKSBy KATHARINE FRASERNational banks with trust departments operating in several states maysoon get a break on the cost of doing business.   The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has issued a proposal thatwould allow banks to account for all trust operations at their headquartersrather than having to maintain separate books in each state they dobusiness in.   Trust bankers see the OCC proposal - outlined in a Dec. 21 letter - as awelcome reprieve. Currently, national banks with trust operations in two ormore states must maintain staffs in each state that do nothing but preparefor state examinations.   "It's a lot easier to run a business under a single regulatory roof,"said David J. Kundert, chairman and chief executive officer of  Banc OneCorp.'s investment management and trust group.   Mr. Kundert believes that a relaxation of regulatory demands could helpBanc One compete with nonbank investment managers that do not have toadhere to the same regulations as national banks.   "You need to level the playing field to compete with those kind offirms," Mr. Kundert said.   First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, is also supportive of the proposal,according to a bank spokeswoman.   The OCC proposal, if enacted, would represent the first major revisionof the agency's 32-year-old rule defining how fiduciary businesses can beconducted by national banks whose trust businesses are also subject tostate regulations. The proposal comes on the heels of an OCC interpretiveletter issued on Dec. 8 that allows national banks to offer trust servicesoutside their home states without having to set up new branches.   "Much about the national banks fiduciary business has changed since(1963) including ... the structures and operational methods that banks useto deliver those services," reads the OCC notice.   While the OCC proposal would allow for accounting and businessadministration to be streamlined, that does not mean that banks could use acookie cutter to deliver trust services to clients in different states.   The agency writes that case-by-case determinations would be made whetheror not state laws regarding the conduct of trust relationships can bepreempted by federal oversight.   "They have clearly opened the door to banks doing their administrationon a uniform basis out of the headquarters state," said John P.C. Duncan, apartner at Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, which counsels banks on interstateissues.   But, Mr. Duncan observes that the OCC is making a distinction betweenstreamlining bean-counts and implementing any standardized investmentpolicies.   All 50 states have different "prudent investor" rules that govern whattypes of investments are acceptable and how they should be disclosed.   The OCC is inviting comment on how to minimize the differences amonginvestment laws so national banks can operate on a uniform basis.   "We're dealing in a national environment now, and it's important thatbanks and customers both know what law applies," Mr. Duncan said.   State consumer interests and regulators have until Feb. 20 to submitcomments to the OCC.   In the meantime, the affected banks are offering their support to theproposed regulation.   Banc One is a classic example of a banking company that stands to gainmuch from this OCC proposal. The institution would like to whittle down itsfar-flung banking operations to a single charter someday.   Banc One has 60 affiliate banks in 11 states, compared with 88 threeyears ago. In each state, there are three or four separately charteredbusiness units that all have to be accounted for.   Other trust executives at banks with similar situations would welcomeany opportunity to centralize the business.   "The current approach is encumbered by a variety of differentregulations," said Daniel E. Klimas, KeyCorp's executive vice president forprivate banking and investing. "This new proposal may offer us a moreeconomical way of offering those services," he added.   Though Mr. Klimas said he is supportive of the OCC proposal, he expectsan onslaught of litigation from state regulators before anything isresolved.   Like Banc One, KeyCorp sees a clear benefit to consolidating thereporting of its segmented trust departments.   "We are supportive of anything that allows us to look at ourselves andrun a business on a national basis instead of several independently," Mr.Klimas said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOTCONGRESSBy JUSTIN FOXWhen 1995 began, a new Republican majority on Capitol Hill seemedpoised to release banks from the shackles that had kept them a step or twobehind the rest of the financial services industry.   No such luck.   Instead, the good news for bankers came from the courts and theregulators. The Supreme Court affirmed banks' right to sell annuities. TheFederal Deposit Insurance Corp. cut premium rates to all-time lows. All thebanking regulatory agencies trumpeted regulation-cutting reforms.   The only major banking legislation Congress approved was a SavingsAssociation Insurance Fund rescue that will - if President Clinton signs it- cost banks and thrifts more than $20 billion.   Should the industry look to Congress for answers in 1996? Probably not.   Bank lobbyists say there is no predicting what lawmakers might do,particularly if plans to follow the thrift fund fix with a merger of thebank and thrift charters gain momentum.   But the stalemate persists in the House of Representatives betweensupporters of broader bank powers and insurance agents who want to protecttheir turf. What's more, with elections looming, Congress is likely toeffectively shut down by summer.   The courts and banking agencies, meanwhile, will keep on judging andregulating. And they could take actions this year that have a big impact onthe business of banking.   First up is the Supreme Court, which on Jan. 16 will hear oral argumentsin Barnett v. Gallagher, the attempt by Barnett Banks Inc. to overturnFlorida laws that keep it from selling insurance.   Last January, the court ruled in banks' favor in a case challengingNorth Carolina-based NationsBank's right to sell annuities, and many in theindustry expect a similarly favorable Barnett decision before midyear.   Bank lawyers think the court also will decide to hear another importantbanking case - dealing with credit card issuers' right to charge late feesto out-of-state customers.   A win in the Barnett case would let banks use current federal law tolaunch insurance marketing efforts from branches in towns with fewer than5,000 people.   It also would likely embolden Comptroller of the Currency Eugene A.Ludwig. The comptroller laid off proposals to expand bank powers last yearafter receiving a series of stinging letters on insurance and other issuesfrom House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach.   If the Supreme Court acts and Congress does not, the door will be openedfor Mr. Ludwig to revive his plans to let bank subsidiaries move into linesof business now generally off-limits to banks.   But if the Supreme Court hands banks a victory, insurance agents are notlikely to sit idly by. "It could whip them into a frenzy," said KennethGuenther, executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Associationof America.   All this points to rough sailing for Rep. Leach's bid to break down someof the Glass-Steagall Act barriers that keep commercial banks out of thesecurities business. In September, insurance agents' pressure led Houseleaders to combine Rep. Leach's bill with a regulatory relief measure and amoratorium on the Comptroller's ability to grant banks new insurancepowers, making for a legislative stew unpalatable to most banking groups.   Rep. Leach will keep fighting for passage of his bill, Mr. Guenthersaid, but others believe it is more likely that regulatory relief - alongthe lines of the bill approved in September by the Senate BankingCommittee, which doesn't touch the controversial Community Reinvestment Act- will be decoupled from Glass-Steagall and enacted on its own.   Then there's the charter merger. In return for being forced to chip inalmost $600 million a year for 22 years to help pay the interest on bondsfrom the savings and loan bailout, commercial banks have clamored for anend to the federal thrift charter.   Thrifts now possess insurance, affiliation, and branching powers thatbanks don't, and some in the industry see the charter merger as a back-doorway to improve the bank charter. But any major changes would run up againstthe same forces that have halted Glass-Steagall reform, while an attempt toforce savings institutions into the existing bank charter would be fiercelyopposed by many thrifts.   Thrifts also want to make sure the industry isn't forced to pay billionsin back taxes on their so-called bad-debt deductions as part of a chartermerger - although agreements by House and Senate tax writers late last yearput such fears largely to rest.   "We do not want to see our people hurt because of this," said RandallMcFarlane, director of governmental relations for America's CommunityBankers, the leading thrift trade group.   Thus, while Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, chairman of the BankingCommittee, has promised action on the charter merger by Easter, chances aregood that the issue won't be resolved this year.   More likely to be dealt with in 1996 is a Federal Home Loan Bank Systemmodernization bill, which foundered in 1995 because of disputes overdividing the 12 Home Loan Banks' payments on thrift bailout bonds.   If Glass-Steagall reform indeed goes nowhere in 1996, bank groups planto start pushing regulatory buttons - urging the Federal Reserve Board tolet bank holding companies' section 20 subsidiaries get more of theirincome from securities activities that banks themselves cannot engage in.   Currently, such business - which includes underwriting municipal bonds,dealing in consumer receivables, and underwriting corporate debt and equity- can't provide more than 10% of the income of a bank holding companysubsidiary. Bank lawyers say the Fed has the legal leeway to raise thatlimit as high as 49%.   The Fed already has a proposal in the works to make the limit moreflexible. In a December speech, Fed governor Susan M. Phillips said theboard definitely will consider raising the limit if Congress fails to act.   The Fed and the other banking agencies are also in the midst ofcampaigns to rewrite their rules to reduce confusion and regulatory burden,and make the examination process more "banker-friendly."   The Comptroller's office has been most aggressive, mixing regulatoryrelief with new powers for national banks. James D. McLaughlin, director ofagency relations for the American Bankers Association, said he doesn'texpect other regulators to go that far, but does see real reductions inpaperwork and other hassles on the horizon for bankers.   The agencies also promised that the new community reinvestment rulesthey approved in April will make life easier for banks and thrifts. Examsunder the new rules start this month, giving banks a chance to judgewhether their regulators were right.   Also sure to show up in 1996 exams - particularly those by the FederalReserve and the Comptroller's office - is an increased emphasis on riskmanagement, something regulators talked about often in 1995.   Then there are the deposit insurance premiums. Throughout 1995, bankspushed the FDIC to cut them further and faster as the once-depleted BankInsurance Fund returned to health. But the industry had nothing more tocomplain about after Nov. 14, when the FDIC cut most banks' premiums to thelegal minimum of $2,000 a year.   In 1996, bank premiums can't go down any more. In fact, they will almostcertainly go up about 2 basis points as part of the thrift fund rescue.   As of last week, however, the budget reconciliation bill that includesthe thrift fund plan was still caught in the tug-of-war between PresidentClinton and Congress.   The savings fund proposal, which would let the FDIC drop thrifts'premiums to bank levels, is not the subject of any tension between thePresident and Congress. But if the budget legislation were to collapsecompletely and the thrift fund legislation were considered separately, 1996would witness a Capitol Hill battle royal between thrift executives whowant their fund fixed and bankers who don't want to help pay for it, Mr.Guenther said.   No one is predicting that this is will happen. But then again, as 1995showed, predictions can be wrong.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUITBy JARET SEIBERGTrying to limit its potential liability, NationsBank Corp. asked afederal judge last week to deny class-action status for a pendingfair-lending lawsuit.   The bank charged the Washington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights andUrban Affairs with missing the deadline to seek class-action certification.   "By failing to move for class certification by Dec. 20, 1995, which was90 days from the date on which the class complaint was filed, plaintiffsdirectly violated (the) local rule," the bank said in Dec. 26 memorandumfiled with the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia."Accordingly, plaintiffs' class-action allegations should be stricken intheir entirety."   John Relman, director of the fair-housing project at the WashingtonLawyers Committee, said the group hasn't missed the deadline. He declinedto elaborate, saying he will explain the group's position in a future courtfiling.   Class-action status is crucial to the lawyers committee's case, whichalleges that NationsBank discriminated against borrowers. The bank wouldhave much more to lose fighting a class action in court.   Without class status, the case involves only 13 plaintiffs and nine loanapplications; even if NationsBank lost, the damage award would be limited.But with class-action status, the lawyer's committee could seekcompensation for all similarly affected consumers. That could raise thebank's tab dramatically.   The bank also argued that the lawyers committee has had since itsDecember 1994 press conference announcing its fair-lending initiative tosearch for clients. It said the group has employed a toll-free number,meetings with community groups, and a "carefully orchestrated" mediacampaign.   Still, NationsBank noted that just 11 plaintiffs joined the lawsuit,which was filed Sept. 21. Two months of publicity persuaded only one moreperson to join the case, NationsBank told the court.   "If the plaintiffs believe they have meritorious individual claims, theyshould be required to litigate them as such," the bank said. "NationsBankshould be subjected to no further prejudicial adverse publicity tied tograndiose promises of class-action litigation that the plaintiffs' counselhave been unable to fulfill."   NationsBank said this is not the first time the lawyers committee failedto file its papers on time. It said in the memorandum that a federal judge"sternly admonished" the group for failing to file a timely class actionrequest in a 1982 employment discrimination case.   According to the memorandum, the judge allowed the committee to file therequest late. But he warned them not to let it happen again.   "Plaintiffs chose to bring this as a class action and it is time forthem to fish or cut bait," the judge said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FEDMark P. Jacobsen was named senior adviser to Comptroller of theCurrency Eugene A. Ludwig last week. After joining the agency in January1994, Mr. Jacobsen was special assistant to the chief counsel. Before thathe hadbeen an associate with the law firm of Covington & Burling, where Mr.Ludwig was a partner.   Mr. Jacobsen replaces Ballard Gilmore, who is now director of licensingoperations in the agency's bank organization department.   Meanwhile, John Hartzell has left his post as deputy comptroller forinternational banking for, of all things, an international bank.   Mr. Hartzell, who left last month, will soon join the New York office ofDresdner Bank, which is based in Frankfurt. His new title will be directorof economic and group strategy. The Comptroller's office has not chosen areplacement.                              ***   Rep. Doug Bereuter, R-Neb., has hired Alan Brubaker as his new bankingaide. Mr. Brubaker, 28, most recently worked as a loan officer with aMaryland mortgage company, but has Capitol Hill experience. From 1989 to1991 he was a staff member with the House Republican Conference.   Rep. Bereuter is sponsor of the House's regulatory-relief bill, whichwould cut bank paperwork and red tape. The legislation is stalled becauseof banks' opposition to restrictions on their insurance powers.   Mr. Brubaker replaces Joe Pigg, who left in October to be a Washingtonlobbyist for New York City.                              ***   Investment banker John C. Whitehead, insurance executive Thomas W.Jones, and balanced-budget crusader Peter G. Peterson have been named tothe board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.   Mr. Whitehead, a former State Department deputy secretary and former co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Co., now heads AEA Investors Inc. He will bechairman of the New York Fed board.   Tapped as deputy chairman was Mr. Jones, who is vice chairman,president, and chief operating officer of Teachers Insurance and AnnuityAssociation-College Retirement Equities Fund.   Mr. Peterson is a former secretary of commerce and former CEO of LehmanBrothers, Kuhn, Loeb Inc. He now heads the Blackstone Group, an investmentfirm, but is perhaps best known for founding the Concord Coalition, anonprofit group pushing for a balanced federal budget.   The Federal Reserve Board appointed the three men; the other six membersof the New York Fed board are elected by Fed member banks.                              ***   Gail L. Patelunas is the new acting director of the division ofresolutions at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. She takes the placevacated by Robert H. Hartheimer, who resigned as of Dec. 31 to join theAlexandria, Va., investment banking firm of Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &Co.   Since 1994, Ms. Patelunas has been associate director of the division,which is responsible for the resolution of failing FDIC-insured banks andthrifts. Before that she was assistant director of resolutions, and beforejoining the FDIC in 1990 she worked at the Federal Reserve Board, Kidder,Peabody & Co., and KPMG Peat Marwick.                              ***   Lynn Reaser is the new chairman of the American Bankers Association'seconomic advisory committee. She replaces Alan Gayle who just completed atwo-year term.   Ms. Reaser is senior vice president and chief economist at FirstInterstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.   In her ABA post she will oversee the committee's forecasts of economicindicators and national and regional economic issues. The panel's nextsemiannual economic forecast and monetary policy recommendation will beannounced Jan. 24.   The committee's new vice chairman is Joel L. Naroff, chief economist atFirst Fidelity Bancorp. in Philadelphia.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMPANY INDEX[TABLE]   A   AEA Investors, 2   America's Community Bankers, 1   American Bankers Assn, 1,2,15   American Express, 17   B   Banc One, 14   Bank of Boston, 10   Blackstone Group, 2   Boatmen's, 1   Broadway & Seymour, 18   C   Capstead, 13   Chicago Corp, 12   Coldwell Banker, 12   Colorado Bankers Assn, 7   Concord EFS, 18   Continuum, 18   Countrywide Credit Industries, 12   Credit Union National Assn, 7   D   Deluxe Corp, 18   Direct Marketing Assn, 1   DM Group, 1   Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, 1   Dresdner, 2   E   E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate, 12   F   Fair Isaac, 18   Farmers & Merchants (NE), 10   Federal Home Loan Mortgage, 13   Federal National Mortgage Assn, 13   Fifth Third, 17   Financial Institutions Consulting, 6   First Bank System, 6,14   First Data, 16   First Fidelity, 2   First Interstate, 2,6   First National (New England), 10   First Technology Federal CU, 7   G   Gates Credit Union (CO), 7   GE Capital, 13   General Electric, 12,13   General Motors Acceptance, 1   Gensar Holdings, 16   George K Baum & Co, 18   Glendale Federal, 6   Graystone Mortgage, 12   Great Western, 13   H   Hogan Systems, 18   Home Savings, 13   Hovde Financial, 6   I   Independent Bankers Assn of America, 1   J   Jack Henry & Associates, 18   Jones Day Reavis & Pogue, 14   M   Massachusetts Bankers Assn, 10   Massachusetts Independent Bankers Assn, 10   MasterCard, 17   Merrill Lynch, 6   Monness Crespi & Hardt, 6   Mortgage Bankers Assn, 13   N   Natl Assn of Securities Dealers, 15   Natl City, 16   NationsBank, 2   Norwest, 12,13   O   Olympic Financial, 1   P   PaineWebber, 6   Patelco CU, 7   Pentagon Federal CU, 7   PNC, 12   Polk, 1   Prudential, 12   R   RCSB Finanical, 1   Rodman & Renshaw, 1   Royal Bank of Canada, 24   S   Signature Group, 1   State Bank of Blomkest (MN), 10   Sulphur Springs State (TX), 10   Sumner National, 17   T   TIAA-CREF, 2   Trustee Consulting, 14   U   U S Central CU, 7   United Jersey, 13   V   Value Rent a Car, 17   W   Wells Fargo, 6   Western Corporate Federal CU, 7===Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITSBy DANIEL DUNAIEFLess is more for the U.S. businesses of Canada's biggest bank,  RoyalBank of Canada.   In the last three years, U.S. senior vice president and general managerDavid L. Robertson has reduced the bank's corporate client base to about685 from 1,500.   At the same time, he has reduced the bank's staff to 217 from 415, evenas the bank has added an asset-backed securities business, a syndicationdistribution business, and a structured finance team.   And Mr. Robertson is not done. He plans to reduce the number ofcorporate clients even further in 1996, to 600, focusing on multinationalcompanies that present the greatest opportunities for the bank.   In conjunction with its investment banking affiliate DominionSecurities, Royal Bank has been building its expertise in various capitalmarkets arenas, hoping to develop a critical mass of business to justifydoing business with each customer.   "We want to be able to deliver at least three or four main products toeach of our clients," said the 53-year-old Mr. Robertson.   The bank also hopes to find companies that have subsidiaries in Canada,where it can provide a branch network and services ranging from payroll tocash management.   The strategy has worked so far, with fewer customers accounting for morerevenues.   Mr. Robertson estimated that revenues from U.S.-based banking hadreached 10% to 12% of gross revenues, up from about 8% three years ago whenhe took over the U.S. operations.   Some of that increased profitability can be attributed to  growth inspecific business lines.   "We've more than trebled the amount of foreign exchange and capitalmarkets derivatives that we deliver to the remaining clients," said Mr.Robertson.   The key products Royal Bank is looking to deliver include trade finance,syndicated loans and standby lines of credit, foreign exchange, capitalmarkets derivatives, and equity derivatives.   To that end, Dominion Securities last year added 20 former KidderPeabody equity derivatives traders to its staff.   Additionally, this fall the bank raised its profile among U.S. investorsby listing its stock on the New York Stock Exchange.   Mr. Robertson said the listing was "a first step," as the bank continuesto view the United States as an area for expansion in such areas as retailbanking, fund management, and regional investment banking.   While the New York Stock Exchange listing presents an opportunity for anacquisition, it's not something the bank considers practical right now."You see what everyone wants to pay to buy banks these days?" Mr. Robertsonasked.   Down the road, Mr. Robertson said, the United States presents an idealarea for expansion, especially as laws like the Depression-era Glass-Steagall Act and the Bank Holding Company Act change.   "If you look at North America and at the North American Free TradeAgreement, (a strategic acquisition) would be a natural expansion for us,"he said.   The Royal Bank executive said that a focused strategy is the rightapproach in a foreign marketplace.   Indeed, Mr. Robertson, who has been with the bank for 36 years, has donethree stints outside Canada, including one in London, and articulated theneed for targeted competition.   "You can't compete with Natwest or Barclays on the ground in England andreally make any money," said Mr. Robertson. "When you're outside thecountry, you have to try to deliver certain things you can do profitably."   The Royal Bank favors profitability over size.   With about a $6 billion-asset base in the United States, the bank hasthe smallest amount of American assets among Canadian banks.   "We're not chasing assets," said Mr. Robertson. "We concentrate onproducts, and if it results in assets, that's fine."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALESBy JAMES C. ALLEN and STEPHEN KLEEGESharp divisions are developing on Wall Street over the recent upticksin consumer loan delinquencies.   Short-sellers are betting on further damage to consumer financecompanies, while some stock analysts are touting buying opportunities inthe stocks.   A case in point is Olympic Financial Ltd., a Minneapolis-based autolender that won a "buy" affirmation from Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette lastweek - after the short interest in its shares had soared 65% in a month.   The skepticism about consumer lenders helped push up short interest inbank-related shares traded on the National Association of SecuritiesDealers' system by 9.5% in the month ended Dec. 15. The rise in bank shortinterest came amid a general decline in short interest in stocks traded onthe over-the-counter system. (See tables on pages 22 and 24.)   Short interest is the outstanding volume of shares sold short - that is,borrowed and promptly sold. Short-sellers are betting that the stock pricewill fall, so their short positions can be covered profitably with cheapershares.   Earlier, the New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchangereported a slight decline in bank-related short interest. The basket ofbank stocks traded on the Nasdaq includes numerous small, retail-orientedbanks and thrifts that could be seen as vulnerable to rising delinquencies.   Short interest in Olympic Financial - which provides auto finance mostlyto "prime," or creditworthy, consumers - rose by nearly 1.8 million shares,to more than 4.6 million shares. It was the largest short position in thebank-related group.   RCSB Financial, a Rochester, N.Y., thrift holding company, had thelargest short position relative to its daily trading volume. Its shortposition of 2.3 million shares represents 21.1 days of average trading.   RCSB had the fourth-largest short position in total among the Nasdaqbank-related issues, behind Olympic and Boatmen's Bancshares, the St. Louisbased regional bank, with 2.7 million shares sold short.   The second-biggest increase was in the Money Store, the well-known homeequity lender. The Money Store's short position increased by 848,852 sharesto 1.5 million shares - the 10th-largest total.   Olympic Financial's shares were trading at $16 last week, off from morethan $30 in September. Short-sellers apparently believe Olympic could falleven further because of what analyst Andrew Jeffrey of Rodman & Renshawcalls its "loss deferral strategy."   "I think the assumptions they have used are unrealistic, given the typeof paper they are buying," said Mr. Jeffrey, who specializes in companiesthat make auto loans to less creditworthy consumers.   Olympic's chairman and chief executive Jeffrey Mack insists thecompany's loss assumptions are based on historical performance: Loan lossesare currently running at an annualized rate of 65 to 75 basis points, or130 basis points to 140 basis points over the average two-year life of aloan, he said.   He said the company is setting aside nearly 172 basis points to coverany variance that economic swings cause for the portfolio.   "On top of that, we have set up what we call general reserves, which areother allocated reserves in the millions of dollars, to add furtherprotection," he said.   But that is not enough, Mr. Jeffrey said. He said General MotorsAcceptance Corp., also a prime lender, has experienced cumulative losses of200 basis points during previous economic downturns.   Another disconcerting factor for Mr. Jeffrey is the manner in whichOlympic disposes of its repossessed automobiles. Instead of auctioning theautos as its competitors do, Olympic puts the cars on a used-car lot andsells them on consignment, he said.   By doing so, he said the company is increasing its future losses becauseit is making greater concessions in order to get the asset sold.   But some observers said the pessimists are misguided.   Thomas Brown, a banking analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, saidthat short-sellers tend to be paranoid and that they are "wrong in assumingthis is a giant conspiracy."   The rating agencies, third-party guarantors, and Olympic's accountantshave all signed off on the company's assumptions regarding such things asprepayment speeds and loan-loss reserves, Mr. Brown said.   "In my experience it's typical of the way short-sellers have tried tojump on financial stocks," he said. "It makes a good story until youexamine it."   Mr. Brown said even if losses exceed the level of reserves the companyhas set aside, it is unlikely that shareholders will see a significantreduction in current earnings to cover any losses.   If he's right, a lot of short-sellers will be licking their wounds nextyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96By BRIAN TRACEYLike in the rest of the U.S. equities market, 1995 was a terrific yearfor bank technology stocks.   The publicly traded financial systems and processing-services firmstracked by American Banker saw their stock prices rise an average of 34%last year.   That hefty increase was statistically in line with the Standard & Poor'sindex of 500 stocks and the Dow Jones industrial average, which both roseby about one-third in 1995.   But what was even more interesting was that only 6 of the 30 listedfinancial systems stocks lost value over the 12-month period, while 13outperformed the average gain. The number of advancing stocks far exceeded1994 performance levels, when just 13 out of 28 firms experienced gains.   Wall Street analysts said the bull market in 1995 was led mainly by thetechnology sector, as more consumers and companies sought to leverage thelatest advances in computer and telecommunications systems.   Banks and their technology vendors seem to be at the nexus of thistrend, observers said. Financial institutions increasingly see technologyas vital to their future competitive positioning, as well as providing themeans to link up with their most profitable customers.   Payment systems and information processing firms are "the growth stocksof the next century," said Richard K. Weingarten, an analyst at MontgomerySecurities in San Francisco. "They're the new Cokes and Pepsis andGillettes of the world."   Like 1994, payment services and financial application software companiesoffered the best returns on investment. Leading the pack was bank softwaredeveloper Jack Henry & Associates, which saw its stock appreciate awhopping 156% in 1995.   Kevin J. Dyches, an analyst with George K. Baum & Co. in Kansas City,said Jack Henry's big gain was mainly attributable to the company's Juneacquisition of the community banking software business of Broadway &Seymour Inc.   "Through that acquisition, Jack Henry increased their customer base by33%," Mr. Dyches said. "At that time, their market value was about $150million, and they bought a company that was one-third their size for $12million." He also noted that the acquisition was profitable in the firstquarter after Monett, Mo.-based Jack Henry acquired the business.   Mr. Dyches added that Jack Henry was generating internal revenue growththrough sales of its Silverlake core accounting system, designed formidsize banks with between $100 million and $10 billion in assets.   The second-biggest percentage gain among financial systems firms wasConcord EFS Inc., a provider of payments systems services to retailers.Then Memphis-based firm's stock rose 146% during 1995.   Two years ago, Concord's stock dipped after some weak-performingquarters, but since then "they've gained back the confidence of themarket," Mr. Weingarten said. "They had the strongest internal growth ofany company in the payment services group."   He added that Concord's specialty is provident credit and debit point ofsale systems to supermarkets, "which is the fastest growing part of thepayments processing business."   Hogan Systems Inc., another bank software firm, gave its stockholders atidy profit for the year: its common stock rose 110%. After months ofspeculation, Dallas-based Hogan agreed last month to be acquired byContinuum Co., an Austin, Tex.-based developer of systems for the insuranceindustry, in stock swap currently valued at about $200 million.   It's also interesting to note that two of the best-performing stocks in1994, Charlotte, N.C.-based Broadway & Seymour and San Rafael, Calif.-basedFair, Isaac & Co. lost ground in 1995.   The common stock value of Fair, Isaac, a developer of credit scoringsystems, dropped 9%. for the year.   Broadway & Seymour, after peaking at $31 a share last summer, hasskidded back to about $16 a share after the company announced it would takea fourth-quarter restructuring charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70MBy BRIAN TRACEYCheck printing firm Deluxe Corp., acknowledging that its future successlies more in electronic banking, said last week it would take $60 millionto $70 million restructuring charge.   Executives at St. Paul-based Deluxe said last week that the fourth-quarter charge to earnings would cover expenses related to the closing ofseveral check printing facilities and other writeoffs in several businessunits.   The company has seen its profit margins shrink in its core checkprinting business in recent years as the banking industry has consolidated.In addition, electronic payments are expected to slowly begin replacingpaper checks as consumers increasingly use bank cards.   "Our earnings declines over the last three years have clearly been adisappointment to our shareholders and employees, and it is now time tobegin reversing that trend," said J. A. "Gus" Blanchard, Deluxe's presidentand chief executive officer, who added that the restructuring shouldgenerate $100 million to $125 million in annual expense savings by the endof 1997.   Mr. Blanchard said that as part of its new strategy, the company plansto enhance its electronic banking and other types of information servicesfor financial institutions, mainly through its Deluxe Data unit, a leadingthird-party processor of automated teller machine transactions.   "Through our Deluxe Data subsidiary, we already provide a variety oftransaction processing and settlement capabilities as well as applicationsfor linking various back-office functions," Mr. Blanchard  said. "Our newplan calls for strengthening our existing offerings as well as broadeningour total value proposition, with the objective being to permit our clientfinancial institutions to connect their customers to any bankingapplication ... by whatever electronic means the customer chooses."   Deluxe officials also said they plan to beef up their product offeringsin the payment protection arena, as banks have been forced to eat billionsof dollars in fraudulent transactions in recent years.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SECURITIZATION LEADERS[TABLE]Aggregate for all three government-sponsored enterprises   Overall issuance                                   Volume in   Rank                             millions    %          1 Countrywide Funding     $24,537   10.50%          2 Norwest Mortgage          19,599     8.4          3 Prudential Home Mtg.       7,723     3.3          4 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,314     2.7          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       5,343     2.3          6 Chemical Residential       4,780     2.1          7 Resource Bancshares        4,519     1.9          8 North American Mtg.        4,372     1.9          9 BancBoston Mortgage        3,411     1.5         10 Standard Fed'l Bank        3,186     1.4   Single-family fixed                                   Volume in   Rank                             millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding     $16,283    9.40%          2 Norwest Mortgage          12,554     7.2          3 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,085     3.5          4 Prudential Home Mtg.       6,016     3.5          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       4,635     2.7          6 Resource Bancshares        4,060     2.3          7 Chemical Residential       4,058     2.3          8 North American Mtg.        3,680     2.1          9 Standard Fed'l Bank        2,903     1.7         10 BancBoston Mortgage        2,594     1.5   ARM issuance                                    Volume in   Rank                             millions    %          1 Countrywide Funding      $7,202   15.00%          2 Norwest Mortgage           6,406    13.4          3 World Savings and Loan     2,326     4.9          4 American Savings Bank      1,727     3.6          5 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,112     2.3          6 Home Savings of America    1,012     2.1          7 BancBoston Mortgage          808     1.7          8 Chemical Residential         679     1.4          9 North American Mtg.          663     1.4         10 Union Fed'l Indianapolis     658     1.4   Multifamily issuance                                    Volume in   Rank                             millions     %          1 GMAC Commercial Mtg.       $269    6.30%          2 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           191     5.9          3 American Mtg.                170     5.3            and Investment          4 Patrician Financial Co.      169     5.2          5 Berkshire Mortgage Co.       162       5          6 Green Park Financial         157     4.9          7 AMI Capital Inc.             156     4.8          8 Eichler, Fayne & Assoc.      107     3.3          9 Mellon Mortgage Co.          104     3.2         10 Bright Mortgage Co.           98       3                            ***   Fannie Mae          Overall issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding  $11,525   12.40%          2 Norwest Mortgage        4,683       5          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,939     3.2          4 American Savings Bank   2,370     2.6          5 World Savings and Loa   2,326     2.5          6 North American Mtg.     2,315     2.5          7 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    2,104     2.3          8 GMAC Mtg. Corp. Pa.     1,439     1.6          9 Chemical Residential    1,384     1.5         10 Standard Fed'l Bank     1,322     1.4   30-year-fixed issuance                                  Volume in   Rank                           millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding   $8,542   14.50%          2 Norwest Mortgage        3,251     5.5          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,427     4.1          4 North American Mtg.     1,955     3.3          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    1,354     2.3          6 Standard Fed. Bank        939     1.6          7 GMAC Mortgage Pa.         892     1.5          8 Chemical Residential      825     1.4          9 Prudential Home Mtg.      770     1.3         10 BancBoston Mortgage       707     1.2   15- to 20-year fixed                                  Volume in   Rank                           millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding    $1,170    8.80%          2 Norwest Mortgage          568     4.3          3 Fleet Mortgage Group      511     3.8          4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.      371     2.8          5 Standard Fed. Bank        339     2.5          6 Chemical Residential      285     2.1          7 Samuel T. Isaac & Ass     278     2.1          8 Barnett Mortgage Co.      241     1.8          9 North American Mtg.       232     1.7         10 Republic Bank             159     1.2   ARM issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                           millions    %          1 World Savings and Loa $2,326   15.80%          2 American Savings Bank   1,727    11.8          3 Countrywide Funding     1,180       8          4 Home Savings            1,012     6.9            of America          5 Citizens Bank of Mass     441       3          6 First Nationwide Mort     425     2.9          7 Bank of Hawaii            410     2.8          8 NVR Mtg. Finance          364     2.5          9 Coast Federal Bank        318     2.2         10 San Francisco Fed'l S     300       2                                 ***   Freddie Mac   Overall issuance                               Volume in   Rank                        millions      %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,592    4.80%     2 Countrywide Funding        3,392     4.5     3 Prudential Home Mtg.       3,154     4.2     4 Resource Bancshares        2,836     3.8     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,989     2.7     6 First Security Savings     1,766     2.4     7 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,755     2.3     8 PHH Mortgage Services      1,564     2.1     9 Washington Mutual          1,288     1.7    10 Chemical Residential       1,209     1.6   30-year-fixed issuance                               Volume in   Rank                        millions     %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,055    6.40%     2 Resource Bancshares        2,381       5     3 Countrywide Funding        1,938     4.1     4 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,846     3.9     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,732     3.6     6 First Security Savings     1,339     2.8     7 PHH Mortgage Svcs.         1,115     2.3     8 Chemical Residential       1,108     2.3     9 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,024     2.2    10 Fleet Mortgage Group         995     2.1   15- to 20-year fixed                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions   %     1 Washington Mutual          $542    4.80%     2 Standard Fed'l Bank          521     4.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.         484     4.2     4 Norwest Mortgage             473     4.1     5 Resource Bancshares          449     3.9     6 Banc One Mortgage            352     3.1     7 Branch Banking and Trust     309     2.7     8 Countrywide Funding          227       2     9 First Security Savings       222     1.9    10 Chase Manhattan Mtg.         220     1.9   ARM issuance                                Volume in   Rank                         millions    %     1 Countrywide Funding        $823    6.70%     2 Washington Mutual            629     5.1     3 Old Kent Bank                244       2     4 Prudential Home Mtg.         229     1.9     5 Standard Fed'l Bank          165     1.3     6 PHH Mortgage Services        102     0.8     7 Sterling Savings              95     0.8     8 First Security Idaho          83     0.7     9 First Security Utah           81     0.7    10 Bank South Mortgage           76     0.6                                 ***   Ginnie Mac   Overall issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions      %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $11,323   17.40%     2 Countrywide Funding         9,620    14.8     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        3,638     5.6     4 BancBoston Mortgage         2,318     3.6     5 Chemical Residential        2,187     3.4     6 Fleet Mortgage Group        2,172     3.3     7 Resource Bancshares         1,645     2.5     8 Principal Residential       1,416     2.2     9 North American Mtg.         1,399     2.1    10 NationsBanc Mtg.            1,335     2.1   Single-family fixed                                Volume in   Rank                          millions    %     1 Norwest Mortgage          $5,206   12.60%     2 Countrywide Funding         4,406    10.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        2,797     6.8     4 Fleet Mortgage Group        1,945     4.7     5 Chemical Residential        1,762     4.3     6 BancBoston Mortgage         1,530     3.7     7 Resource Bancshares         1,203     2.9     8 Principal Residential       1,127     2.7     9 GE Capital Mortgage         1,053     2.5    10 NationsBanc Mtg.              998     2.4   ARM issuance                                Volume in   Rank                          millions       %     1 Countrywide Funding       $18,160   11.40%     2 Norwest Mortgage           13,600     8.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        6,022     3.8     4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.        3,927     2.5     5 Chemical Residential        3,219       2     6 Resource Bancshares         3,141       2     7 North American Mtg.         3,062     1.9     8 Fleet Real Estate Funding   2,869     1.8     9 American Savings Bank       2,178     1.4    10 BancBoston Mtg. Corp.       2,120     1.3   Multifamily issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions    %     1 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           $191     14%     2 GMAC Commercial Mtg.          171    12.5     3 Mellon Mortgage Co.            99     7.2     4 Highland Mortgage Co.          96       7     5 Greystone Servicing Corp.      95     6.9     6 TRI Capital Corp.              86     6.3     7 American Capitol Resource      74     5.4     8 First Maryland Mtg.            56     4.1     9 Bank of America                55       4    10 P/R Mtg. and Investment        51     3.7===Back to Headline List