WT02-B40-1IA074-000493-B044-2http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi114.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012300 text/html 155260HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:20:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:27 GMTContent-length: 155072Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi114.html Sample Issue Copyright U.S. BANKER via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Assets & Liabilities: Why Investment Portfolios Are Shrinking (1094 words) Point of view (633 words) USB Forum: Talking Mergers (3750 words) Retail Banking: Ringing Up New Customers (1200 words) Technology: EDS Nabs a Customer at Alltel's Expense (1427 words) Washington (697 words) Getting Credit For Profits (305 words) ATM USAGE EXPLODES IN '95 (232 words) Internet Security: The Saga Continues (394 words) The Death Of Spread (447 words) Loose Change (313 words) Branch Sales: Branches: There's Still a Market (1779 words) Industry: Does Mutuality Offer Longevity? (250 words) Commentary/ Trust: Preparing for The Prudent Investor Rule (2406 words) Pushing a Global Brand (4856 words) Final Say: CEOs Key to Sales Process (679 words) Funding: Those Dwindling Deposits (1846 words) Industry: Taking It To The Courts (874 words) Mortgages: Servicing Rights: Still In Demand (801 words) People (645 words) CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Assets & Liabilities:  Why Investment Portfolios Are ShrinkingDon't look now, but the investment portfolio is shrinking at most major banks.A recent survey of mid- to large-sized banks shows over half reduced theirportfolios relative to asset size in 1995 despite overall industryasset-growth rates of more than 7%.  It's not hard to see why.First and foremost, banks have been restructuring their balance sheets toimprove liquidity.  According to a recent survey by Olson Research Associatesand the Bank Administration Institute, robust loan demand has fueled an urgentquest for liquidity since 1993.  Banks have taken net paydowns on securitiesor have actively liquidated securities positions to fund the growth of loans.This ongoing process is the expected flip side of the early 1990s, when therewas strong growth in the portfolio amid poor loan demand.A second, and more enduring, reason for portfolio shrinkage may be thatinvestment officers now have to worry about a new dimension of portfoliomanagement.  These days, the chief investment officer or portfolio managermust manage not only the yield on the bank's portfolio but also its marketvalue.  Not that it wasn't always important to manage investment marketvalues, but the difference now is that evolving accounting standards compelspecific market value disclosure.  Executive managers and stock analysts alikecan exercise greater scrutiny because of the new visibility of portfoliovalues.It all traces back to Financial Accounting Standard 115 for disclosures aboutdebt instruments.  The Financial Accounting Standards Board issued thisstandard in 1993 as part of the Board's long-range project on financialinstruments, initiated in 1986.  FAS 115 creates three different accountingapproaches pertaining to market valuation for banks' and other firms'investment securities.  For changes in market values of trading securities,gains and losses are passed through the profit and loss statement and thecapital account.For "available for sale" securities (AFS), changes in market value arerecognized in the banks' capital accounts and, along with trading securities,potentially destabilize reported bank capital.  "Held to maturity" securities(HTM) do not create accounting gains and losses, nor do they impact reportedcapital, but they must meet rigorous standards concerning the bank's abilityand intent to hold them until they mature.Of course, fluctuations in the market values of bank securities are a highlyvisible beacon of interest rate risk.  Gap charts in banks' annual reportsappear benign and only mildly suggest interest rate exposures to bankearnings.  In contrast, changes in market values hit the bullseye ofinterest-rate risk measurement and grab the annual report reader's attention.It's a worrisome thing for executive managements who may connect theircompensation with the need to report ever-improving performance.I Shrunk the PortfolioSo, naturally, some banking firms have shrunk the portfolio itself to reducethe impact of portfolio instability.  Many firms view a portion of theinvestment portfolio as discretionary.  It's the part funded withdiscretionary wholesale money and is not just a parking place for coredeposits.  It's no secret that acquisition-minded superregional banks arebacking away from large wholesale banking positions that add volatility andare reemphasizing their core businesses.This strategy contributes to the shrinkage of the portfolio.  Banking firmsare restructuring their balance sheets by laying off gobs of wholesale fundsand the portions of the portfolios that these funds supported; instead, theirbalance sheets are absorbing core loans and funds obtained through theacquisition of smaller banks.PNC Bank Corp.  provides a good example of portfolio shrinkage.  In mid-1994,PNC's $22-billion investment portfolio comprised 36% of the bank's earningassets-quite large by industry standards at that time.  The bank embarked onan aggressive strategy of emphasizing its core franchise, including a landmarkacquisition of Chemical Bank branches in New Jersey, and backing away fromwholesale funding and investing.  By late 1995, the portfolio had been reducedto below $19 billion.  In the process, the bank exorcised some troublesomeinvestments and took heavy losses.Still, PNC had a problem because HTM securities represented over 80% of theportfolio.  Under FAS 115, these securities escaped accounting for gains andlosses, but the restrictiveness of the HTM classification tended to freezethem in place and make them unmanageable.  And transferring part of them intothe AFS portfolio risked regulatory tainting of the remaining HTM securitiesthat might lead to their subsequent revaluation.At yearend 1995, in a bold departure from the temptation to disguise thevolatility of its HTM portfolio permitted by FAS 115, PNC was said to bepreparing to transfer all of the HTM portfolio to the AFS classification.Apparently the bank is now willing to expose all of its securities activity tomarket pricing.The new FASB-driven focus on volatility has changed the way banks view thepurpose of their investment portfolios.  According to the Olson/BAI survey,chief investment officers most often state that the primary objective of theirsecurities portfolios is to manage interest rate risk, followed by managingliquidity.It would be an understatement to declare that FAS 115 does not get greatsupport from bankers.  A very legitimate complaint is that it does not allowfor symmetrical market value adjustments to the funding side of securitiespositions.  And, like a lot of regulation, it leaves room for inconsistencyamong examiners and invites arbitrary enforcement.  It's not clear how muchportfolio shrinkage is due to distaste for the new accounting rules and thevisibility the rules give to investment performance and how much is due tocyclical effects that sacrifice investment performance in the quest forliquidity to service loan demand.Our speculation is that even an imperfect FAS 115 will eventually change therole and practice of investment management for the better.  Nay-sayers pointout that judging portfolio performance by tracking unrealized gains and lossesdoes not recognize the awkward role the portfolio must play because it isroutinely whipsawed by the loan market.In general, if an investment manager is going to take an aggressive position,it will occur when earnings on the investment portfolio are most critical tobank profits.  Information on how a bank management team reaches for thoseearnings or how it moves cyclically from a liquidity support mode to anearnings mode ought to be more apparent to users of its financial information.In this context, market value information ought to add a crucial element ofdiscipline to future investment management.Donald G.  Simonson holds the New Mexico Bankers Chair in Banking and Financeat the University of New Mexico.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Point of viewMy vote for the most dynamic banker of the past decade goes to Hugh L.  McCollJr., chairman of NationsBank.  I'm not sure he's the best banker, at least notby the criteria that most people would use, since NationsBank's performancehas tended to be fairly average as measured by traditional yardsticks likereturn on assets or loan quality.  I've always thought of McColl as more of abuilder, and banking just happened to be the business that he was in.McColl was the keynote speaker at a recent industry conference, where hedelivered a stirring wake-up call about the importance of the Internet andon-line commerce to the industry's future.  McColl is not a tall man, but hehas a deep, booming voice that begins in the soles of his shoes and builds allthe way up.  It was good to hear him say that the industry's greatest threatis not Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, but rather its own indecisiveness in theface of change.  McColl is an unlikely person to emerge as banking's mostvocal leader, and yet he played the same role last year with the passage ofinterstate banking legislation.  I say "unlikely" because for years, McCollseemed to have a chip on his shoulder, the hard-bitten ex-Marine who kept ahand grenade on his desk and had a "war room" where he plotted his mergerstrategy.  Who would listen to a guy hell-bent on taking them over?I've written two stories about McColl since 1987 and learned something eachtime.  The first time around, I learned that he doesn't take well tocriticism, as when I wrote that his tough-guy rhetoric was the main reason whyfew bankers wanted to merge with him.  His spokesman coolly informed me laterthat I had so offended McColl that he wasn't going to talk to the pressanymore.  The second encounter, in 1993, taught me that McColl can be warm anddelightfully down-to-earth as well.  An investment banker told me of flyinginto Charlotte, where NationsBank is headquartered, to pitch a deal to McColl,whom he had not met before.  My source expected someone from the bank to fetcha colleague and him from the airport-but that "someone" turned out to beMcColl himself, holding up a little sign like a limo driver and grinning fromear to ear.  Later, as they were racing into town in McColl's BMW, thechairman spotted a friend who had pulled his car off the highway.  McCollquickly stopped to see what was wrong.  When they stayed to BS for a while, mysource started thinking this wasn't your normal CEO.My favorite story also occurred when I was not around.  Photos for the secondpiece were shot at a Habitat for Humanity job site, where McColl was helpingbuild a house.  The photographer told me later that McColl noticed two youngboys playing basketball nearby with a makeshift hoop and backboard.  McColldisappeared for a while, then returned with a new hoop, which he proceeded toput up for them.The point of all this is that McColl might be a more effective leader ifpeople knew him better.  His trash talk of years past has largely obscuredboth his warmth and sense of humor.  The media is partly responsible for this,but McColl and his advisers share in the blame.  When he appeared on the coverof Fortune last August crouching with a shotgun while bird hunting, itreinforced the old image of the hungry predator.  Banking doesn't have leaderslike it did 20 years ago.  It could use a few now, and McColl might fit thebill if he allowed a fuller, more balanced picture of himself to emerge.John W.  Milligan Editor-in-ChiefBack to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996USB Forum:  Talking MergersA combination of factors-high stock prices, declining revenue and the fear ofbeing left behind-helped create a robust market for bank mergers in 1995.  Inan effort to review the year's most significant developments, as well as peerinto the year ahead, U.S.  Banker assembled a crack team of investment bankersfor a thorough discussion about shareholder activism, hostile takeovers anddeal fatigue, to name only a few issues.  The participants were:  Robert A.Baer Jr., Bear, Stearns & Co.; John Duffy, Keefe, Bruyette & Woods; KathleenM.  Fisher, J.P.  Morgan & Co.; J.  Christopher Flowers, Goldman, Sachs & Co.;John C.  "Hans" Morris, Smith Barney; and Kendrick Wilson, Lazard Freres & Co.The moderator was John W.  Milligan, editor-in-chief of U.S.  Banker.USB:  Let's talk a little bit about why 1995 turned out to be such a greatmarket for bank mergers.  What were some of the things that drove the market?DUFFY:  The first thing is maybe valuation; stock valuation led the acquireruniverse to be able to pay prices that a lot of the seller universe foundacceptable.  I think you also had a situation with a couple turnarounds wheremaybe all of the fixing up had been done.  People like Midlantic, Shawmut andFirst Fidelity probably fit that category.  So you had sellers; you had auniverse of people that were maybe not perceived to be sellers two years agothat today were sellers for a new reason.WILSON:  I think you might call it a revenue "crunch."  There aren't too manyinstitutions on their own looking at double-digit revenue growth.  Banks havebenefited from an improvement in credit quality and a steep yield curve, andnow it is tough to get revenue.  Also, many managers are saying, "I can't cutmy expenses any more, I might have to think about an acquisition."FISHER:  An incredible confluence of events is encouraging merger activity.Bank stocks are up 50% this year (1995) versus roughly 30% for the market, andthis clearly has made the banks feel well off in terms of their currency.  Butthey look ahead and ask where revenue growth is going to come from.  And it isan amazing dichotomy to have those conversations going on when the stockprices look so favorable.  So why not use your currency to make an acquisitionnow?  It is as good a time as any.  And the sellers appreciate that it is agreat time to sell at these prices, so they are selling.BAER:  An additional reason is that shareholder activism is responsible forspecific deals; where Michael Price has gone into Chase Manhattan and MichiganNational and taken positions that led directly to those firms turning over.USB:  Was Michael Price a phenomenon of one-specifically, his involvement withChase and whatever pressure he applied there-or does that happen more broadly,but (in) situations that are not as public?BAER:  If you look at the 13D filings, there has been-I don't know what thenumber would be this year-but probably in the neighborhood of 30 to 40 thathad been filed with a letter attendant to that filing going to the board,stating that, "We think you should research your various alternatives toincrease shareholder value, including the sale of the bank."  It is not justMichael, there are several groups out there.USB:  How many of those situations yielded something similar to what happenedwith Chase?BAER:  I can't think of one of them that so far in 1995 has resulted in thedecision by the institution to sell.MORRIS:  I think more than the specific cause and effect of a singleshareholder, it is more an aura in the defensiveness of the company that itcreates.  Good management teams are more credible, and the more credible youare, the less you really care about what any particular shareholder suggestsyou should do.  I think many people would say that whether Michael Pricecaused the sale of Chase into Chemical is not as much of an issue as whetherit clearly changed the overall tempo and framework in which Chase had to makedecisions.FISHER:  Shareholder activism has also heightened the sensitivity levels ofdirectors, and there is now a significant increase in the activism ofdirectors in many of these situations versus the past.BAER:  That is important.  The Bank of Boston is an extreme case of wheredirectors seemingly took the place of management for a while.  I think therehas been a number of examples which have not gone that far, but certainly thedirectors are tenfold more involved on a daily basis than they had been in thepast.USB:  If you are representing a bank that may feel vulnerable to an offer fromanother institution, perhaps because it has hit its own revenue wall, and yetis not ready to surrender its independence, how do you counsel the CEO?  Whatis that CEO's obligation when it comes to entertaining a merger offer?MORRIS:  First off, what is the strategy of the bank?  If you don't have aplan, you really don't have any reason to think that you can earn a reasonablereturn for your shareholders.  Further, you will be forgoing a potentialtakeover premium.  I think it is not responsible for a management team to saywe just want an investment banker to defend our position, even though we don'thave a good plan for what to do about it.  The first thing is helping themsort out strategies of what they can do about this position.There is a lot of current discussion about that very issue, in terms of whatwe mean by the revenue wall and how banks are looking at branches and how theyshould be speaking about expenses and efficiencies.  For a long time, bankshad a model that they felt that they could aim towards, and get down to theirpeer group in efficiency, and they could adequately manage theirnon-performing assets and manage their capital and buy back stock.  It isclear that you have to go beyond that and have a better plan than yourcompetitors to be attractive to the market.USB:  If you have the plan but haven't accomplished it yet, what are yourequired to do in terms of reviewing an offer and so on?MORRIS:  If you have a plan, and you have a good plan, you are not required todo anything.  You are required to carefully consider things and listen to bonafide offers.  Ultimately it is the credibility of management and theconfidence that you can create with your own directors and with your ultimateshareholders-and your ability to execute-that is going to decide whether youhave support for your stock and support to continue to execute that plan.DUFFY:  Hans is right.  The board needs to be educated in terms of how theplan will create value for the shareholders.  Otherwise, anybody that walks inthe door with a premium over market could be viewed as legitimate.WILSON:  Obviously, a plan is important, but if you don't have a good offense,your defense will be under a lot of pressure.  I think there is no substitutefor frequent and ongoing communication with your shareholders.  A track recordhelps.  I think having a board that is well-informed and supportive is key.This is very important, because many of these activist investors are not shyabout using their telephones or fax machines to contact directors.  There havebeen several instances where management with credibility and a good story havedefeated well-organized attacks.  All things being equal, in our experiencemanagement starts with a leg up if they are credible and prepared.USB:  If you wait until you are under pressure and vulnerable, that is a lousytime to decide that you need to communicate better with shareholders.FLOWERS:  Several companies have successfully formulated new plans afterreceiving offers.  You might say-in fact I think you would say-it would besmarter to do it in advance.  That doesn't seem to be necessary.  You askedwhat does the company do that has single-digit revenue growth.  One thingeverybody all over the place is doing is buying back their stock in largequantities and adding two or three percentage points to their growth rate.That appears to have been a very successful strategy and makes a lot of sense,I guess.  We will find out.  Maybe they are paying too much for the stock, andthey could have bought it back for less later.  Right now, it seems to makesense.The other comment I would make is I think in responding to offers and thinkingabout the whole arena, boards and managements have become much more attuned tothe quality of what they are getting.  I don't know if anybody remembers fiveor three years ago, I found much more focus on just pure dollars.USB:  There was at one point this year, and I guess it would have been July orAugust, when a series of deals were announced.  It almost seemed like afrenzy.  What accounted for that?FLOWERS:  Two factors.  One is, not only the high stock price, but also thefact that they declined precipitously early in 1995 and then bounced back, andresulted in managements and boards realizing that it may not be forever thatthey can choose their options.  They have to do this at a time when shareprices are high, and that isn't always the case.  And it went through a briefperiod where a lot of the options were eliminated and they came back and theysaid, "We better get on with this."  The second thing is, I do think there isa bit of a situation where Party A does a deal and Party B says, "If they didit, then I will too," and so forth.  For one thing, it makes it morerespectable if your next-door neighbor sells out.WILSON:  There are two other issues to think about.  First, managementsuccession can be a factor in deals, particularly among boards where you havehad a very effective and strong CEO who is near retirement with no onedesignated as his successor.  A second factor is that many management teamshave equity packages that are worth a lot of money now, as well as severancearrangements that compensate them for a change of control.MORRIS:  In some sense, the seminal transaction was First Fidelity in thatlight, because here you had someone (Anthony Terracciano) who was not thetypical old CEO, and one who had a lot of institutional credibility.  He waswell-regarded by his peers and well-regarded by the Wall Street analysts, andhe had done extremely well managing that institution.  He laid out in a veryarticulate way what his thinking was in deciding to approach a couple ofinstitutions in a sale, and that led to other boards of directors, and oftenindividual directors, to call their CEO and ask, "What do we think aboutthat?"Frankly, the fundamental facts of the industry are still before us.  There isrevenue growth which is at best five percent for the industry, and you havesome very challenging decisions that need to be made about commitments todifferent types of infrastructure, and it is not easy.  And if you havesomeone who is a leader like Tony Terracciano coming to the same conclusion, Ithink that made it easier for others to go along.  And I don't necessarilythink of this as a cop-out, but it sort of led to a series of discussionsamong all banks, which accelerated the trend.DUFFY:  I think every transaction has an impact on other people's options, andsometimes they result in fewer options to the remaining institutions, and itforces them to accelerate their thinking.  Maybe they knew they were going tosell the institution within the next three years, but all of a sudden one oftheir potential partners has just done a deal which precludes the combinationof the two of them.  He now has only two potential partners left.  He wouldrather be in the position of negotiating or having an option with two of themrather than having just one person left on the dance floor.USB:  The fundamental factors that we have talked about vis-a-vis 1995-arevenue wall, strong currency, sound asset quality-they all seem to still bein place today.  What would you anticipate in terms of 1996?BAER:  I think one thing that will force people to rethink their future isthat many of the companies in the last few years have focused on cost-cutting.But to the extent that savings have been derived, it is not a recurringsource.  As banks reach the end of their cost-cutting, they have to lookelsewhere for revenue.  I think the banks then have to go back to basics andask, "How will we get the revenue up again?"  That is forcing them to turn toacquisitions as a way to increase revenue.  So, if things stay in place, ifthe market remains strong and the P/Es stay high for the acquirers, I thinkyou will see a continuation of this.FLOWERS:  I sense a fair amount of deal fatigue out there.  I think with thehuge deals, it is hard to do more than one at a time.  One thing we will seeis people assimilating some of the very large transactions before moving on tothe next one.  That doesn't take that long.  I mean, nine months or a yearlater the whole world could change.  In the short run, it will affect themarket.BAER:  That is exactly right for the bigger deals.  This year we have had farfewer numerical deals than last year or even the year before.  I don't thinkthere is the same deal fatigue at the smaller institutions, and I believe wewill probably see in 1996 more smaller transactions rather than largertransactions.USB:  Deal fatigue:  Chris, is that a reason why it seems that in the last twoor three months (deal) volume has really flattened out?FLOWERS:  I think that is some of it.  There are a certain number of potentialdeals, and we went into it, we used a lot of that in 1995, and I think therewill be somewhat less until everybody reloads.MORRIS:  I sense that a pricing discrepancy has begun to emerge.  You haveseen some very high prices get paid on a price-to-book basis, and that has ledto higher expectations on the part of sellers, and yet at the same time, Ithink lower expectations on the part of buyers, which could be a function ofdeal fatigue, but also a sense of uncertainty about how to valueinfrastructure systems.  However, the seller's expectations have not evolvedat all.  Five percent revenue growth and larger provisions coming in 1996-andwe see evidence of that all over the place-is inconsistent with some of thesevaluations.  I think that you will have some significant discrepancies emerge.USB:  There were several deals this year that were priced a little bit northof two times book, and involved some fairly significant dilution.  Were buyersfinally cooled off by shareholders who weren't anxious to see them pay quitethat much for deals?BAER:  The marketplace actually let them get away with it, by and large.DUFFY:  It has been pretty tolerant.BAER:  Three years ago, maybe we would think three percent dilution and earnout in a year and a half or something, and that is comfortable.  We are in astage far beyond that with a lot of transactions.  I am just a littleastounded that the market has been acquiescent of the banks taking the standthat they have got a birthright to do one large strategic deal.  I don't thinkthat same tolerance would have been there three or four years ago.FISHER:  Investors have generally been favorably disposed toward bankacquisitions this year.  Many of the stocks of the acquirors have bumped backto their preexisting prices eight or ten days or less after an acquisition isannounced.  The market has been quite willing to believe that projectedsavings are achievable.USB:  Would each of you tell me what you think the most significant deal in1995 has been so far, and why?WILSON:  I think the situation involving First Interstate (which is beingpursued in a hostile takeover by Wells Fargo & Co.)  subsumes virtually all ofthe elements that we have been talking about.  I think it is a long way fromover.  It could be a precursor of some additional activity, and I think willcertainly bring to the floor all of the issues that we talked about in termsof shareholder activism.  I think that is an extremely significanttransaction.FISHER:  I have to agree with that.  Certainly when looking back several yearsfrom now, this deal will be memorable because it is big and dramatic.  Andmaybe we can even hypothesize that one of the reasons there is a bit of apause in the market now is that all of the banks are watching to see how thistransaction unfolds, because it does have a lot of precedent-setting aspectsto it.  But I think we can't give short shrift to all of the other large dealsthat were done this year, because each one of them did set new precedents.The Chase and Chemical merger certainly should be looked upon as anextraordinary transaction in the U.S.MORRIS:  I already (noted) one earlier, so I will add First Chicago and NBD tomy list.  When it happened, it kind of refocused many of us on theopportunities of mergers of equals.  The recent transactions leading up tothat deal indicated that there was tremendous investor pressure on aninstitution to sell out at a premium.  And the fact that First Chicago and NBDwere able to convince investors on the value, balance street restructuring andbusiness line benefits of the combination, led to an immediate improvedvaluation for both companies' stocks.  That was very significant, compared tothe transactions that were leading up to it.DUFFY:  I agree with Kenny that First Interstate stole the limelight from therest of the sector, for at least the time being, and it has implications.  Ithink First Fidelity was kind of interesting in that it was the first biginterregional deal, and that was kind of like the dam breaking a little bit.One that probably may not be mentioned was Fleet/Shawmut in terms of themarket dominance that it created in New England.  I don't think that you haveseen that in other places else yet.  In the Midwest or Southeast, it is stillpretty fragmented.FLOWERS:  I think since we have run out of significant deals, I will suggestthe company that got the luckiest this year.  I will offer up United CountiesTrust Co., which managed to get a double dip and was acquired first byMeridian and then by CoreStates.BAER:  That was not strategic.FLOWERS:  That was luck.BAER:  If it is one deal, it is First Interstate.  It easily is something thatnone of us have seen on that scale before, and/or complexity.  And I thinkwhat's going to be very interesting is the way politics has entered into thistransaction, because we have grown into a situation realizing that we have aninefficient banking system, and the economics are driving the system toconsolidate to make it more efficient.  We now have politicians who are tryingto keep the inefficiencies for political votes.We have already got politics starting to enter into the First Interstatetransaction.  It is such a public forum, it will be an ideal place for thepoliticians to continue to play.  I think it will be interesting to see howpolitics ends up influencing the final transaction.USB:  Would you expect to see banks continue to build their productcapabilities by doing more focused transactions, consumer finance being one?BAER:  I think you would, if the banks could.  The difficulty is that themono-line companies, whether it is the B/C auto lenders or equity home lenderstoday, sell for around 25 and 30 times earnings because there is such hugegrowth potential.  But even the pure credit card companies, the pure financecompanies and other business lines that the banks would find very attractiveto enter through acquisition, are all selling at higher multiples than thebanks.  So it becomes a conundrum.  I think there is probably a high desireand a low capability.USB:  It makes you wonder about the future of the full-service,brick-and-mortar bank if it doesn't find some way of taking all of thoseproduct capabilities and tying them together to add value.DUFFY:  I think we are in the bottom of the third inning, and some people aretalking like it is the eighth inning.  And you look at the Chase/Chemical proforma market cap, and it is $20-odd billion.  I mean, supposing tomorrowMerrill Lynch decided that they wanted to sell-who could they sell to?Probably a bank.  Banks don't have the P/E today, but I think they have thecumulative market cap to be a player.  They have consistently lost marketshare to the more innovative players, whether it is a mortgage bank or assetmanagement company or auto finance company, but a bank winds up acquiring themat some point later in the cycle.While the market share of the banks has declined dramatically over the past 10years, the market cap of the industry still (overshadows) most of thecompetition.  I think the industry is not dead, and some of the moreprogressive players are starting to surface as giant financial intermediaries.I don't know who the ultimate winners will be.  I think it is still prettyearly in the game.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Retail Banking:  Ringing Up New CustomersLarge and brightly decorated, the sign in the Safeway supermarket had asimple, but symbolic message:  "Now Hiring Bright, Motivated People OurCustomers Will Like."  Interestingly enough, it could serve equally well as arecruiting poster for any bank that is beginning to open new branches inretail establishments like supermarkets.Such signs clearly underscore an attitude bankers are adopting as they embracecustomers on their own turf-in stores where they do the weekly shopping.Chasing new customers in this ever-changing, highly competitive marketplacerequires new marketing skills, shedding the stodginess and acting likeretailers.While in-store banking isn't a new phenomenon, it is a fast-growing trend thatclearly has bankers excited.  Community banks, superregionals and even thriftsare embracing the idea.Many are staking out prime locations, hoping to gain an advantage overcompetitors, while others are developing branches in areas where they didn'thave a banking presence.  While supermarkets have historically made goodpartners, they aren't the only homes for in-store branches.  Generalmerchandise stores like Kmart and Wal-Mart are quickly becoming good locationsas well.In 1995, the nation's largest banks accelerated their efforts.  Wells Fargo &Co., BankAmerica Corp., Union Bank, BayBanks Inc., Barnett Banks Inc.,National City Corp.  and First State Bank all expanded their operations.The in-store movement has produced more than 3,000 branches, and many moreribbon-cutting ceremonies are planned for this year.  National CommerceServices, a Memphis-based consulting arm of National Commerce Bancorp.,forecasts as many as 5,000 branches by the year 2000."Banks are looking for alternative distribution networks," explains KathleenHolmes, managing director of the Wharton Financial Institutions Center inPhiladelphia.  "They're doing it for strategic reasons.  Some are entering newmarkets.  Others are opening branches where the local market isn't strongenough to support a traditional branch."Proponents believe the rewards make the venture worthwhile.  "An in-storebranch can be more profitable quicker than a brick-and-mortar branch."explains John W.  Garnett, president of International Banking Technologies, inNorcross, GA.  "There are lower startup costs, a captive audience-a majorityof whom are not already customers."For example, studies reveal that store branches are less expensive to buildand often become profitable much sooner than traditional branches.Supermarket branches cost $150,000 to $200,000 to install, while the tab fortraditional branches ranges between $800,000 and $3 million.  Once inoperation, they are also quicker to yield profits.  "In-store branches shouldbreak even in about 18 months," contends NCS president Douglas W.  Ferris Jr."If they are not breaking even in two-and-a-half years, something is wrong.It usually takes a traditional branch about three years to become profitable."In the '80s, success came easily for the supermarket pioneers.  With access to30,000 to 60,000 weekly supermarket customers, they attracted new prospectsmuch faster than traditional branches.  Customers embraced the concept.One-stop convenience, services that surpassed those of the automated tellermachines and interactive relationships with live tellers were the drawingcards.  Customers marveled at the thought of applying for a car loan whilecompleting their weekly grocery shopping.And sometimes a bank really hits the jackpot.  One elderly gentleman opened a$1 million savings account at a southern supermarket branch because he feltsafer.  "In a supermarket, a person walking out with groceries doesn't exposethemselves.  No one knows that they've cashed their check.  It's not uncommonto see customers open very large accounts at supermarket branches," explainsGarnett.For many, the benefits continue.  Throughout the country, supermarket bankersreport impressive financial results.  Many produced spectacular revenuesduring their first few months of operation.  In Memphis, the Tri-State Bankproudly touts how it opened 1,155 new deposit accounts during the firstquarter of '95.  Twelve hundred miles away in North Dakota, the First NationalBank's Hugo branch celebrated its 288th new account.But the novelty has pretty much worn off, and customers want more than mereconvenience.  And there have been some failures.  Banks that entered a localgrocery store without studying the local demographics or developing astrategic plan for serving that customer base generally have not done as well."Some banks have (treated) them like a branch, but they don't work like atraditional branch," notes Holmes.  "They are more like a community bank.  Youhave a closed community, so your capacity to the market is more like that of acommunity bank."Success begins with knowing the difference between supermarket andbrick-and-mortar branches."The key to success is in hiring the right staff," explains Garnett.  "Youalso must have frequent marketing and promotional programs, as well asstreamlining operations and freeing up people to go out into the aisles andsell."The People's Bank of Connecticut grasped that concept a few years ago.  Today,it operates 45 branches in Stop 'N Shop stores and plans another 46 by the endof next year."You have to change your thinking," suggests Bryan Huebner, senior vicepresident with the human resources and strategic planning unit for the bank."You have to advertise, market and sell, Huebner says.  "That requiresemployees who are experts in our products.  They must understand how theproducts serve the needs of our customers.  We also need employees who knowthat the real game is talking to as many customers as possible."BankAmerica launched its first in-store branch 10 years ago.  As an industryleader with more than 180 in-store branches, the San Francisco-based giantforesees future success through further expansion into the supermarket arena."To capitalize, you have to do things differently," cautions William G.Raymond, senior vice president for retail distribution at BankAmerica.  "Youneed to hire different kinds of people.  You need to train differently.  Youhave to set different goals and you need different operating practices."One of the keys to success is getting out into the aisles and meetingprospects," he explains.  "That's not something that many traditional bankersfeel comfortable doing.  We like to have people who are not specializedtellers or sellers.  You need people who can do many things."Raymond believes banks should train their sales force to act more like theirstore colleagues and maintain a quality relationship with their host grocer.Such mundane, non-banking chores as knowing how to operate the public addresssystem and learning the location of store merchandise are also important.  Forinstance, it might not be a bad idea to know where various items are locatedin the store-just in case a customer happens to ask.Learning how to read body language is another important skill.  "You shouldknow when the customer wants to be bothered and how long you hold theirattention," he explains.Supermarket bankers may want to provide the same products and services as aconventional branch, but they have to work quicker.  "Because customers don'twant to stand in your lines long and don't have much time, you have to be ableto open checking accounts in five minutes.  You have to be able to providethem with quick loan approvals," Ferris explains.James C Lawson is a Sicklerville, NJ-based business writer.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Technology:  EDS Nabs a Customer at Alltel's ExpenseBy signing a seven-year check-processing contract with EDS Corp., RepublicNational Bank of New York gave Alltel Corp.  the cold shoulder.Alltel had already sold most of its check-processing business to Fiserv Inc.,but it held on to its account with Republic, which dated back to 1993.  TheLittle Rock, AR, company, formerly known as Systematics, put its check unit onthe block early this year after it took a $32-million write-off from a failedinvestment in imaging technology.Fiserv executive vice president Dean Schmelzer would not disclose the amounthis firm paid for Alltel's check business, although an EDS executive put thevalue of his firm's business with Republic at $40 million.  When looked attogether, the two transactions make it clear that the check outsourcingbusiness has boiled down to a two-way competition between EDS and Fiserv.There are other players in this market, including Transys, which is part ofCoreStates Financial Corp., and the Global Processing Alliance, a jointventure between Bankers Trust New York Corp.  and First Fidelity Bancorp.  ButEDS and Fiserv have been the most aggressive at signing up new customers.That aggression is partly driven by a desire to build volume and generateeconomies of scale.  EDS and Fiserv both seem intent on gaining a large enoughclient base to make imaging technology cost-effective."We've made a commitment to provide image capability to our clients," saysSchmelzer.  But in order to make it work, "you've to have the volume."Alltel's inability to deploy image technology successfully isn't discouragingeither EDS or Fiserv from going ahead with their own plans to use imaging,although both data-processing companies will move forward slowly.  It will beat least a year before EDS converts Republic to imaging.  For the time being,EDS will process the New York bank's checks using conventional technology.Two California thrifts for which EDS does item processing, Great WesternFinancial Corp.  and First Nationwide, will be converted to imaging muchsooner, but they have been EDS customers for several years.The problems Alltel ran into make it clear that imaging technology is far morecomplicated than has been acknowledged, but EDS is still confident it willavoid the same mishaps because it is working closely with IBM Corp.  to modifythat supplier's system to its own needs.  The Dallas company is taking anapproach that lets it avoid redesigning its check operations from top tobottom, which is what most imaging installations have called for until now,says Dan Talbott, EDS' vice president for its check operations.Most of EDS' current check-processing system will remain intact, apart from animaging camera that will be inserted into the middle of the operation.  Thedata sent to the mainframe that manages the check shop will look essentiallythe same as it does with a system running conventional technology."What we're doing allows us to leverage our existing platform," Talbott says.If done according to plan, imaging technology will help both firms reducetheir costs, says Fiserv's Schmelzer.  In the hotly competitive outsourcingbusiness, survival is quickly becoming dependent upon being a low-costprovider.A Small Shift Away From Big BusinessThere's been a modest but meaningful increase in the percentage of banks' cashmanagement revenue stemming from small business customers, according to thelatest cash management survey from Ernst & Young.Some 17% of the proceeds in cash management-where banks manage corporations'direct deposit, wire transfer and accounts payable and receivable-came fromsmall businesses in 1994, up slightly from 15% in 1993.Large corporate customers still accounted for a significant plurality of cashmanagement revenue, about 38%, but that figure is off from the 44% theycontributed in 1993.To some extent, this increase could have been anticipated.  In recent years,Fortune 500 firms and other large bank customers have sharply reduced thenumber of banks from which they purchase cash management services, accordingto Larry Forman, a manager with Ernst & Young.  On the other hand, banks haveincreased the number of products suited for their small business clients."Small business has become an important segment," Forman says.This shift is even more pronounced for mid-sized regionals and smaller banks,where small business customers contribute 29% of cash management revenue.  Forthe largest regional and money center banks, small businesses only account for7% of cash management.  These big banks are still heavily dependent upon thebiggest corporate accounts, getting some 46% of their cash management revenuefrom them.  But even for them, that figure is down.  In last year's survey,the industry's behemoths garnered some 50% of their revenue from their largestaccounts.The greater dependence on small businesses helps explain why so many bankshave rushed into the market with cash management software, according to LindaVanadis, an assistant vice president with Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.  The$32-billion-asset St.  Louis regional company is one of several banks that hasbegun marketing a personal computer-based cash management software program inthe last few years.Vanadis says that many small business clients have bought PCs already loadedwith Microsoft Corp.'s Windows for their accounting and other businessfunctions, and many banks have decided that if they are to serve this market,they must sell a cash management system that runs on Windows.Networks' Age And Size Cut Debit Card FeesThe largest debit card networks also have some of the lowest fees, accordingto the latest data book from Debit Card News, a Faulkner & Gray publication.Interlink, the debit card network owned by Visa International, not onlyprocesses 15 million transactions a month, which is by far the largest numberof any network, it also charges a switch fee of only 3 cents a transaction.By comparison, Explore, the next largest network that is owned by the WestCoast automated teller network, Star System Inc.  of San Diego, charges 5cents.  Most of the other large regional networks charge roughly 5 cents to 8cents per transaction."The older the programs are, the more the fees have come down," says ArtClark, a partner with Business Dynamics, a consulting firm in Nyack, NY."It's a function of cost and market pressure.  There's just no way that a POStransaction can carry the same cost" as a check or cash transaction.  Aboutthe only way to entice retailers into accepting debit transactions is to makeelectronic payments less expensive than paper ones.The West Coast was one of the first markets where debit cards were widelyused, and the networks with a heavy concentration of accounts there, Interlinkand Explore, have the lowest fees.  By comparison, networks in the Midwest,such as Cash Station and Magic Line, have some of the highest fees.  Theirhome markets, Illinois and Michigan, were relative latecomers to the debitcard party, adopting this technology several years after the networks inCalifornia and Texas.  Magic Line's switch fee is 13 cents, while CashStation's is 11 cents.Fed Fills Its Technology GapsNow that the Federal Reserve System's massive computer system consolidation isjust about finished, the central bank's Automation Services group has shuffledits organizational structure and hired a former KeyCorp executive as the firstchief information officer in its history.  He will supervise the ninemainframes the Fed runs out of three data centers."In the first few years of FRAS (Federal Reserve Automation Services), therewas a focus on setting the organization up," says Robert Tucker, the Fed's newsenior vice president for computer operations and technical support.  Untillast fall, he had been an executive vice president for Key Services Corp.  inCleveland.Prior to the formation of FRAS in 1992, each of the Fed's 12 district bankshad its own data center.  But the cost of maintaining them was very high, andsince the cost of long-distance telecommunications has dropped sharply, theFed closed nine of the existing centers and created three large ones inRichmond, VA, where FRAS is headquartered; Dallas and East Rutherford, NJ.Tucker, will report to Carl Powell, the Fed's director of automationresources, until Powell retires later this year.Two communications centers are also part of the FRAS network, one in Richmondand another in Chicago.  There are four other groups within the FRASumbrella-support services, administrative services, national network servicesand planning and customer support.Technology is written by Joseph Radigan.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996WashingtonBig Changes At The FDICDon't look for business as usual at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., wherechairman Ricki Helfer is shaking things up bigtime.First and foremost, the agency is shrinking-understandably so fromunrealistically high levels created during the last recession, when failureswere running at a near-record pace.  Helfer says that expenses were to betrimmed 20% in 1995 and staffing was to be cut 14%; altogether, staff levelswill have fallen by more than a third from mid-1993.  She won't predict justwhere core staffing will settle, but says "it will be far less" than it isnow.  In November, the agency announced a buyout program intended to spur 500employees to leave voluntarily."I want to run the FDIC the way a business operates-by striving for greaterproductivity and enhanced performance, by using rigorous cost/benefit analysisand by relying on up-to-date management concepts and technology," Helfer toldthe America's Community Bankers convention in a speech in late October.In a subsequent interview, Helfer said she had brought the FDIC its first-everstrategic and operating plans.  The first is a five-year plan; the latter,which looks out 12 to 18 months, is more flexible and encompasses some 150projects.  "We are viewing the familiar as if we had never seen it before,"she said.The chairman also noted that she is asking staffers to concentrate anew on theability to assess broad risk-not just clean up in its aftermath.  Too oftenthe agency has tended "to look at the trees (individual banks) and not theforest," she argues, adding that it's critical to understand the impact ofstate legislation, regional economic distinctions and rolling recessions.Helfer cheered many in the ACB audience when she promised to reduce theregulatory burden, especially that falling "disproportionately on smallerinstitutions."  Time spent on examinations is dropping as the agency turnsmore to computerization; she said that 10 hours have been trimmed offcompliance exams since last January, and five hours off Community ReinvestmentAct exams.Not surprisingly, there are rumblings that agency morale is less than robustas further job cuts loom.  But Helfer is marching ahead to an ambitiousrefrain.  "We must," she says, "move from the New Deal into the newmillenium."What Does Future Hold For The FHLBS?Just what is the mission of the Federal Home Loan Bank System?  Mostknowledgeable people in Washington would say promoting housing finance.  Butthe chairman of the Federal Housing Finance Board, which oversees theFHLBanks, says that may not turn out to be its role, going forward.Bruce Morrison, who became the FHFB chief last year, says a key role is toprovide "local credit availability in cases where that isn't necessarilyavailable"-in a community where deposits are scant, for instance.  Members ofthe FHLB System routinely use it for advances for housing finance, as well asfor low-cost borrowings."I think the system would be likely to survive as it is, but it would beunder-utilized," he says.  Morrison argues that the system needs "regulatoryroom to develop, and not a narrow blueprint from Congress."  But Republicansin the House, in their budget-trimming zeal, have been eyinggovernment-sponsored ventures like the FHLB System for an amputation, if notoutright execution.Morrison contends that system membership should be fully voluntary-a notionthat pleases thrifts, many of whom have been mandatory members for many years,carrying large FHLB balances as assets on their books.  Commercial banks,however, have been admitted since 1989 as voluntary members, free to come andgo as they wish.The FHFB chairman says the board is in the "bizarre position" of being bothregulator of the system and the statutory issuer of its debt, a position it'strying to extricate itself from.  Meanwhile, the board has been working onways to delegate more management functions to the district banks.  "We'll setthe compliance standards, and they'll determine how" to reach those, he says.A laudable goal.  Now we'll see if Congress goes along and spares the ax.Washington is written by Jeffrey Marshall.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Getting Credit For ProfitsThe industry's strong profitability in recent years has done wonders for bankbalance sheets, not to mention credit ratings.  If you assigned a numericalvalue to every rating on the Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co.  scale-one forAAA, two for AA+ and so on-the average rating for a bank holding company inthe firm's universe in 1991 was 7.3, or between A- and BBB+.  This average hadimproved to 6.3 (A/A-) by year-end 1993, and to 5.8 by the end of 1994-whichis a good solid A, leaning toward A+.But the pace of upgrades has slowed dramatically since 1992 and 1993, explainsD&P group vice president Charles Orabutt.  D&P upgraded 24 banks in 1992, 15in 1993 and only 12 last year.Realistically, industry balance sheets may be as strong as they're going toget.  A great many institutions are over-reserved for loan losses, and some ofthem have so much excess capital that they've been buying back stock (U.S.Banker, January 1995).  Any further improvements in credit ratings willprobably come from the earnings side, which is where Orabutt and his band ofbank debt analysts have turned their attention for now.  "We're reallyfocusing on business line profitability," he says.  "That's the linchpin tofurther rating upgrades."What businesses does D&P like?  It's keen on consumer lending because it tendsto have higher margins, although Orabutt cautions that banks need to have theright controls in place, since too many of them still try to grow at a 10%rate when the economy only offers 5%.  Orabutt also favorstechnology-intensive, fee-based businesses like check clearing and paymentsprocessing.  And for all the bad press that derivatives have garnered of late,he figures that providing risk management products to end users will also be awinner.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996ATM USAGE EXPLODES IN '95Transaction volume on automated teller machines nationwide shot up 14.6% for a12-month period ending in September 1995, compared to 9.7% in 1994 and only6.9% in 1993.  The deployment of ATMs also grew 11.3% for the year, and whilethis was down from 15% in 1994, it was still the second best performance in adecade.  The gold medal, however, goes to point of sale:  transaction volumeincreased by 37%, while the number of terminals expanded by 47%.  These wereamong the findings of an annual survey of the electronic funds transferindustry conducted by Bank Network News, a twice-monthly newsletter publishedby Faulkner & Gray Inc.Many of the leading ATM networks also posted strong volume gains.  Thecountry's largest network-Star System-reported a 26.4% gain in transactionsfor the 12-month period.Among the factors cited for the strong growth in overall ATM volume was thestrong likelihood that ATM and POS usage tend to feed one another.  "Theconsumer says, 'This card will do everything,'" Tom Bass, president ofWashington-based Exchange network told Bank Network News.  Another possibilityis that a sharp increase in the number of off-premise ATMs is driving thegrowth in those transactions.EFT TRANSACTIONS (in millions)1995 1994 Growth ATMs 807.4 704.5 14.6% POS 64.6 47.2 36.9% Total 872.0 751.716.0% EFT volumeSource:  Bank Network NewsBack to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Internet Security:  The Saga ContinuesThey may get along with each other about as well as House Speaker NewtGingrich and President Clinton, but it seems that Visa International andMasterCard International are once-again talking turkey about a common standardfor protecting payments over the Internet.A September announcement that Visa and Microsoft Corp.  would cooperate indesigning a new standard-leaving MasterCard out in the cold-was apparently allthe result of a misunderstanding.  At least that's what the parties now say.But it seems that at some point there was a disagreement over how thesuppliers of Internet security software would be compensated.  Microsoft wassaid to have wanted 0.4% of the value of all card transactions made throughthe Internet, according to a November story in USA Today.  The same piece alsoalleged that Visa's members, outraged by Microsoft's asking price, forced thecard association back to the bargaining table with MasterCard.But Microsoft never wanted to be paid on that basis, says Mark Kroese, itsdirector of electronic commerce; rather the software giant simply wantsroyalties from software developers that write programs for Internet commerce.This is the same source of revenue that IBM Corp., which is part ofMasterCard's camp, will seek.Spokespeople for both card associations say they never really stoppeddiscussing the issue, but somehow Visa and Microsoft went ahead withannouncing their security standard without MasterCard's participation.  Backin June, the associations had said they would announce a standard together."We never stopped talking, and we're optimistic about" a common standard, saidDavid Melancon, a Visa spokesman.  He also said Visa wouldn't pay Microsoftany transaction fees over the long haul for the security standard, but itmight do so temporarily to cover some development costs.Melancon also said that Visa was never that out of sync with its members."The feedback hasn't been 100% positive" he said, "but it's never 100%positive on anything.  It's not like they made us do a 360 (degree turn)."But William Randle, a senior vice president for Huntington Bancshares Inc.Visa's electronic payments advisory board, says all 22 members of warned theassdociation in the summer of 1994 not to pursue a relationship withMicrosoft.  Visa later changed the makeup of the board and transferredresponsibility for the board to its home banking subsidiary, Visa Interactive.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Death Of SpreadTwo years ago, bankers could make a pretty good living using cheap sources offunding to invest in U.S.  Treasury securities.  They didn't have to lend toget an adequate return; they could simply take cheap short-term funds and usethem to buy higher-yielding treasury bonds, while pocketing a nice spread.And here was the real beauty of it all:  A U.S.  Treasury bond has no creditrisk (Washington's six-day shutdown in late mid-November over the budgetimpasse notwithstanding).Those days are long gone, of course.  Lenders have opened the credit spigot somuch since then-especially to consumers-that many people now fret they've beentoo aggressive.  The spread game seems to have officially ended in mid-1995when the yield curve-which is the difference between source of funds like Fedfunds or core deposits and the interest rate on investment securities liketreasuries-took on the appearance of a flat line.  Normally, the yield ontreasuries will be higher than the underlying cost of funds, and this marginbecomes more pronounced the further out you go on the investment spectrum,since a 30-year bond pays a higher rate of interest than a two-year note.Why did the yield curve flatten out?  The Federal Reserve started tighteningshort-term rates in February 1994 and didn't stop until July 1995, when aftera long series of increases it finally cut rates by a modest 25 basis points.Obviously, those increases put fierce pressure on margins from below.  At thesame time-and somewhat ironically-a generally optimistic view of inflation andthe economy helped bring down rates on long-term bonds, which squeezed marginsfrom above.Theodore H.  Tung, Ph.D., chief economist at National City Corp., points outthat 30-year treasuries normally yield at least 1% more than two-year notes,but that spread has now shrunk to 70 basis points.  "Even more unusual is therecent disappearance of the spread between yields on two-year notes and theFed Funds rate," wrote Dr.  Tung in the November 1995 issue of FinancialMarket Outlook, his monthly financial commentary.  "(This) spread has averagedmore than 1% over the past three years."A flat yield curve is bad news for banks-or at least for their investments insecurities.  "Because the cost of funds is so high, there's no spread," Dr.Tung explains.  And this largely explains why lenders became so much moreaggressive in 1995.  As the cost of funds went up, they had to turn tohigher-yielding loans instead.  "That's why you see the industry competing forconsumer loans-especially credit cards," he says.  Cards loans at, say, 10%enable a lender to cover its funding costs and still make a profit.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Loose Change"National Home Ownership Strategy:  Partners in the American Dream," anamalgam of more than 50 housing organizations, continues to press toward itsgoal of raising the national home ownership rate to 67.5% by 2000, from 64.7%today.  Henry Cisneros, secretary of the Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment, says the target rate would add eight million home owners in fiveyears.Equifax, si.  The Mexican government has given the Atlanta-based creditinformation company the go-ahead to create a consumer credit informationsystem that will offer on-line access to Mexican banks, retailers andbusinesses.  Equifax, which had applied for permission last May, is alreadyoperating in other Latin American nations such as Chile and Argentina.Amerin Corp., the Chicago-based mortgage insurer that was the focus of aDecember feature story ("Amerin Finds LPMI Isn't the Only Path"), completedits initial public offering Nov.  29.  The stock quickly soared from its $16offering price, hitting $27 by mid-December.  The company, which raised over$213 million in the offering, called the response "a strong endorsement of theconcept of wholesale mortgage insurance."You won't find many institutional investors crabbing about high CEO salaries,according to a new study by Russell Reynolds Associates, the major recruitingfirm.  Fifty-six percent of those polled voted strongly against limiting suchpay, and nearly all respondents favored tying CEO compensation to companyperformance-letting it ride up, untethered, as long as the corporation and itsstockholders are going with it.Now accepting the American Express card is that most blue-collar of retailoutlets, Wal-Mart.  AmEx claimed in a news release that more than 14,000cardholders had written or phoned in 1995 to urge an acceptance agreement withthe world's largest retailer.  Convenience aside, the deal is one more signthat the elite image AmEx cultivated in the 1980s is giving way to somethingmore practical.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Branch Sales:  Branches:  There's Still a MarketSanford Belden is one of those bankers who, with good reason, has every rightto call the industry's staid, familiar brick-and-mortar outposts more troublethan their worth.Belden, who is president and chief executive of Community Bank System Inc.  inSyracuse, NY, had his plans to make the three-hour drive west to his branch inthe hamlet of Olean shredded by the early December storm that dumped threefeet of snow on Buffalo.  That would be enough to convince anyone that it's alot easier to bank electronically than in person.  Yet Belden remains devotedto the 49 branches his company owns in small towns along the rural northernand western fringes of New York State."Having the physical geographic presence is key to our strategy," Belden says."We'll look at enhanced ATMs, and we'll look at PC banking.  We view thealternative delivery as a constructive adjunct to what we do in the branches,but we think the branch remains the focus of our strategy."Having a strategy focused on conventional branches was the main reasonCommunity Bank picked up 17 branches holding $450 million in deposits fromChase Manhattan Corp.  last July.  A few months later, the $1.1-billion-assetSyracuse-based company sold three of those branches to NBT Inc., a bankingcompany in Norwich, NY.  Those offices were in Utica, which is well east ofCommunity's geographic market.Of course, central New York state was hardly the only corner of the countrywhere branches were traded like so much horseflesh.  Plenty of banks large andsmall were active in the branch sale business, and few, if any, of them couldbe described as iconoclasts swimming against the electronic banking tide, inwhich increasing waves of transactions are being done by personal computer,automated teller and even the Internet.Rather, they described strategies that were very similar to Belden's-usingATMs, telephones and PCs to offload most simple transactions like deposits,withdrawals and balance transfers.  That leaves branches, and branchpersonnel, available for the personal attention and the sales pitches that canincrease revenue.All told, there were some $23 billion in deposits bought and sold in 1995,according to U.S.  Banker's sixth annual ranking of branch sale advisoryfirms.  Yet two-thirds of that total can be attributed to just one deal.  InSeptember, GreenPoint Financial Corp.  of Flushing, NY, purchased $8.1 billionin deposits from H.F.  Ahmanson Corp.'s New York operations.  J.P.  MorganCo., which advised GreenPoint, and CS First Boston Corp., which advisedAhmanson, each got credit for the full value of the deposits, and as a resultshared first place.  Without that exchange, there would have been only $6.7billion in branch deposits changing hands.  In both 1994 and 1993, about $7.5billion in deposits were bought and sold.Different ClimateThe last three years have been much tamer than the gold rush period of 1990and 1991, when the Resolution Trust Corp.  was unloading thrift branches bythe truckload.  Now that the RTC is for all practical purposes defunct, branchsales seem to be returning to a more predictable level of activity.Interestingly, while most banks are increasing their investments in electronicservices and many banks are shuttering branches, those branches that are puton the block are commanding high prices.In 1995, branch deposits generated a 7.3% premium, according to HovdeFinancial Inc., an investment banking firm in Washington.  The premium is thepercentage of deposits that a purchasing bank must pay the seller.  In 1994,premiums were 5.3%, while from 1991 through 1993 they averaged only 2.6%.The lure of retail branches has steadily increased in the last several years,says Bill Boyan, a vice president at Hovde.  One big reason:  It is muchcheaper to buy an existing branch than to start one up de novo.  For example,Fifth Third Bancorp., which first moved into Cleveland five years ago,announced it would essentially double its Cleveland franchise once it closedon its purchase of 28 branches from First Nationwide Bank, the SanFrancisco-based thrift.Cleveland is a mature market, and there are few available sites for newbranches.  "That factors into the premium," says Robert Niehaus, the executivevice president who runs Fifth Third's affiliate banking groups.  In 1995,Fifth Third paid just a shade over the industry norm, or about 8% for retaildeposits, Niehaus says.Fifth Third was one of the busiest branch acquirers last year.  In addition tothe $17-billion-asset company's September announcement of its deal for theFirst Nationwide offices, it also bought PNC Bank Corp.'s 12 Dayton branchesin May.  In October, it bought NBD Bancorp.'s 25 Ohio branches, and finally inNovember, Fifth Third bought seven Banc One Corp.  branches in Cincinnati.Niehaus justifies the purchases with reasoning that Community Bank's Beldenwould find familiar.  "There are still a significant number of our customerswho want to do face-to-face banking, and secondly it allows us to cross-sellproducts to our customers," Niehaus says.Fifth Third's branch-buying spree underscores the notion that conventionalbranches still have an articulated purpose.  Few banks are more committed toelectronic services than Fifth Third, yet it was willing to pay a premium forbranches in some selected markets.This was also true for Huntington Bancshares Inc., which bought four brancheswith $138 million in deposits from Banc One in Springfield, OH, a community of70,000 people about midway between Dayton and Columbus."Is there still room for a full-service branch?"  Thomas Prendergast, aHuntington senior vice president asks rhetorically.  "Sure there is."Huntington, despite its development of eight "Huntington Access" branches thatrely almost completely upon ATMs and video kiosks, still has more than 340conventional branches in Ohio and seven other states.Complementary MethodsFrom Prendergast's point of view, the purchase of the four Banc Onebranches-two of which were promptly closed upon the deal's completion-hardlyundermines Huntington's commitment to electronic banking.  Rather, each ofHuntington's means of reaching its clientele-whether it's through conventionalbranches, the all-electronic branches, PC banking at home, phone banking orATMs-all complement one another.Prendergast, who is the senior Huntington executive for the Springfieldmarket, simply sees the acquired branches as a means of giving more Huntingtoncustomers more ways to reach the bank.  Now that the bank has six branches inSpringfield, it will open a seventh outlet this year.  This site will not be abranch, however, but a drive-up ATM in a shopping mall.The message that comes through all this buying and selling is that electronicbanking has its purpose, but so does the branch.  More importantly, not onlycan the two co-exist, but managed intelligently, they can complement oneanother.  Despite the growing importance of electronic banking, there are somecommunities where the branch will likely remain the primary means of servingcustomers.For example, few states are as top-heavy with behemoth holding companies asNorth Carolina.  In Charlotte, there are NationsBank Corp.  and First UnionCorp.  Then there's Winston-Salem, where Wachovia Corp.  and Southern NationalCorp.  are based.  Most of them are also among the industry's technologicalelite, with PC banking programs and smart card initiatives that regularly grabheadlines.Yet Triangle Bancorp, an $800-million-asset Raleigh company that does all ofits business in the state, has carved out a nice niche for itself in the ruralcommunities east of Interstate 95.  For the most part, its larger competitorsdo the bulk of their business out of North Carolina, and most of the in-statebusiness they do is based in the large cities in the state's middle andwestern sectors-Charlotte, Winston-Salem, Durham and Greensboro.Triangle bought four Raleigh branches with $55 million in deposits from FirstUnion, and it also purchased three NationsBank branches with deposits of $49million in two small towns in the eastern part of North Carolina."The acquisitions have mostly filled gaps in our markets," says Debra Lee,Triangle's chief financial officer.  "We still consider ourselves a communitybank, and there are a lot of people out there who still want to walk in andsee the place.  That's not saying we're going to open a branch on everycorner, but in our market, we think that's the way to go."If the track record of the last several years is any indication, there will beample demand for branches in 1996.  Many of the outlets put up for sale werethe offspring of in-market mergers, where the selling bank looked to whittleaway some excess capacity once it had completed a major acquisition.  With thecompletion of some very large in-market deals like Chase and Chemical BankingCorp., Fleet Financial Group and Shawmut National Corp., First Chicago Corp.and NBD, there should be an ample supply of branches in several markets aroundthe country.In spite of the demand for some branches, that rapid flurry of consolidationcould create excess supply and cause premiums to fall.  Fifth Third's Niehaussays he's already seen some evidence of that.Despite the lower premiums, it seems there will still be plenty of buyers forbrick-and-mortar, no matter how out-of-date some people might consider them.Old habits die hard-and that's as true for customers as it is for bankers.  AsTriangle's Lee says, "There are still a lot of people who want face-to-faceservice."Branch Sales for 1995/ Banks and ThriftsAdvisory Firm Deals Branches Sold Deposits ($Mil)J.P.  Morgan 1 60 $8,138.6CS First Boston 1 60 8,138.6Berwind Financial Group 2 25 1,021.3Montgomery Securities 1 63 961.0Friedman, Billings & Ramsey 1 13 820.0Smith Barney 2 28 739.0Hovde Financial 17 35 635.8M.A.  Schapiro 1 15 390.0Baxter Fentriss 11 25 348.0McDonald & Co.  1 12 255.2Keefe, Bruyette & Woods 1 4 221.6David A.  Noyes 2 10 199.0Alex.  Brown & Sons 1 4 195.0Ryan Beck & Co.  3 5 173.7Kaplan Associates 3 4 142.0TTG Inc.  1 3 126.1GRA Inc.  2 3 93.2Carson Medlin 1 3 73.0Sandler O'Neill 2 3 65.1Trident Financial 1 3 50.0McConnell, Budd & Downes 2 2 41.8Chaffe & Associates 1 3 41.0Austin Associates 4 4 39.1Roney & Co.  1 2 30.2Doug Austin's Financial Services 1 1 6.6Northeast Capital 1 1 5.6Totals:  65 391 $22,950.5Note:  For transactions closed between 12/1/93 and 11/30/94Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Industry:  Does Mutuality Offer Longevity?It's not always easy being a mutual institution, but some mutuals clearlybelieve it affords them something important:  a future.Consider what Staten Island Savings Bank, a large New York mutual, wentthrough last year when it set its sights on buying a small Staten Islandrival, Gateway State Bank.  The process was something like a dance, says CEOHarry P.  Doherty-in reality, more like a lurching tango than a minuet.When executives at the mutual first approached the New York State BankingDepartment for approval to buy Gateway, a stock commercial bank, they got a"you can't do that" reaction.  Pressed as to why not, Doherty relates,department officials "called back a half-hour later" to say they couldn't findanything in the statutes to stop it, but a mutual buying a stock company just"had never been done before."The deal did get done at 1.5 times book, adding about $300 million to thesavings bank's asset base, now $1.7 billion.  Doherty says some Gatewaystockholders were perplexed that they'd be getting cash and not stock-in fact,a few even asked if the closing could be delayed past Jan.  1 for tax reasons.It wasn't.Doherty insists SISB plans to remain a mutual.  As a stock institution, "wewouldn't last long," he says, alluding to "the life expectancy of a mayfly."For those who aren't fisherman or entomologists, the adult mayfly usuallyexpires within 48 hours.  An exaggeration, perhaps, but worth noting.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Commentary/ Trust:  Preparing for The Prudent Investor RuleThe law of investment management for fiduciaries is in the midst of a majorrevision.  The change is based on a revolution in financial theory which haslong been embraced by the markets, but until recently ignored by the law.The Prudent Man Rule is gradually being replaced by a new statutory standard,the Prudent Investor Rule.  The new rule is intended to free fiduciaries fromrigid and outdated investment practices and to allow them to use the fullarray of tools available in the modern investment world for the selection andmanagement of an investment portfolio.The cost of this freedom is a greater responsibility in the selection andmanagement of portfolios.  The fiduciary must make those selections that areappropriate for each particular trust.  What is prudent for one trust may beimprudent for another.  The new rule is liberating in many respects but moredemanding in others than the old rule.  The prudent fiduciary and its legaladvisers must therefore have a full understanding of the broad ramificationsof this revision.The revision is intended to bring trust law into accordance with the practiceof the investment management industry generally, which has been shaped by fourdecades of important academic research as to the optimal methods of investmentmanagement.  These theories and insights are generally referred to as "modernportfolio theory."  At least 11 states have enacted some version of thePrudent Investor Rule, as shaped by the American Law Institute in its 1992Restatement (Third) of Trusts, and the National Conference of Commissioners onState Laws in its 1994 Uniform Prudent Investor Act (UPIA).  They are:California, Colorado, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Utah, Washington, NewYork, Illinois and Florida.  It is expected that most other states will soonmove to this standard as well.Modern Portfolio TheoryTwo of the cornerstones of modern portfolio theory can be reduced to timelessadages.  "Nothing ventured, nothing gained" emphasizes that the other side ofrisk is reward.  The market offers bigger rewards (and penalties) for theunknown than for predictability.  "Don't put all your eggs in one basket"emphasizes the critical importance of diversification of investments.Under modern portfolio theory, economists and sophisticated marketparticipants look at risk differently than the traditional prudent fiduciaryinvestor.  Risk is a recognition of the uncertainty of future values.  It is atwo-sided coin with an upside and a downside.The theory assumes that all investors desire the highest possible level ofreturn while bearing the lowest amount of risk.  Economists assume a certainbaseline for risk-free investors-the return on U.S.  Government securities.Since the Treasury rate can be had without risk, the market forces anadditional return for the assumption of risk beyond Treasury risk.  Aninvestor cannot beat this return unless he is willing to assume an additionallevel of risk.  Risk appetites will vary according to the circumstances, butno one gets rich investing at the risk-free Treasury rate.  While assumingrisk does not guarantee riches, it is the only means for an investor toparticipate in market returns greater than the baseline.Modern portfolio theory is concerned not with risk alone but with therelationship between risk and reward.  Investors must inject an element ofrisk into their investments in order to be successful.  Since the marketcompensates investors for accepting greater risk, investors will thereforesearch for those opportunities which offer the greatest reward relative to therisk assumed.  While investors must accept the risk of a particular investmentin order to have the opportunity to gain the compensation for such risk, aportfolio of diversified investments has less overall risk than a singleinvestment.  Diversification reduces the overall variability of theperformance-which is to say, risk-of an investment portfolio since investmentstend not to all react the same if selected to minimize covariance.Covariance is the tendency of certain investments to behave the same.  A crashof technology stocks is likely to drag down most technology stocks, just asmost technology stocks last fall benefited from a bull market.  A portfoliocomposed of a mix of different investments will therefore be more diversifiedthan one which is concentrated in certain types of investments.  A portfoliocomposed of Chrysler, General Motors and Ford will have more covariance thanone composed of Citicorp, General Electric and Coca-Cola.The focus of modern portfolio theory, then, is on portfolio selection ratherthan on individual asset selection.  Diversification is important both withinand across different types of assets.  Risk can be judged only within thecontext of the whole portfolio.The common law rule regarding investment by fiduciaries has historically beenquite restrictive.  Investment in common stocks by fiduciaries is a relativelynew development, having been viewed as per se imprudent until the 1940s.Until that time fiduciaries were generally restricted by statute to "legallists" which specified permissible fixed- income investments.  The collapse ofbond values in the Depression led to the adoption of Prudent Man Rule statutesin most states.Interestingly, these statutes were based almost verbatim on the language of an1830 Massachusetts case, Harvard College v.  Amory:  "In acquiring, investing,reinvesting, exchanging, retaining, selling, and managing property for thebenefit of another, a fiduciary shall exercise the judgment and care, underthe circumstances then prevailing, which men of prudence, discretion, andintelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not in regard tospeculation but in regard to the permanent disposition of their funds,considering the probable income as well as the probable safety of theircapital."While seemingly a timeless statement setting forth a flexible yet accountablestandard, Prudent Man Rule statutes were interpreted by the courts as actuallysetting forth a Prudent Trustee standard, in the belief that a Prudent Manwould be justified in taking risks in his own investments that would beinappropriate for a prudent fiduciary.  Caution and conservative selection ofinvestments became the hallmarks of the Prudent Man Rule.The interpretations of the Prudent Man Rule statutes have no tolerance forspeculation.  The old rule emphasizes the duty to "preserve principal" at allcosts.  A loss of capital can have catastrophic consequences for a fiduciary.A fiduciary can become a guarantor of risky investments, even if it picks manymore winners than losers.  Each investment is considered on its own merits,without regard to the rest of the portfolio.  Broad categories of investmentsare considered as imprudent per se.  A fiduciary investing in growth stocks,start-ups, options and futures might face a surcharge action if those assetsdepreciate.Under the Prudent Man Rule, delegation of investment authority by a fiduciaryis generally forbidden.  Thus, even if a fiduciary is selected for goodrelationship reasons rather than for investment expertise, the fiduciary ispersonally responsible for all investment decisions, regardless of his levelof expertise-although he is free to seek advice.The Prudent Investor RuleAs modern portfolio theory became almost universally accepted in economics andinvestment management, the law lagged behind.  In acknowledgement of thisproblem, the trust bar began a comprehensive review process that resulted inthe Prudent Investor Rule.  The objective was to articulate a standard whichallows various sound investment strategies, yet is flexible enough to adapt tothe inevitable changes in the markets.  It also imposes a meaningful duty ofprudence and care on fiduciaries, forcing them to take steps to serve theinterests of settlors and beneficiaries rather than relying on traditionalinvestment practices that had as a principal benefit a safe harbor fromliability for the fiduciary.  Interestingly, the Prudent Investor Rule is inmany ways a return to the flexible standard of the original Harvard Collegerule.The heart of the Prudent Investor Rule is a focus on the portfolio as a wholerather than on specific investments.  The rule recognizes that the key job ofthe fiduciary is to determine the tradeoff between risk and return necessaryto realize the trust objectives.  The rule abolishes categoric restrictionsand disavows the emphasis in prior law on avoiding "speculative" or "risky"investments.  Delegation is permitted, even encouraged.The Prudent Investor Rule is a standard of conduct.  Liability is not based onthe performance of investments if the fiduciary takes informed and thoroughactions in its investment selection.  It is process-oriented rather thanresult-oriented.  In this sense it is somewhat similar to the businessjudgment rule of corporate law.  A process-oriented rule puts a continuousburden on the fiduciary, who can no longer rely on rules of thumb.  Thefiduciary must analyze each situation and make a decision which is prudentunder the circumstances.  Under the Prudent Investor Rule, there is verylittle that is per se prudent or imprudent.  The rule does not, however,abandon trust law's favor of conservative investing.  It does, however,require a fiduciary to justify whatever investments it makes, whether inTreasury bills or derivatives.The major points of the Prudent Investor Rule statutes are as follows:* The standard of prudence applies to the trust as a whole rather thanindividual investments, with a realization that particular investments thatwould have been seen as surchargeable speculations under old law may besensible, perhaps even risk-reducing additions to a portfolio viewed as awhole.  * The overall investment strategy should be based upon risk-and-rewardobjectives suitable for the trust.  These objectives will vary widely,depending on the circumstances in each trust arrangement.  * There is a dutyto diversify unless the fiduciary reasonably determines that it is in theinterests of the beneficiaries not to diversify, taking into account thepurposes and terms of the governing instrument.  * No particular investment isinherently prudent or imprudent.  * No special status is accorded to originalinvestments received by the fiduciary, and the fiduciary must review themwithin a reasonable time of receipt.  * Delegation is permitted, encouragedand in some cases required.  The Prudent Investor Rule reverses the PrudentMan Rule's anti-delegation bias.Impact on Trust DepartmentsIn many respects, the new rule will not change the decision-making process ofmost bank trust departments when determining investments.  Most placesignificant emphasis on the diversity of assets in the trust portfolio and tryto balance growth and yield to make their investments meet the needs of allthe trust's beneficiaries.  And most understand that their care in the processof making choices-and not the actual performance of the assets chosen-is thebasis on which they will be judged.  Furthermore, trust departments arealready familiar with provisions of the Prudent Man Rule statutes that holdthe professional trustee to a higher standard of skill than thenon-professional, a concept carried over to the Prudent Investor Rule as well.Nevertheless, the Prudent Investor Rule, because of its emphasis on theportfolio as a whole and on the interplay between risk and reward, is a moredynamic standard and requires consideration of more factors in makinginvestment choices.  The fiduciary must determine an investment strategy forthe entire trust portfolio, and be able to justify and document both thereasonableness of that strategy and the prudence of each investment in lightof that strategy.  The strategy, furthermore, must protect the real value, asopposed to the historic value, of the trust principal while providing for asuitable return for the income beneficiary.  As a result, the strategy willnecessarily change over time, depending on changes in the economy, individualinvestments and the needs and resources of the trust's beneficiaries.To ensure that the necessary work has been done to review all the relevantconsiderations, trust departments will need to establish consistent proceduresto gather and record basic factual information about the family needs andfinances, not only at the trust's inception, but on an ongoing basis.  Thesame applies to general analysis of the economy and performance of theinvestments.  Trust instruments will have to be analyzed carefully as to theirterms because powers to invade (or the absence of such powers) and precatorylanguage will take on heightened meaning under the new standard.  Recordsshould be maintained of the considerations and decisions resulting in aparticular strategy or investment.The burdens on a trust department resulting from increased inquiry andrecord-keeping may well be offset by the opportunities for increased contactwith family members and their input into the decision-making process.New Opportunities, New RisksThe Prudent Investor Rule permits and even encourages unsophisticated trusteesto delegate investment decisions to professionals.  As a result, assetinvestment departments of banks and trust companies will likely find more callfor their services to individual fiduciaries.Many fiduciaries also will chose to meet the requirements of diversificationand risk assumption by participating in mutual funds.  In another area, banksin Prudent Investor Rule states are now providing specific sophisticatedservices to trustees, such as risk-management derivatives or review andoversight of family assets.There are a great many unknown areas in the application of the PrudentInvestor Rule.  It cannot be predicted how easily the courts will move awayfrom the more clear-cut standards of the Prudent Man Rule when faced withactual lawsuits, or how they will reevaluate the fiduciary's decisions yearsafter they were made.  Other important issues include the extent of thetrustee's duty of affirmative due diligence to inquire about familycircumstances, and the scope of liability of the investment advisor.In addition, it is not clear how the Prudent Investor Rule interacts withother existing laws which have not been-and may not be-modified to fit itsconcerns.  For example, under-productive property rules in many states requireeach asset of a trust to produce a minimum amount of income to avoidallocation of a portion of that asset's proceeds to the trust's incomebeneficiary.  This is not consistent with the total return analysis of thePrudent Investor Rule.  Other portions of state income and principal acts mayalso be troublesome.  Furthermore, the effect of the Prudent Investor Rule onpension trusts and charitable trusts and corporations that are regulated byspecific state or federal statutes has not been fully explored.  Indeed,fiduciaries will be acting in a realm of uncertainty for some time to come.Bernard Karol and M.  Antoinette Thomas are partners in the New York law firmof Carter, Ledyard & Milburn.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Pushing a Global BrandOn a dank winter day in Red Wing, MN, a woman troops out through a chillydrizzle to her mailbox and finds, among other mail, a statement from hercredit card company, Citibank.  Included is a notice that her credit limit isbeing raised, and a reminder that its purchase protection plan offers pricesavings if an item she buys is being sold more cheaply later.Halfway across the world in steamy Singapore, an export executive returns tohis sleek apartment to find a different Citibank mailing, an offer for a cardtied to a frequent flyer program for Asian travelers.From Bangkok to Bangor, and sundry points in between, the Citibank credit cardis proving itself to be truly a worldwide brand, with a scope that's sometimesstartling.  Citi issues secured cards and even private-label cards in Brazil,frequent flyer cards in Argentina and Taiwan.  In many countries, Citibank andDiners Club-the travel and entertainment card of which Citi is the primaryowner-are the chief consumer card brands.  Citibank processes more than 240million card payments and has 90 million card customer contacts a year.  Itsoverseas executives don't need to brush up on Portuguese or Thai; likely asnot, they're natives.More than any other American bank-and arguably any bank-Citibank is a nameplayer in an array of overseas markets.  Long-established operations in Europeand Latin America weren't shucked off some years ago, the way they were atseveral other money center banks when profitability was squeezed.  Underchairman John S.  Reed, parent Citicorp has made servicing the global consumera veritable mantra-and the credit card business is perhaps the biggest weaponin its arsenal.It is precisely this unparalleled reach that should keep Citi at the top ofthe credit card receivables heap.  Nimble, aggressive issuers like MBNA Corp.,First USA Inc.  and Advanta Corp.  have used a precision-bombing approach ontop credit targets to build U.S.  market share dramatically, and they'll keepgaining share-but less so at Citi's expense than other large issuers.  Even ifthe New York behemoth finds its domestic lead shrinking, its plethora ofrelatively untapped overseas programs-some with explosive growthpotential-should preserve its top ranking."We believe that Citicorp is in a unique position to build upon itsmultinational credit card experience in entering new markets, dealing withtheir cultural differences and developing relevant products-even where creditbureaus or other information sources are nonexistent," wrote Salomon Brothersanalyst Diane Glossman in a report last fall.Citi's card operations may be its crown jewel, analysts say; plastic generatesa higher percentage of the bank's earnings than any other bank issuer's cardsdo, and accounted for an estimated 29% of the bank's net income inthird-quarter 1995, according to Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.  It's a jewel cutand honed by many years of large-scale marketing, telephone account servicingand experimentation with differing offers.  Citi was among the pioneers in thepurchase protection plan area, as well as extended warranties.  ItsCitidollars program, offering catalog items to customers as a form of rebates,also broke new ground years ago.In the spring of 1994, this gem was placed in the hands of Roberta J.  Arena,a 20-year Citi veteran who had most recently headed Citi's relatively smallEuropean card operations.  As executive vice president in charge of the NorthAmerican and European card group, Arena replaced James L.  Bailey, the bank'slongtime card honcho.  Citibank declined to make Arena available for aninterview for this story, but industry observers say her experience outsidethe U.S.  is underscoring Citi's commitment to pushing its global strategyeven further.At a time when headlines in the U.S.  are trumpeting worries about mountingconsumer credit troubles, foreign markets may offer a useful counterweight.Historically, Citicorp's card-loss numbers have been slightly worse thanindustry averages because of its targeting of what Glossman calls "ahigh-risk, high-return clientele."  Citi's U.S.  loss experience, however, haschanged little; at 3.72% of managed card receivables in the third quarter, itactually improved two basis points from the second quarter and was up just 15basis points from third-quarter 1994.Moreover, KBW research finds that cards represented just over half of Citi'snet chargeoffs in the third quarter-53%-compared to 74% at Bank of New York,75% at Chemical Bank, 87% at Chase Manhattan and 99% at First Chicago.  Still,Citi has been boosting its provision for credit losses in the global consumerbank.  That item hit $465 million in the third quarter, up $100 million fromthe year-earlier number.Credit the bank with seeing the trendlines.  "As the largest credit cardissuer in the country, we think it will be impossible for Citicorp to avoidconcerns about credit cards' credit quality," noted PaineWebber's LawrenceCohn in a recent report.Citi's card prominence dates to the virtual dawn of the bank card in the early1970s, and at this juncture its card is a very mature product in this country.There's a bit of consumer ennui about the brand, perhaps, which will be achallenge for Arena and her marketing forces.  So, too, will be catering tothe more service-savvy customer and finding the proper alchemy of rates andrewards to keep profitability high amid fierce competitive pressures.The legacy of leadership is certainly there.  "They reached a milestone in thelate 1970s when they realized that the card was the beachhead of leastresistance," says a consultant who worked for the bank years ago.  "They gaveup trying to be a national bank."Very early on, they decided the card business should be done on a volumebasis," he adds, and began multimillion-piece mailings.  "Even though Citi wasrealizing significantly higher loan losses than the industry norms, by goingafter active credit users, where the profits are, they were making morebecause those people aren't as sensitive to rates and fees.  (Citi) acceptedcredit losses as a cost of goods sold.  They also realized that they had agreat list, and they crammed everything they could sell down that pipeline."Reputation as a Bully"Cram" implies an element of bullying-and Citicorp still occasionally getsdemonized by consumer groups and smaller banks as the apotheosis of impersonalservice and a Marie Antoinette-in-pinstripes, "let-them-eat-cake" response tocriticism.  Some of that reflects a kind of Jeffersonian revulsion to bigness,but Citi earned a lot of enmity in thev '70s and '80s, when it seemed eager tobulldoze any regulation or law in its path.But a seemingly chastened Citi-burned by waves of LDC, leveraged buyout andcommercial real estate losses in the late '80s and early '90s-is keeping alower profile these days.  It's no longer the merger scourge that smallerbanks once saw in their nightmares; institutions like NationsBank Corp.  andFirst Union Corp.  have taken over that mantle.  As Citi has turned rightfull-rudder into consumer banking, it's often been reducing fees (especiallyfor electronic services), not just jacking them up.If Citi's consumer banking business isn't hitting on all cylinders, it'sclose:  It generated over $500 million in global earnings in the thirdquarter, a new high-water mark and 60% of the company's net income.  That'sbroad-based, but the credit card is the biggest arrow in the quiver.  Citireported 56 million cards in circulation at the end of the third quarter, up9% from the year earlier, with managed receivables up 19%.  Growth wasespecially strong in the Asia-Pacific region, where managed receivables surged40%, year-to-year, and applications hit a record level.  Since 1990, worldwidecards in force have swelled more than 50%.It's a big business, Citicorp's largest, and it requires hordes ofpeople-6,400 alone in three service centers in South Dakota, Maryland andNevada (Citi has offered 24-hour, 7-day phone service for almost a decade).Throw in the operations in 31 other countries, and 14,300 employees areinvolved-more bodies than the entire workforce at most large regional banks.It's hard to downplay scale and experience in a business like credit cards.In a recent survey of senior bank executives and directors by Towers Perrin,Citibank was named most often as the best product manufacturer and distributorin banking-attributes at the heart of card programs.  "The fact that Citi hasplayed at this level year in and year out is a remarkable thing," says AngeloPalombi, senior executive vice president at Resource Bancshares Corp., aColumbia, SC, firm that helps smaller banks run card operations.For many years, Citi has been using scoring and portfolio modeling, thenblanketing the country with mail pieces, often with pre-approved applicationsbased on statistics and credit report data.  True, Citi doesn't know thecustomer in Oshkosh as well as the local bank, and never will.  But the creditcard business is a scale-enhanced one in which it's increasingly impracticalto lend just locally.  Think Advanta and MBNA aren't using sophisticatedcredit scoring techniques?  Think again.  Citi is using its technologicalprowess to segment its marketing efforts and boost responsiveness, as well asbuild average card balances.With $42.1 billion in receivables at the end of 1995's third quarter, Citi'sprogram was half again as large as second-place Discover's $28.2 billion,according to RAM Research.  MBNA, First USA and First Chicago rounded out thetop five (see table on this page).  Citi held 23.4% of total receivables forthe 10 largest issuers.Several money-center analysts put its return on assets on its U.S.  cardbusiness around 2.5%.  KBW's Berry says the business "continues to generatesuperior returns," though Salomon Brothers' Glossman predicts returns willtrend down toward 2.0% over time.  That 2.5% ROA is double what aggressive"pure-play" issuers Capital One Financial Corp.  (1.20%) and Advanta (about1.30% on receivables made up 80% of credit cards) reported in the thirdquarter.  Revenues would be even more impressive if Citi could develop bettercross-sell numbers; only 6% of the card base has another Citibankrelationship, and only half of branch customers have a Citi card, saysGlossman.Profitability has received renewed attention, and that seems to be paying off."Historically, they were more aggressive and more sophisticated than any otherissuers," says K.  Shelly Porges, president of Porges/Hudson Marketing in SanFrancisco.  But "they did not focus exclusively on revolving customers (thosewho carry balances)-that would have made them more profitable.  They were outthere to gain total share."Citi clearly isn't as dominant as it was a few years ago.  Its share of U.S.credit card receivables slipped from 18% in 1991 to 13.5% at the end of 1994,according to Credit Card Management, a Faulkner & Gray publication.  RAMnumbers put its Sept.  30, 1995 share even lower, at 12.8%.Yet it's hard to underplay the importance of cards in Citi's earnings stream.The bank reported 24.8 million bank card accounts in September 1995, and cardloans made up 23% of Citi's bankwide loans, up from 21% a year earlier; onlyFirst Chicago (41%) had a higher percentage among major bank issuers.Visa and MasterCard cards make up the vast majority of those accounts, butCiti has issued some seven million Diners Club cards, and also issues andservices millions of private-label cards for department stores.  In the 1950s,Diners was the travel and entertainment card for U.S.  corporations.  That's adistinction it has lost-American Express is now six times as large, worldwide.But Diners recorded its fourth straight record sales year in 1994, withworldwide revenues of $22 billion in more than 175 countries.Citi's ownership of the 45-year-old Diners brand is complex-Citi may havecontrol in various countries or share it with local franchisees.  It owns thefranchise in Germany, for instance, but In Chile has only a 20% share.  Dinersclaims relationships with more than half of the Fortune 500 corporations, butskeptics say it lives more on its past reputation than anything, and has moreclout in Europe in Asia than in the U.S.  "They haven't exploited Diners tothe point they can," says Michael Auriemma, president of Auriemma Consultingin Westbury, NY.  "The energy and the effort seem to be missing."But Porges points out that Citi has been developing new marketing for Diners-aclear sign that it is committed to the program.  New commercials featureyounger, hipper travelers and an updated focus on women, she says.  In arecent full-page ad in major newspapers, Diners takes on American Express,calling Diners' "membership miles" program superior because it includes "everymajor U.S.  airline"-including two Amex leaves out.Big SwitchAnalysts attribute Citi's relative passivity on the marketing front in 1991-93to its internal problems, many related to real estate loan losses.  That wasalso a period when Citi's card chargeoffs peaked, climbing to over 6% in1991-92, according to KBW.  Yet card profits, as well as those from otherconsumer businesses, helped pull the bank from the ditch it had landed in fiveyears ago.The 1992 switch to variable rates and the year-end 1993 decision to eliminateannual fees for Citibank Classic and Preferred Visa and MasterCard customerswith good credit histories sacrificed what some analysts estimated washundreds of millions of dollars in revenues.  But it clearly gave Citi's cardprogram a shot in the arm.  "Repricing is restoring our momentum," Arenaannounced in 1994.  In an interview last year with Brandweek magazine, shesaid, "We invested more than we had planned in sheer marketing last year(1994)...  so I think it's fair to say that we are back."In its latest annual report, Citi said the steps were taken "to reinforce itsmarket dominance by building customer loyalty in this highly competitivemarket."  Adding customers was a key objective.  Early in 1995, for instance,the bank was offering new customers an introductory fixed rate of 6.9% for 12months, considerably longer than most rivals.Frank DeSantis, money-center analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, addsthat Citi has identified active customers who have $50 billion in balances onother issuers' cards-and is targeting these accounts with balance-transfersolicitations.  Its goal, he says, "is to regain half its lost market shareover the next five years."  Earlier last year, DeSantis singled out Citi'susage levels, citing the figure of 79% of all accounts active (vs.  66%industrywide) and higher-than-average balances per active account, $2,150 vs.the $1,750 industry average.  Moreover, he says that the company's credit cardexpense control "borders on spectacular"-recently, it was operating at a 34%efficiency ratio in the U.S.Citi has been "coming to terms with things that were part of its heritage,"says Porges.  Citidollars, for instance, which was discontinued a year and ahalf ago.  When it was introduced in the early '80s, Citidollars "had a lot ofpower," she says.  "But in an age of co-branded cards, Citidollars had littleif any appeal."The U.S.  portfolio has been highly segmented, offering consumers an array ofchoices:  Classic (security and value); Preferred (higher credit line);Choice, for price-sensitive buyers; and co-branded programs with such majorpartners as American Airlines, Ford Motor Co.  and Apple Computer.  Anothersuccessful selling strategy is the Photocard, in which the cardholder's photois digitally imprinted on the face of the card-a genuine security advantagethat Citi says cut its U.S.  bank card fraud losses by 62% in 1993-94.Introduced in the U.S.  in 1992, it has been rolled out in all European,Asia-Pacific and Latin American markets.But the bank has hit a few pockets of major turbulence, too.  Its co-brandedcard with MCI Communications was killed last year when consumers just didn'tline up.  And the Ford card, announced with a flourish three years ago, isrumored in the industry to have collected most of its accounts from elsewherein Citi's empire, not from new customers.Some attribute those difficulties to a focus on Citi's own brand, givingco-branding programs-in which the bank shares proceeds with a nonbank-a lowerpriority.  "The focus on the brand is an excellent strategy, but I think forsomething that large they should have a two-pronged approach," says Auriemma."They're not focusing on some of the non-branded programs that might havetremendous potential."Great ExpectationsWhere issuers like MBNA and Household Bank have had tremendous success withco-branded programs, the only one that has really clicked at Citi is theAmerican Airlines frequent flyer, or AAdvantage, experts say.  It's done sowell that it's been exported throughout Latin America.  But the otherprograms?"The Apple program ought to be huge, but I don't know one person that carries(that card)," Auriemma says.  Similarly, he says never got an MCI cardsolicitation, even though he was an MCI customer; he believes that's becauseCiti is concentrating on its branded cards in the greater New York market.Says Porges:  "When we talk about success in co-branding, the expectation isthat (Citi) would have something as big or bigger than anyone else's.  By thatstandard, they weren't successful."  She quickly adds that this doesn't meanthe programs are failures, however.On the flip side, Citi's own brand recognition is a huge asset-and coupledwith the bank's far-flung presence, it offers breathtaking potential.  Citiissues bank cards in Belgium, Germany, Greece and Spain-and believes aco-branded arrangement with the German national railway could catapult it tofirst place there.  Plans are to consolidate the 15 card processing andcustomer service facilities in North America and Europe into a small core ofcentralized operations, trimming costs.Asia, where Citi has a stronger presence than any other American bank, is itsmost turbocharged card market.  Four million cards are in force there, andCiti recently partnered with Passages, Asia's biggest frequent-flyer program,in seven countries.  Arena has said that the credit card "is the biggestintroductory agent we have for the (Citibank) brand."Even Eastern Europe, where capital infrastructures are still being built fromthe rubble of Communism, holds card potential-though it may be a ways off.Citi is in such countries as the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Russia.Salomon Brothers' Glossman noted in a recent report that Citi's EasternEuropean operations "have been profitable from day one...  These economiestend to be almost completely cash-dependent, and Citicorp is well-positionedshould development skip checks and move straight to credit/debit/stored valuecards."Some observers wonder just how quickly these emerging markets can deliver,however.  "It is important to develop them, but those markets are so small andso immature that to spend a significant portion of management time on them isdangerous, I think," Auriemma says.  "You certainly wouldn't want to do it tothe detriment of the U.S.  market."Even in many highly developed areas in western Europe, there's plenty ofopportunity.  A New York banker with close ties to a large Dutch bank saysthat many bankers there don't understand the popularity of credit cards inthis country; there, they've focused far more on debit cards-leaving anautobahn-like opening for a high-volume card issuer like Citi.In a number of overseas markets, Citi doesn't have to import its U.S.  cardlogic, notes John Laurino, managing director at Westport Consulting inWestport, CT.  "It has built retail businesses from the ground up, and theyare as well-established as they are in the States."  In fact, some of itsproducts in this country "were explored and validated overseas and broughtback here."  Citi calls that process "success transfer."Success isn't necessarily measured in terms of customer satisfaction, however.Citi tied for fifth in a recent U.S.  card satisfaction survey by J.D.  Power& Co., long noted for its automotive surveys.  Power measured such attributesas billing payment quality, interest rates, rewards and fees, cash advancelimits and point-of-sale processing quality.  Citi's score of 101-100 wasdeemed average-tied it with Banc One.  Only one multiline bank scored higher,Bank of New York at 102.  AT&T Universal Card led the pack, followed byDiscover and Household Bank.In a RAM rating of the "best" consumer cards, Citi doesn't score in the topgroup in any category except "best secured cards," where it was third behindWachovia Corp.  and Chase Manhattan.  But its move to eliminate annual feeshelps boost consumer satisfaction-though Citi, like most fee-charging issuers,was dragged into those waters by a horde of no-fee rivals who were clearlymaking big inroads.Service QuestionsService quality issues remain, some customers say.  One customer with aCitigold account-a packaged account that requires an opening minimum of$100,000 and brings with it such goodies as a personal account officer, fundssweep and trading privileges-complains that he's had difficulty with the bankacknowledging separate accounts.  When he ran over his limit on a plainvanilla card, he says, the card service people apparently never realized hewas a Citigold customer.  "From a customer perspective, (the card business)seems to be managed autonomously from the retail bank," he says.  Thatexperience highlights the difficulty of managing information over massivenetworks, but for an institution with Citi's technological prowess, it'sdisconcerting nonetheless.Technology does appear to be paying dividends, however, in keepingdelinquencies and losses in line.  As consumer loan delinquencies have shot upin recent months, Citi's numbers have held up well.  Moreover, Lehman Brothersanalyst James Rosenberg maintains that even if Citi's U.S.  consumerchargeoffs (including cards) jumped 100 basis points, that would extract atmost a 10% toll on earnings.  Similarly, KBW's Berry notes that Citi's $1.8billion in consumer loan-loss reserves (most allocated for card losses)represented 17 months of recent losses-far more than the seven months'reserves that specialty card banks usually carry.But it's incontrovertible:  cards are riskier than, say, home equity loans.Citi's overall loss rate of 2.02% for all managed consumer loans at thethird-quarter close compares to 3.78% for worldwide credit card loans.Risk management is a tough nut for issuers, and so is consumer loyalty at atime of intense competition on the issuer's version of the Three R's:  rates,rebates and rewards.  It's estimated that a record three billion credit cardoffers were mailed out in 1995 alone.  "In the last 10 years, customer loyaltyto credit cards (in the U.S.)  has been destroyed, as holders were saturatedwith offers," says Robert Skolnick, executive vice president at BehavioralAnalysis Inc.  in Tarrytown, NY.  "Issuers have turned credit cards into acommodity in consumers' minds, and now they are launching major efforts todevelop long-term relationships, which historically had been presumed."That's every major issuers' story; it is Citi's, too.  Growth potential inthis country is circumscribed by such commoditization, but it isn't strangled,especially if current cardholders can be coaxed to build their balances.Berry thinks Citi's card program can maintain its domestic share even asoverall credit card receivables mount at a 14%-16% annual clip through therest of the decade.  Roping in a new group-maybe even a new generation-ofcustomers is a key cog in that effort.Arena told Brandweek that the student market is one of Citi's four majormarketing thrusts, the others being high-end spenders, "new Americans" and"the great magic middle," which she said "is best characterized as beingmarried, or something, with children."  That great middle, she added, is whereCiti is "focusing our marketing weight."In developing markets, far from the U.S.' saturated shores, growth could becomparatively luxuriant.  "Adding new countries, improving penetration inexisting countries and increased usage of credit cards as a payment vehicle inthe locations are all sources of growth," wrote Glossman recently.  "Citicorpalready has enviable positioning in many of these markets with a known brandname and the ability to draw upon its U.S.  and international skill base."For instance, Citi recently introduced its American AAdvantage card in fournew markets-Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Panama.Obviously, the developing world offers risk with a capital "R."  But Glossman,who has exhaustively analyzed the bank's card operations, offers aninstructive example of Citi's experience in Colombia.  While savings banksthere have seen delinquency rates shoot as high as 25%, Citi's recently stoodat 4.4%.  Citi "has the advantage of centralized scoring, collections and moretargeted marketing," she noted.  One result:  Citi grew its credit card bookin Colombia by 116% in the first half of 1995, she says.No Alarm BellsDomestically, Citi can expect to see a modest uptick in delinquencies ifcurrent trends hold-but nothing alarming.  Card executives at other banksdon't profess serious concern.  "Our forecasted losses are within ourexpectations," says John A.  Klein, executive vice president for consumerbanking at People's Bank in Bridgeport, CT, which has a national low-rateportfolio.  "They continue to track in a way we would expect with thevintaging of our account base."Another executive with a regional issuer attributes today's delinquency risemore to the economic cycle than to a lack of portfolio "seasoning" over time."We're seeing people claiming bankruptcy who are not even past due.  That debtis not showing up at the credit bureaus."  Still, he says that "mostsuccessful players don't stop issuing in these markets, and the big guys likeCiticorp know that."What's driving the most successful operations in this era of card saturationis the ability to assemble information electronically and use it to maintainthe most profitable customer relationships, says James Quella, head of thefinancial services practice at Mercer Management Consulting.  Citi continuesto reinvest heavily in the card business, adding client-server and voiceresponse technologies, and Glossman insists its current cost-per-account levelis what it was in 1982.  In a 1993 study by Booz, Allen & Hamilton, Citi'scost advantage in the back office over other major card players ranged from10% to 60%.An executive with a regional card issuer says he heard that a few years ago,Citi explored a mutual opening of back offices with First Data Corp.  Suchovertures, in which companies check out each other's technology, don't alwayslead to ventures, and he says "Citi is notorious for stealing ideas."  Afterthat process, he says, "Citi felt it had perhaps the best cost structure" inthe business.  Being a low-cost producer has conferred tremendous advantagesby freeing up resources for new marketing and technology initiatives.While Citi hasn't been duking it out in the courts far and wide as it was inthe 1970s and 1980s, it isn't loath to fight to protect its interests.  Thebank recently challenged a New Jersey law limiting late fees to $10 per cardaccount each month; Citi charges its customers $15.  The New Jersey SupremeCourt upheld the state limit in late November, and Citi immediately vowed toappeal.It's clear that Citi doesn't have the pre-eminent role it once did in the cardbusiness; too many other talented players have come in.  But Citi is no NormaDesmond, either, living only on past glories.  Freed from its earlier assetwoes and focused on the global consumer, it is in the process of erecting aworldwide brand it hopes will rival Coca-Cola or Hewlett-Packard.When that exporter in Singapore weighs his options for a card, that namerecognition and the image of Citi's four-pointed star will be no smallconsideration.  So, too, will it weigh considerably with a manufacturingexecutive in Germany.  Citi expects to grow its European card business to fivemillion accounts by 2000, from one million now, adding a new country every12-15 months.  Since Arena's elevation, "They're taking a more global view ofthe business," says Porges.  "Even though they talked global, the focus was onthe U.S.  My sense is there's a truer commitment now to non-U.S.  expansion."That will require plenty of bodies and minds, and rivals won't be sittingstill.  But analysts see only encouraging signs.  You can't say the Citi neverslips, but it's spinning its wheels a lot less these days.  Pumped up byglobal branding, its credit card business is like a battleship:  It may not benimble, but it has loads of firepower and a very long reach.Largest U.S.  Card IssuersName Receivables ($Bil) 1995 Growth 9/30/95Citibank 42.1 14.0%Discover 28.2 26.4MBNA America 23.3 32.4First USA 15.0 36.4First Chicago 14.6 20.1AT&T Universal 12.9 0.3Chase Manhattan 11.90 14.4Household Bank 11.2 4.6Chemical Bank 10.4 16.9Capital One 10.2 37.8Totals 179.8 19.4Source:  RAM ResearchOpportunity Beckons OverseasNations with most domestic credit card transactions (in millions)Country Transactions1 USA 10152 France 5773 United Kingdom 4264 Denmark 2085 Canada 1856 Japan 1707 Netherlands 14410 Portugal 9015 Argentina 2816 Colombia 24Source:  The Nilson Report, 1994Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Final Say:  CEOs Key to Sales ProcessBanking's best CEOs and business unit managers have a passion for selling anda well-defined process for managing sales.  They treat great selling as one oftheir few sustainable strategic advantages.At one of the nation's best-performing large banking groups, the presidentmakes over 300 sales calls a year and meets regularly with field salesmanagers.  At another high-performing bank, the senior retail bankingexecutive personally coaches every one of his 120 retail salespeople inselling for an hour each quarter as a model for his managers to follow.Most bank CEOs are comfortable with selling, or they wouldn't have achieved somuch career success.  But often they're uncomfortable with the time requiredto manage sales or with the functional skills of sales leadership, such assales planning and coaching.  As a result, they're often persuaded to championeasy, non-integrated solutions to sales problems, such as single-eventprograms that require little interdepartmental cooperation.  That's why mostbank sales programs aren't working.Examples of traditional bank sales practices that don't work include theindustry's popular cross-sell measures, product sales incentives and officercall programs.  These typically focus managers on activity rather than oneffectiveness.  Similarly, the structure and detail of activity-driven salestraining and mystery shopper programs make CEOs feel that a lot is being doneto increase sales and customer satisfaction, despite any hard evidence.These "quick fixes" have actually encouraged formulaic selling andproduct-pushing and have relieved managers of their sense of accountability.None of those "easy" sales interventions by themselves can provide the focus,motivation and accountability that's provided by a fully integrated salesprocess.  Most line sales managers in banking know these traditional salesprograms aren't working, but few will say so aloud because so much money andsenior management prestige is invested in them.Sales effectiveness begins at the top of the organization chart.  Research atHarvard Business School has established that having a clear sales task is themost important factor in sales motivation, coupled with feedback andaccountability.  If this is true, only the CEO and other senior executives caninfluence large gains in sales production.If a CEO doesn't communicate a clear vision of success and clear roledefinitions for selling or doesn't hold line managers accountable for salesrevenue and developing salespeople through coaching, this lack of clarityfilters down through the bank.  Employees lose their motivation, and averagesales revenue per employee falls.  Repeated surveys of bank salespeople havedemonstrated that bank employees don't know what they're supposed to dorelative to sales and customer satisfaction.  They also say they're receivingvirtually no coaching, no feedback and no meaningful consequences forperformance, good or bad.For a bank to make a quantum leap in sales, its employees must believe thatsenior managers are placing a consistent focus and priority on sales andcustomer satisfaction.A Simple AnswerWith so many banks failing at sales, what are the CEOs of successfulorganizations doing to produce outstanding results?  The answer issurprisingly simple:  Banking's best CEOs treat sales as a primary businessfunction, giving it the same commitment and attention to detail that they giveto pricing and expense control.Banking's best sales organizations show a sense of urgency and accountabilityfor sales production and customer satisfaction that isn't present at otherbanks.  This is driven by the CEO's uncompromising insistence that salesrevenue contributions and customer satisfaction be considered as key factorsin decisions affecting all functional areas of the bank.This means that improvement in sales revenue and customer satisfaction aremeasured and rewarded; that sales and customer satisfaction are key agendaitems for senior level management meetings; and that the CEO and business unitmanagers are visible in articulating clear goals, strategies and preferredways of selling, and in serving as models of personal selling and salescoaching.  None of this is rocket science, but it is increasingly clear thatactive sales leadership by the CEO pays dividends and helps improve prospectsfor long-term survival.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Funding:  Those Dwindling DepositsLike a pond drawn down by drought, the nation's depository institutions arefinding their deposit bases shrinking as consumers take their savings moneyelsewhere.  To some observers, this phenomenon has gone beyond a cyclicalevent dictated by rate movements-and has profound repercussions on the futureof bank funding."The (core) deposits are not going to come back," says Michael Brosnan,director of the Treasury and market risk division at the Office of theComptroller of the Currency (OCC).  "In my opinion, this is not a short-termphenomenon; this is a secular change in the system.  The question is, are youplanning this out, or is it just happening to you?"A recent study of this phenomenon by Charles N.  Cranmer, director of equityresearch at New York broker/dealer M.A.  Shapiro & Co.  Inc., establishesclearly that at best, core deposits at the nation's banks are stagnant, whilethe low-cost deposit categories are experiencing significant run-offs asdepositors search for higher yields.  Illiquid assets as a percent of coreliabilities, the standard for liquidity in Cranmer's study, have jumped from84% in year-end 1993 to 95% in the second quarter of 1995.And according to data from the OCC, deposits of all sorts have declined in thepast three years, and are flat to significantly lower compared with 1990 (seecharts).  Most dramatically, all time deposits in the nation's commercialbanks fell from 31.74% of total assets in mid-1990 to 22.37% in mid-1995.  Inthe same period, small time deposits fell from 20.07% to 16.43% of totalassets, while large time deposits fell from 11.67% to 5.94%.Experts say that consumer flight to higher yields isn't the only cause.  Manybanks are rationalizing their branch systems and finding that core depositsgathered through them aren't always the cheapest way to go."I think what's happened is that as banks have acquired robust informationsystems, they've come to appreciate the fully-loaded costs of acquiringcertain deposits and have become less enamored of them, because it mayactually be expensive money," says Chris Formant, a Boston-based nationalpartner in the financial services group of Coopers & Lybrand Consulting.But this phenomenon naturally sends the nation's banks into the capitalmarkets for money to lend, raising the cost of funds-and squeezing margins.And while the industry as a whole is awash in capital today, says Cranmer, itdoesn't mean the subject is so boring that bankers can safely look the otherway.  Analysts certainly aren't.  In a recent report on First Bank System,Citicorp fixed-rate analyst Blaine Frantz wrote that "available balance sheetliquidity to fund loan growth is the most noteworthy constraint on the bank'scredit profile.""If American bankers continue ignoring this (liquidity issue), one day they'llget caught with their pants down," Cranmer says.  "People don't talk muchabout liquidity, but these days, the Japanese banks have to pay 100 basispoints over the yield curve for funds, and I'm sure they wish they didn't haveto do that."Japanese banks, which don't have as well-developed an asset securitizationmarket as U.S.  banks, have reportedly endured significant outflows of foreigndeposits in recent months as news of their deep-seated problems has surfaced.These outflows have forced them into the arms of professional-andskeptical-financiers.A similar fate, say experts, awaits complacent U.S.  bankers who think theycan safely ignore balance sheet basics, and concentrate on the glamorous sideof the business, because they imagine that the bad old days of write-downs andmicroscopic bank examinations are over.  This is exactly what will cause thenext liquidity crunch if banks don't pay more attention, says Roy Smith,professor of finance at New York University's Stern School of Business."The real problem (today) isn't on the liquidity side-banks areover-capitalized today," he says.  "The problem is, what are banks doing withtheir capital?  And they're doing two things; buying other banks and payinghigh prices, or squandering it on some of the syndicated loans they'remaking.""They just want to look good in the locker room," he continues.  "If they'rewilling to take 11 basis points from a British conglomerate, they're surelynot covering the risks of that loan being degraded; that's a lower spread overLIBOR than they got for some of the loans that went bad in the 1980s," hesays, citing a recently syndicated loan.To a great extent, what is replacing the core deposits as an important sourceof liquidity at the nation's depository institutions is no mystery.  Mostlarger banks today are deeply into securitization and outright asset sales,and are familiar figures at the Fed funds window and in the nation's moneymarkets.As a result, most experts feel that while keeping an eye on liquidity is atthe very least well-advised, they also say that focussing on illiquid assetsas a percent of core assets as a liquidity measurement as closely as Cranmerdoes in his study is too narrow.  "When I look at liquidity, I can't look at asingle ratio," says the OCC's Brosnan.  "I look at (borrowing) capacity, aswell as asset quality issues, management issues, and the stability ofearnings.  To the extent that these things, and capital, are solid, we'rehappy."There are important cost, regulatory and accounting issues, often unremarked,that are driving the turning of U.S.  banks to securitization and asset salesas a source of liquidity.  The cost of operating a branch system to gatherdeposits, for instance, is a largely hidden, but real cost.  Also, says theOCC's Brosnan, securitization improves a bank's capital position.  "You get tofund off-balance sheet, and get a continually growing earnings stream withoutraising capital by a proportional amount."Auto loans, for instance, must be reserved against at an 8% rate, whilesecuritizing such a loan requires no reserves and releases that 8% to the bankto re-lend, explains Brosnan.  But since earnings from securitizations andasset sales flow to non-interest income on a company's annual report, it'sdifficult to measure directly the impact of that activity on the bank'sliquidity position.Cranmer doesn't disagree with this analysis.  "Securitization is a prettypowerful force on the consumer side of the market, and a clear alternative" tocore deposits, he says.  "To the extent you're creating internally generatedfunds, that's liquidity.  But while a company that's leveraged one-to-one oreven two-to-one can fund most of its needs internally, a company that'sleveraged 20-to-one never can."The growth of these sophisticated financings have allowed bankers to likewisebecome much more sophisticated in their use of the capital markets,derivatives and risk management, which is leading them away from a reliance oncore deposits as a primary source of liquidity, says Cooper & Lybrand'sFormant.  And as a result, core deposit levels don't really reflect a bank'strue liquidity.Approaching Obsolescence"I think it's becoming an obsolete measurement," he says.  "Not completelyobsolete; but the stated composition of a bank's superficial liquidity andmatching funds may not be what it really is, if you look at some of theoff-balance sheet financings, and some of the derivatives, which may changethe composition of that liquidity."The issue, then, isn't whether banks have money to lend, but how they get it."The real measure of liquidity is, what's the quality of the bank, and how arepeople looking at it?"  says the OCC's Brosnan.There's the rub; market perception.  When a bank turns from core deposits tothe money markets for much of their liquidity, everything depends on how it'sviewed on the trading floor.  And while securitization, and professionalmarkets, are perfectly reasonable venues for liquidity when properly managed,they can also turn on borrowers like tigers, in a sort of extremely grown-upversion of high school popularity.For a domestic example of how fast a good thing can go bad, look no furtherthan Continental Illinois Corp., say observers.  Once one of the nation'spremier banks, Continental Illinois was prevented under Illinois regulationsfrom having a branch system, and therefore direct access to stable coredeposits.  The result was that it had to fund itself in the money marketsevery day, to the tune of billions of dollars.Of course, other Chicago banks had to do the same, and prospered.  But in1984, a connected series of events led to its being solvent on a Friday andbroke next Monday.  Headlines and a federal reorganization inevitablyfollowed.Nightmares like that can be useful in keeping bankers from a terminal case ofcomplacency, but they're also easy to ignore, especially as the tides offinancial fashion sweep from coast to coast.  That, says Cranmer, is why nowis a good time to buttress a bank's balance sheet."There's always a credit cycle, and when times are good, you want to buildyour balance sheet in anticipation of the next down cycle," he says.  Headvises bank to stop relying so much on overnight Fed funds and to staggermaturities, so that a bank isn't caught one day carrying both a big marketbasket and a low credit rating.Sounds like common sense.  But are banks doing this?  Not really, saysCranmer.  "The whole criticism I have of the industry overall, is that they'retending to short-fund themselves.  It does cost more money to issue five-yearbank notes than to borrow overnight Fed funds, but the difference is only 50basis points.""This is something banks haven't really had to face up to, because they couldalways fund with their core deposits," Cranmer adds.  "But they want toaccommodate their long-term customers and they want to go to the closingdinners and they want to sit at the lead table.  There are all sorts ofmotivations; it just doesn't seem to me that a lot of the syndicated loansbanks are making these days are real economical."If this has a certain unhappily familiar ring to it, NYU's Professor Smith isunsurprised-and unmoved."The premium in banking, as always, goes to those who know what they're doing,and understand the problems they face, and don't squander their funds onbadly-priced loans just to gain some sort of ephemeral leadership in a marketthat may not matter to them," he says.  "What they ought to be doing isasking, 'How are we going to compete in the retail market with the mutualfunds, and how are we going to compete in the wholesale markets with theinvestment banks?'"Good questions, of course, and critical for the big picture.  But lending andspread management are the bread-and-butter of banking.  Unless the entirenotion of banking is revolutionized, banks need to be occupied with fundingissues.  Core deposits may not have the starring role they once did, but it'shard to imagine them fading into the background any time soon.Andrew Reinbach is a freelance financial writer in Shrewsbury, NJ.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Industry:  Taking It To The CourtsAmid the hoopla over the proposed merger of Chemical Banking Corp.  and ChaseManhattan Corp., there's an alarm sounded by several recent merger challengesthat threatens only to get louder.  Community activists are no longer willingto simply lick their wounds when the deals get approved and their wishes gounmet.  Now, they're suing to try to get the deals overturned.The hotbed of this activity has been New York; it's been spearheaded by InnerCity Press/Community on the Move, a Bronx-based community group whoseexecutive director, Matthew Lee, has challenged a series of bank mergers inthe past few years.  Lee and his group went to court recently to fight boththe Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s approval of GreenPoint Bank'sacquisition of 60 Home Savings Bank branches and Chase's acquisition of mutualfund advisory businesses from U.S.  Trust Corp.In the former, a federal court actually issued a stay of the FDICapproval-then concluded that no relief was warranted, largely becauseGreenPoint had already made moot Inner City's chief complaint by establishinga presence in the Bronx.  Inner City sued to block the Chase-U.S.  Trustmerger on the grounds that Chase has discriminated in its mortgage lending.The court let the deal go forward, but agreed to review the administrativerecord.As the courts ruminate, the process for evaluating Chase-Chemical is goingthrough predictable paces.  The Federal Reserve Board and the New York StateBanking Department (the new Chase, as the banks call their merged entity, hasopted for a state charter) held a highly structured, two-day hearing inmid-November at which some 150 people testified.Anxious to cover all bases, the Fed extended the comment period by 11days-then tacked on another three days.  The state banking department alonereceived thousands of pages of testimony.  Much of what they heard and readwas utterly predictable, with executives from Chase and Chemical defendingtheir community service record and many activists challenging it.  A number oflegislators got into the act, with Republicans generally lauding the mergerand liberal Democrats from New York City raising objections.  In fact, aconsortium of Democrats later banded together to urge regulators to strikedown the deal.Lee, who seems to chase Chase like Ahab pursued Moby Dick-Inner City has takenthe bank on in every merger and chartering issue in the past couple ofyears-urged the regulators to deny the deal on fair lending grounds.  Chase,he argued, "is the most exclusionary banking organization in New York."What appears to be behind the legal truculence is activists' sense thatregulators remain loath to intervene in merger applications beyond a politethroat-clearing and sotto voce advice to the banks to put up a bit more cash.In a recent article in The New York Times, Ralph Nader wrote thatChase/Chemical's pledge to boost lending in underserved areas "isunenforceable, but it does provide cover for regulators eager to rubber-stampthe mergers."Nader urged a rewriting of the Bank Merger Act "by placing greater emphasis ondetermining the 'public interest' in these mergers."  He added that theJustice Department should adopt tougher standards for measuring bankcompetition than those prevalent in the Reagan-Bush era.Nader isn't likely to get his wish any time soon.  But massive mergers likeChase-Chemical throw a spotlight on job losses and other byproducts ofconsolidation that are impossible to ignore-and bring political considerationsinto the equation (see Point of View, November 1995).  Add to that the newlevel of legal scrutiny sought by Lee and his allies, and regulators may wellbe pushed to put big mergers through a finer screening.Lee's stated goal, an outright denial, is almost unthinkable.  Chemical has alegacy of "outstanding" Community Reinvestment Act ratings, and the two banksannounced a five-year, $18-billion pledge for community reinvestment (thoughmuch of it is nationwide, and targeted not at urban reinvestment but at"affordable mortgages").In an interview, Lee snorts that "it's the least well-defined of any of the(bank) mega-pledges...  If they'd made a $2-billion pledge with a specificcommitment, it would have been much better."Lee hints that if the Fed okays the merger-a decision could come as early aslate this month-his group may head back to court.  That depends in part, hesays, on how Inner City fares with its two ongoing suits.  If the only way toget CRA enforcement is through denying an application, that's the logicalroute to pursue, he adds."I expect the courts to slap him down, but one never knows," says WarrenTraiger, a New York attorney specializing in community reinvestment issues."The standard for overturning any administrative decision, of being arbitraryand capricious, is a pretty high hurdle."Traiger predicts that New York regulators will work "in tandem" with the Fedon Chase/Chemical:  "I can't imagine a divergence."  The pitch and the volumeof the criticism isn't unexpected, given that the merger will create thenation's largest bank, and the regulators can't tune it out.  Don't besurprised if the new Chase winds up making loan commitments for a few billiondollars more before the deal is sealed and delivered.-Jeffrey MarshallBack to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Mortgages:  Servicing Rights:  Still In DemandIn the third quarter of 1995, the transfer of servicing rights to loanspurchased by the nation's Congressionally chartered secondary marketingagencies fell by 7%.This barometer of activity in the lucrative field of mortgage servicing may bean indication to some that the market for home servicing rights is levelingoff.  After all, in the past banks and large mortgage bankers have beenwilling to pay up to seven times a loan's servicing fee for the right toacquire servicing in the open market.  Lately, prices have fallen back to lessstratospheric levels.Does that mean the golden days of mortgage banking are over?  Don't bet on it.Although there has been somewhat of a lull in activity in recent months,investment bankers and advisors that buy and sell servicing for their clientscite a number of different reasons for the slowdown.Some believe that buyers are waiting to see what happens with the sale ofPrudential Home Mortgage Corp., Clayton, MO, an $80-billion servicer owned byPrudential Insurance Co.  "They want to see what type of price it commands andwho winds up with it," says one Wall Streeter.  "Once that is known, some ofthe bigger players might want to rethink their strategy."Greg Bennett, managing director for Los Angeles-based Hamilton, Carter, Smith,believes there has actually been a supply shortage in servicing in recentmonths, a situation he blames on an accounting change made by the FinancialAccounting Standards Board.  The change, referred to as FAS 122 (the number ofthe rule), allows banks, mortgage bankers and other lenders to "capitalize" ontheir balance sheets the servicing rights to loans they originate.Previously, in the arcane world of accounting, only servicing rights that werepurchased on the open market could count as something of value on aninstitution's balance sheet.  (The FASB rule is prospective, not retroactive.)Bennett believes that a number of depositories that are heavily involved inservicing "have been lulled into believing that FAS 122 has changed thebusiness, when in fact it has not."  Many firms are holding onto servicingbecause they can count it as an asset without first having to sell it.  Intheory, this doesn't sound so bad-but capitalization does not immediatelytranslate into "real" cash."A mortgage servicer is still going to need cash," says Bennett, who hasbrokered many a servicing deal in his day.  "The rule change didn't change theeconomics of the business."The HCS executive anticipates that it is only a matter of time beforecompanies that have been hoarding servicing begin bringing it to market onceagain.  Once supply increases, prices likely will fall.But other factors are affecting the market as well.  As U.S.  Banker went topress in December, the bond market was continuing to rally, driving long-terminterest rates down even further.  John Wolf, a technology executive for themortgage division of Alltel Information Services, Jacksonville, FL, sees theslide in rates accelerating mortgage refinancings-which, in turn, causesservicing rights to "run off."When this occurs, as it did during the refinancing boom of 1993, buyers ofservicing rights on new loans usually claw each other in the open market,which increases prices.  That is good for servicing sellers, but bad forbuyers.Currently, prices for new servicing rights on conventional, fixed-rate loansare holding steady at about six times the servicing fee, brokers report.  (Thetypical servicing fee on a Federal National Mortgage Association-purchasedloan is 25 basis points.)  But if rates fall just a bit, another price war fornewly originated product could accelerate.In other words, the outlook for servicing rights is a bright one in 1996, andexperts anticipate that banks will continue to be big purchasers.  However, assome banks continue to gobble up mortgage banking franchises (and theservicing rights that go along with them), a few are exiting the businessentirely.  KeyCorp of Cleveland recently sold its servicing division, as didBarclays American.Bank of Boston Corp.  is spinning off BancBoston Mortgage Corp., Jacksonville,FL, a $40-billion servicer, while First Bank System of Minneapolis is on theverge of selling its mortgage division, FBS Mortgage Corp., St.  Paul.Many of the current sales are being facilitated through a competitive bidprocess, in which an offering circular on the target company is circulated toprospective buyers.  However, some investment bankers feel that this year themarket could see an increase in privately negotiated transactions.  "I thinkprivate, or 'direct' deals, represent a growing segment of the business," saysTed Jadlos, a broker with United Financial Inc., Denver.Based in Washington, D.C., Paul Muolo is a senior editor of National MortgageNews, a Faulkner & Gray publication.Back to Headline List CopyrightU.S. BANKER via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996PeopleEmbracing A Dynamic MarketJOHN A.  NIGHTitle:  President and CEO, MidAmerica Bank, St.  Paul, MNNew situation:  Comes to the Twin Cities from Wyoming, where he had beenpresident and CEO of Rocky Mountain Bank in Cheyenne before it was acquired in1994 by Metropolitan Financial Corp.Dynamic environment:  Nigh, an Indiana native, says he has had exposure overthe years to Minnesota and always admired the market.  "It's one ofstrongest-growing economic areas in the country," he says.Strategic thrust:  Plans to add new business services to MidAmerica, which has27 branches and $650 million in assets in Minnesota and Wisconsin.  Says thatentails offering "a big basket of services," including cash management, to avaried group of industries.  The margins in that business are attractive, and"when you have such a diverse basket, you have a pretty diverse risksituation."Philosophy:  "We don't re-create the wheel.  We take a group of services, andbundle and interlock them.  This gives the borrowers a lot better perspective,sometimes, than they get elsewhere."  Believes that "the CEO is the number onemarketing person in the bank.  This is a sales business.  The whole game isthe manner of delivery."Competition:  Acknowledges the prowess of superregional competitors likeNorwest Corp.  and First Bank System.  "We're not going to take that groupon," he says.  Believes there is a very viable place for a small bank that is"both very high-touch and very high-tech."Background:  Started in banking 23 years ago in Omaha, and ran two smallinstitutions in the 1970s.  Went to Wyoming in 1983, where he worked for KeyBancshares (predecessor of KeyCorp) and rose to executive vice president.Moved to Rocky Mountain Bank after it was formed in 1988 from the combinationof two failed thrifts.Still in the Snow Belt:  Acknowledges that he can't expect warmer winters inMinnesota, but says, "I think the wind is worse in Wyoming."Plotting A Global CourseJOSEPH BARTOLONITitle:  Managing Director, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce's Wood GundySecurities Inc.'s Global Technology UnitResponsibilities:  Supervises systems development and product support for theinvestment bank of the Toronto-based commercial banking company.The vision thing:  Working closely with his boss, Tom Kielty, Wood Gundy'ssenior vice president for technology, on a new information technology strategyto support the firm's global capital markets and other securities operations.Small is beautiful:  "The whole client/server environment is the core of ourdirection," he says.  During the past 15 years, Bartoloni has observed smallerplatforms like workstations and personal computer local-area networks assumethe dominant role in investment banking.  "I don't even know if we have anymainframes in our current environment."  In the past, workstations and PCswere often just stopgap solutions for setting up new offices in London orTokyo.  Now, the small systems perform almost all of the firm's computingtasks.Need for speed:  In a world where dollars fly past yen at the speed of light,and the European countries are in the midst of creating a common currency fromscratch, someone in Bartoloni's job has to work fast.  "The markets are thedominating factor," and there's never a lot of time to work on new projects.Background:  Ran a management consulting business for commercial andinvestment banks for the past two years.  Spent the previous 13 years ininvestment banking, including successive six-year stints at Merrill Lynch from1980-86 and First Boston from 1986-92.  Also spent two years at LehmanBrothers.Education:  B.S.  and MBA from New York University, where he also studiedcomputer science.Spare time:  Spends his free time with his wife, son and daughter, and he alsocoaches the kids' soccer and basketball teams.People is edited by Jeffrey Marshall.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-2IA074-000493-B044-30http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi90.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012337 text/html 73219HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:21:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:07 GMTContent-length: 73032Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi90.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNet February 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES A PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR? (540 words) ACCOUNTANTS GET LITIGATION RELIEF FOR CHRISTMAS (962 words) REPORT PUBLISHED ON PROVISIONS (136 words) WORKSHOP DEFINES OBJECTIVES (299 words) TRADE IN PROFESSIONAL SERVICES (278 words) WHO HOLDS THE GOVERNANCE REINS? (186 words) IASC LOOKS AGAIN AT SEGMENTAL REPORTING (148 words) NEWS IFAC RELEASE GUIDANCE ON IT (46 words) EUROPE: FEE STATES GROWTH IN ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITING (161 words) ECO-AUDIT STANDARDS ARE 'ACCEPTABLE' (71 words) EU GREEN ACCOUNTING GUIDELINES PUBLISHED (179 words) AUSTRALIA: SOCIETY CALLS FOR E50'S WITHDRAWAL (414 words) GOODWILL ED ISSUED (255 words) ED RELEASED ON NON-CURRENT ASSETS (256 words) EQUITY METHODS PROPOSED (258 words) INTANGIBLE ASSETS TO BE DERECOGNISED (219 words) LACK OF CONSENSUS ON DEPRECIATION POLICY (239 words) BULGARIA: ACCOUNTING FOR BANKS STANDARD APPROVED (295 words) FRANCE: PEER REVIEW RESULTS PUBLISHED (253 words) FRANCE: FREE SERVICES FOR NEW COMPANIES (215 words) ISRAEL: COMMISSION REJECTS AUDIT STANDARD (280 words) ISRAEL: QUALITY CONTROL RULE FACES REBELLION (91 words) ISRAEL: LAW INCREASES AUDITORS' LIABILITIES (111 words) ISRAEL: ROTATION OF AUDITORS IS A MYTH (75 words) ITALY: COOPERS' AUDIT APPOINTMENT REVOKED (384 words) ITALY: PROFESSION DISPUTE RAGES ON (141 words) NEW ZEALAND: AGREEMENT REACHED ON JOINT ED (153 words) NEW ZEALAND: NEW CHEQUE LAW AFFECTS ACCOUNTANTS (326 words) NEW ZEALAND: SHARING THE COST OF STANDARDS (95 words) UNITED KINGDOM: 'EFFECTIVENESS' SHOULD GO SAYS APB (506 words) UNITED KINGDOM: ACCA SEEKS CHARTERED DESCRIPTION (183 words) UNITED KINGDOM: PURE CASHFLOW STATEMENT PROPOSED (256 words) COUNCILS APPROVE MERGER PROPOSALS (238 words) UNITED KINGDOM: EXEMPTION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES ON CARDS (164 words) UNITED STATES: AMEX'S VICTORY ON FLORIDA LAW (238 words) UNITED STATES: ORANGE COUNTY CLAIMS KPMG WAS NEGLIGENT (151 words) UNITED STATES: BANKERS PRESS FASB FOR FAS 115 RELIEF (178 words) DTTI - A STORY OF TWO HALVES (91 words) BDO GO FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTH (139 words) E&Y EMBARK ON AN EASTERN ADVENTURE (87 words) MRI PLUNGE INTO SCANDINAVIA (108 words) STEIN TO LEAD KPMG'S INTERNATIONAL SERVICES (54 words) HLB ENJOYS A SINGAPORE SLING (97 words) CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996A PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR?While accountants in the US were celebrating the victory in narrowingliability, some practitioners in the UK were starting to count hard thecost of unlimited, as well as joint and several, liability.The final shape of the US tort reform, which became law just before theChristmas break, looks a sensible measure which should protectaccountants from the excesses of frivolous actions, but leaves themexposed enough to want to maintain the highest professional standards(see page 2 for full report).Unfortunately, the issues are not so clear-cut in the UK where theconjunction of several events has tangled the debate. Firstly, there isthe Binders/ADT legal case. The action related to an agreed bid byBritannia Security Group, audited by Binders. After the acquisition ADTfound the profits and net assets over stated. The judge found that notonly had Binders been negligent but they owed a duty of care to ADTbecause the lead partner told ADT in an 'off the cuff' remark that hestood by the firm's audit opinion. Out goes Caparo where it was decidedan auditor did not have a duty of care to third parties - unless theAppeal Court says something different.There is only bad news and worse newsOn to the damages: the bad news was that the judge awarded damagestotalling #105m ($160m): the worse news is that the firm only hasinsurance cover of #71m leaving partners to pick up the tag for therest - an uncomfortable #300,000 each for the 100 or so partnersinvolved. Binders partners are left to sweat for a year or so and therest of the profession can declare that something must be done to solvethe problem they have, in part, created. The obvious solution would bereform the law, but that looks unlikely to happen quickly, with agovernment gearing up for an election, despite an official review ofthe problem which is due to be published soon.So the Big 6 firms lost patience and decided to take matters into theirown hands.Incorporation seems the best way forwardBefore the ADT decision, KPMG partners had already announced that theywere going to incorporate as the best solution they could find to theliability crisis. And alongside incorporation they have promised fullfinancial disclosure. Whether the revelation over size of partners'drawing helps or hinders the firms' cause remains to be seen.At the same time as the ADT bombshell, Ernst & Young and PriceWaterhouse announced they intend to avoid possible financial disasterby forming limited liability partnerships in the offshore haven ofJersey. All they need is the legislation due this summer from theJersey Parliament which would be similar to Delaware law in the US and,in theory at least, would protect partners' private assets.Whether any of these moves will, in the long run, help firmsprofessionally, commercially or on the PR front, remains to be seen.There are many examples of trends starting in the US and quicklyreaching the UK and elsewhere. In the case of tort reform, for UKpartners at least, this particular trend cannot cross the pond toosoon.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ACCOUNTANTS GET LITIGATION RELIEF FOR CHRISTMASJust days before Christmas, the US accounting profession's long heldwish for securities litigation reform was finally granted. It was thebest Christmas present imaginable for a profession that has beenbattered by enormous legal expenses.For the past four years, the American Institute of Certified PublicAccountants (AICPA) and the major accounting firms had intenselylobbied Congress for litigation reform. 'We are extremely pleased withthe legislation enacted,' Margaret Simmons, legislative affairscoordinator for AICPA, told WAR.In recent years, the Big 6 firms have collectively spent as much as 12%of their annual fee income defending or settling litigation. The newlegislation should significantly lighten that burden.Two key provisions of the new legislation, formally known as thePrivate Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, are expected to curbthe number of lawsuits brought against accountants. The first has to dowith what is known as the pleading stage of a case. The new lawrequires that plaintiffs in a securities lawsuit make specificallegations of management fraud at the time the suit is filed, saidSimmons.This was not a requirement in the past. Plaintiff attorneys had beenaccused of turning the discovery stage into fishing expeditionsdesigned to rack up huge legal bills. The mounting legal costsencouraged many defendants to cut their losses by settling out ofcourt, even though they might have been innocent of any wrongdoing.Legal scholars say that the new pleading standard raises the thresholdfor a case to proceed to discovery, which should significantly reduceaccounting firms' legal expenses.A second important provision of the reform bill does away with thejoint and several liability system that had been in place. Under thenew law, defendants can only be held responsible for the proportion ofthe losses they are deemed to have caused. In the past, if a companywent insolvent and its auditors were deemed to have contributed to evena small percentage of investor losses, the accounting firm could beheld fully liable for all investor losses.Under the new law, joint and several liability remains in place only ininstances where the accounting firm is shown to have participated inthe fraud.AICPA president Barry Melancon said the law now strikes a fair balancebetween the rights of truly defrauded investors and outsideprofessionals 'who had become victims of a small group ofentrepreneurial lawyers abusing the legal system.'Other important protections afforded by the new law include:- A 'safe harbour' provision protects companies, and their advisers,from claims of fraud in the event that their prediction of futureperformance do not pan out.- A provision requires courts to sanction plaintiffs and plaintiffattorneys who initiate frivolous lawsuits.- The statute of limitations for filing securities lawsuits remainsunchanged. Plaintiffs must file claims within three years of the timethe violation occurred or within one year of the time the violation isdiscovered.- A provision allows judges to select as lead plaintiff in a class-action lawsuit the party with the greatest financial stake. Someplaintiffs had been accused of taking small stakes in numerouscompanies, thereby positioning themselves to become lead plaintiffs tothe largest number of potential class actions.The accounting community's original reform wish-list included severalother provisions which became casualties of the legislative process anddid not become law. These included a fee shifting proposal that wouldhave required unsuccessful plaintiffs to pay all legal fees incurred bythe defendants.All in all, the new law provides accountants all the protections theycould have reasonably hoped for, Simmons said.As a tradeoff for the protections afforded by the act, accountants willbe subjected to additional oversight on the part of the Securities andExchange Commission (SEC). The new law gives the SEC the power toprosecute accountants, lawyers and underwriters who wittingly helpcorporate executives commit fraud.The SEC had previously had that power stripped from it in a 1994Supreme Court case. The court held that corporate advisers could not beheld liable for the actions of their clients.Another significant concession made by the accounting profession is aprovision of the law which make accountants responsible to reportfraud. An auditor who uncovers fraud during an audit must report theillegality to the company's audit committee, its board of directors or,in some circumstances, the SEC.The new legislation is notable not only for the protections it affordsaccountants, but also for the dramatic manner in which it became law.In early December, both houses of Congress voted on and passed thefinal version of the litigation reform bill by wide margins. It waspresented to President Clinton, who had earlier expressed his support,to be signed into law.At the eleventh hour, the president unexpectedly vetoed thelegislation. The veto reportedly came after the president held aprivate meeting with William Lerach, a prominent member of theplaintiff bar and one of the largest contributors to the Democraticparty which funded Clinton's presidential bid.In response, the AICPA fired off a terse press release decrying theveto. It read in part: 'The President has once again neglected the willof the people and caved in to a small group of wealthy, powerfulcontributors.'Despite the veto, the coalition supporting the bill held together. On20 December and 22 December respectively, the House of Representativesand the Senate voted to override the presidential veto (a two-thirdssuper majority was required in each chamber) and passed the bill intolaw.The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 was the first vetooverride suffered by the Clinton administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996REPORT PUBLISHED ON PROVISIONSFASB has published a report, Provisions: Their recognition, measurementand disclosure in financial statements, in conjunction with standard-setters in the UK, Canada and Australia as well as the InternationalAccounting Standards Committee. The report is aimed at developingsolutions to accounting problems based on common accounting frameworks.FASB chairman Dennis Beresford noted that: 'Accounting for provisionsis an important topic for standard-setters around the world becausethey are often material in reporting financial performance. Very littleaccounting guidance currently exists for provisions, which may lead toa diversity in practice.'The report explores the basic issues of when provisions should berecognised, how they should be measured, and what disclosures should bemade. Additionally, the report considers specific applications tofuture operating losses and restructuring costs, areas in whichprovisions are often recognised.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996WORKSHOP DEFINES OBJECTIVESAn UNCTAD workshop on environmental accounting recently establishedpriorities for its current work programme. Participants decided toprepare a synthesis of existing financial accounting requirements, lookat links between financial reporting and general environmentalmonitoring information, and work on systems which produce environmentalcost accounting information for companies.Following on from the 1995 conference of the Intergovernmental WorkingGroup of Experts in International Standards of Accounting and Reporting(ISAR) which presented a series of studies on environmental accounting(see WAR, April 1995, p2), participants from several countries met inGeneva recently to discuss what further contribution UNCTAD could makein this area. The ISAR conference had suggested that some form ofguidelines could be produced.The working party defined environmental accounting as taking infinancial accounting (eg provisions for decommissioning costs), 'fullcost' management accounting, general environmental reporting, andenvironmental audit. It decided that work could be done to present andintegrate existing financial accounting rules which bear onenvironmental issues as a first step. Similarly, a study could be madeof environmental reporting indicators in use to see which were the mostmeaningful, and examine whether any useful link could be built betweenfinancial reporting and the present free-ranging, voluntaryenvironmental reporting which is being done by some companies.Some companies are experimenting with cost accounting which provides apicture of environmental costs. Participants observed that much of thiswork was not published because of its confidential nature, but thisprevented rapid development. UNCTAD had a role there, but it was feltthat it should not involve itself further in environmental auditing.It was also decided that UNCTAD should look at the possibility ofproviding an electronic bulletin board for environmental accountingliterature, as well as developing education and training programmes indue course.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TRADE IN PROFESSIONAL SERVICESThe World Trade Organisation (WTO) working party on professionalservices, which is working on cross-border provision of accountingservices, had its third meeting in January. The meeting set out a listof subjects to be addressed in a model agreement, and asked for furtherinformation on professional qualifications in developing countries.The WTO's council for trade in services was established as part of thelast GATT agreement to prepare the way for a liberalisation of cross-border trade in services, with accounting as a priority. It hasestablished a working party which met for the first time last October(see WAR November 1995, p3) whose objective is to prepare a modelagreement for cross-border trade in accounting services.At its January meeting in Geneva, the working party, to which all WTOmembers are entitled to send representatives, agreed on a list ofissues which would need to be addressed in any model agreement. Thislist includes questions such as:- mutual recognition of professional qualifications- minimum periods of post-qualification experience- minimum educational requirements- professional liability arrangements- relationships with local professional bodies- use of IASC standards.Members of the working party agreed to review these issues from anational perspective and meet again in March to discuss them.Although the working party had already been given extensive briefingsby IFAC and UNCTAD in October, some members felt that they need furtherinformation about conditions in developing countries before they couldproceed. The collection of such data would take some time, and wouldhave the effect of considerably slowing progress, which could, ofcourse, be one reason for suggesting it.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996WHO HOLDS THE GOVERNANCE REINS?A taskforce of the International Capital Markets Group (ICMG) hasreleased a report entitled Who holds the reins?, focusing on theinternational dimension of corporate governance, from a review ofcorporate governance practices and issues in countries such as the US,UK and Canada.The taskforce encourages all major companies to disclose the key areasof their corporate governance processes so that they have appropriatechecks in place to direct and manage businesses, and so that investorsunderstand that differences exist between countries. The taskforcehowever ruled out the idea of prescribing an international standard forcorporate governance because, as ICMG members stated: 'Governance isabout behaviour. It is deeply rooted in national cultures which varywidely, reflecting the economic, social and legal traditions of eachcountry.'ICMG is encouraging debate on its recommendations among its constituentmembers - the Federation Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs, theInternational Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and the Section onBusiness Law of the International Bar Association.Copies of Who holds the reins? are available from IFAC, 114 West 47thStreet, Suite 2410, New York, NY 10036.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996IASC LOOKS AGAIN AT SEGMENTAL REPORTINGThe International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), has publishedan Exposure Draft, E51 on segmental reporting which proposes majorchanges to its existing standard, published 15 years ago.E51 proposes to change the way in which segments are identified and addseveral new segment disclosure requirements. It would also make anenterprise's internal organisation and management structure and itssystem of internal financial reporting to the chief executive officerthe basis for identifying the dominant source and nature of risks andtherefore the business or geographical segments reported.A safety net provision will ensure that if there is evidence thatinternally reported segments combine parts of the business withdifferent risks and returns, they must be disaggregated for externalreporting purposes.The E51 proposals are the result of cooperation between IASC and NorthAmerican standard-setters, as well as extensive consultations withfinancial analysts and multinational corporations.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996IFAC RELEASE GUIDANCE ON ITThe Education Committee of IFAC has issued a new InternationalEducation Guideline, Information technology in the accountingcurriculum.The Guideline recognises that developments in the area of IT havesignificant implications for the accountancy profession and for the preand post-qualification education of IFAC members.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EUROPE: FEE STATES GROWTH IN ENVIRONMENTAL AUDITINGFEE has published a survey called Environmental accounting, reportingand auditing: Survey of current activities and developments within theaccountancy profession covering all 15 European Union countries, aswell as Iceland, Israel, Norway and Switzerland.It concludes that there is clear and definite growth in the importanceattached to environmental accounting, reporting and auditing inbusiness across the EU, but environmental information is still largelyrestricted to qualitative information with no assessment of thefinancial impact.The survey is based on the responses to a questionnaire circulatedamong FEE's 34 member organisations in 22 countries.FEE said that: 'The development of an accounting and managementreporting framework which specifically addresses environmental issuesis perhaps some way off. In the meantime, firms should be encouraged todisclose more detailed environmental information in their financialstatements with an indication of the financial impact, while auditorsshould cooperate more closely with experts and advisers from otherdisciplines in the environmental field.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ECO-AUDIT STANDARDS ARE 'ACCEPTABLE'EU Environment Ministers meeting in Brussels on 18 December raised noobjections to the British, Irish and Spanish standards for eco-audits.The standards need formal recognition under the EU's environmentalmanagement and audit system regulation, which came into being lastApril. The British standard BS7750, the Irish Standard IS310, FirstEdition and the Spanish standard UNE77-801(2)-94 were referred to theCouncil of Ministers owing to disagreement in the EMAS regulatorycommittee.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EU GREEN ACCOUNTING GUIDELINES PUBLISHEDBusinesses in the EU can now include environmental expenditure in theirannual accounts. Guidelines have been drawn up by the AccountingAdvisory Forum as an advisory document for the EC, and focus onapplying the provisions in the EU's 4th and 7th Company Law Directiveson annual and consolidated accounts to environmental considerations.Although not legally binding, they are the only green accountingguidelines to be formulated at EU level so far. The EC is urgingcompanies to use them in response to a growing insistence byshareholders and investors that companies shoulder their environmentalprotection responsibilities, although it said that the report does notreflect its official position.The objective of the guidelines, entitled Environmental issues infinancial reporting is to ensure that company accounts paint anaccurate picture of:- a company's attitude towards the environment, and- the impact of environmental risks and liabilities on a company'sfinancial position.The document provides recommendations on the definition and disclosureof environmental expenditure and the recognition, measurement anddisclosure of environmental risks and liabilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996AUSTRALIA: SOCIETY CALLS FOR E50'S WITHDRAWALThe Australian Society CPAs is calling for the immediate withdrawal ofE50, the ISAC's proposed International Accounting Standard onintangibles. In an unprecedented public attack on IASC actions, ASCPApresident Jim Kropp said the proposed standard 'out of touch with themodern economy' and will 'discriminate against companies which haveassets of this kind'.'There is a need to reassess how to measure, recognise and discloseidentifiable intangible assets - and this should not be done byredefinition of terms nor by taking the issue outside the context ofexisting standard.'The Society has sent the IASC a submission based on a recent Societyreport Accounting for identifiable intangible assets includinggoodwill. The report argues that intangibles should not be treated anydifferently from other assets.Jim Kropp, a partner in Price Waterhouse, Sydney, maintains there isincreasing diversity among international standards addressing therecognition and measurement of assets.'In this draft, for example, there are many exemptions, as well asinconsistencies with other international standards such as IAS 16'Property plant and equipment' and IAS 22 'Business combinations' whichwould penalise enterprises developing or holding intellectual assets.'What we most strenuously object to is the impact on those enterpriseswith intangible assets.' In most cases, these companies will be forcedto amortise the asset within 20 years - a period which is often muchless than the useful life of the asset - and a period which will forcecompanies with extremely valuable intangibles to suffer a paper loss inreal company value. 'Such a harsh approach is unwarranted and out oftouch with modern economic reality.'Kropp said that some assets have an indeterminate useful life and wouldbe best measured by subjecting them to a recoverable test rather thanthe amortisation regime advocated in E50. The Society also criticisedthe restrictive approach taken to initial recognition of an intangibleasset being based solely on cost. The use of an 'other value' approach,provided it can be reliably measured, is appropriate, particularly inrelation to intangibles, the submission states.The ASCPA wants E50 to be withdrawn and reconsidered by the IASSteering Committee.'In its current form, the Society would not recommend to the AustralianAccounting Standards Boards and the Public Sector Accounting StandardsBoard to pursue Australian harmonisation with this draft standard,'Kropps said. 'This is a good example of why Australian standard-settersshould maintain strong influence over the direction of internationalstandards.'Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GOODWILL ED ISSUED'The Australian Accounting Standards Board (AASB), and the PublicSector Accounting Standards Board (PSASB), have approved the issue ofan Exposure Draft which proposes changing the accounting standard ongoodwill to require entities to amortise goodwill on a straight-linebasis.They say the effect of the amendments would 'make the Australianstandard and existing practice more comparable with standards andpractices in most other countries.'The main effect of the proposal will be to preclude the use, by a smallnumber of entities, of the 'Inverse Sum Of the Years Digits' (ISOYD)and similar methods.The ISOYD method results in small amortisation charges in early yearsand the defers the bulk of amortisation charges to later years. InSeptember 1995, the Urgent Issues Group placed a moratorium on the useof ISOYD method until 1 July 1996, and requested the Boards to clarifythe standard.The Exposure Draft proposes that the standard will apply to reportingperiods ending on or after 30 June 1996. AASB chairman, Ken Spencer,notes that the scope of the current review of the standard is limitedto dealing with the issue referred to Boards by the UIG. Considerationof this issue could not be delayed and considered as part of a morecomprehensive review of the standards. International developments, suchas the new approach to accounting for goodwill being debated in the UK,are not likely to become clear before the UIG moratorium ends. TheExposure Draft is open for public comment until 15 February 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ED RELEASED ON NON-CURRENT ASSETSAASB and PSASB have released Exposure Draft on accounting for non-current assets. ED 70, proposes amendments to the depreciation andrevaluation standards to remove impediments for entities adoptingcurrent values for non-current assets. The proposed amendments to therevaluation standard would permit entities to revalue non-currentassets on a progressive basis, as long as all assets within therelevant class are revalued consistently within a three year period.The standard, which currently require revaluations of all assets withina class to be completed as at the same date, is considered to impose anonerous requirement on public sector entities which have adopted apolicy of revaluing non-current assets frequently and on an on-goingbasis.ED 70 permits entities, adopting a current cost or deprival valuebases, an option in the disclosure of asset value. ED 70 also proposesthat the definition of 'useful life' in the depreciation standards bechanged to reflect the period over which an entity expects to use anassets rather than the period over which the asset could remain usefulin some other environment.The Boards say this amendment will ensure that depreciation expensesare more closely related to the pattern of economic benefits consumedby the entity and that the amended standards will be more comparablewith pronouncements overseas.The comment period for ED 70 is short. It closes on 29 February 1996.The short period reflects the need for public sector entities to adoptthese amendments in preparing their financial reports for 30 June 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EQUITY METHODS PROPOSEDAASB and PSAB have also approved the issue of ED 71, Accounting forinvestments in associates by the equity method. The ED proposes thatentities equity account investments in associates in their financialstatements. The Boards note there is a perceived impediment in theCorporations Law to applying equity accounting on the face of thefinancial statements, and companies are disclosing information abouttheir associates in the notes to the financial statements.The Second Corporate Law Simplification Bill 1995 proposes to removethe perceived legal impediment to equity accounting.Now the Boards have responded by developing an Exposure Draft which, ifadopted, would bring Australian practices in this area into line withpractice overseas.The ED proposes that equity accounting be applied in the consolidatedfinancial statements for all investments in associates and, except inlimited circumstances, the cost method of accounting is to be appliedin the investor's separate financial statements.Other features of the draft proposals:- the equity method of accounting is to be applied in respect of allassociates. Associates are defined broadly to include associatedcompanies, partnerships, trusts and other forms of arrangement in whichthe investor has an ownership interest and has the capacity to exercisesignificant influence;- the carrying amount of an equity accounted investment must not exceedits net market value;The ED proposes that the subsequent standard will apply for reportingperiods ending on or after 30 June 1997. Closing date for publiccomment on the proposals is 31 March 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INTANGIBLE ASSETS TO BE DERECOGNISEDThe Urgent Issues Group (UIG) is continuing to examine the issue ofwhether internally generated identifiable intangible assets can be'derecognised'.The group notes that the accounting standards AASB 1010 and AAS 10,Accounting for the revaluation of non-current assets identify thecircumstances in which assets can be revalued downwards, and Statementof Accounting Concepts ASC 4, Definition and recognition of theelements of financial statements, identifies the circumstances in whichassets could be derecognised.At its most recent meeting the UIG concluded that the issue underconsideration was much broader than that the derecognition of onlyinternally generated intangible assets. The group agreed that it shouldclarify that a 'revaluation' included a change in accounting policiesrelated to the bases of measurement adopted for any class of assets.A once only change in the basis should be allowed, and that a changeback to a cost basis should be permitted only within the transitionalperiod.After this transitional period expires AASB 1010 and AAS 10 will onlyallow a downwards revaluation arising from a change in the basis ofmeasurement when the carrying amount of an asset is greater than itsrecoverable amount.In these circumstances AASB 1010 and AAS 10 will require that the assetnot be revalued below its recoverable amount.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996LACK OF CONSENSUS ON DEPRECIATION POLICYThe UIG has been unable to reach a consensus on the treatment ofchanges in the rate of depreciation which arise from revised estimatesof useful life or residual value.The alternatives canvassed by the UIG include depreciating the asset atthe new rate over its remaining life, or adjusting the carrying amountof the asset by making a catch-up adjustment in the profit and loss orother operating statement.The relevant accounting standards AASB 1021 and AAS 4, Depreciation ofnon-current assets do not specify how to deal with revisions ofestimates and the requirements of international standards vary as doespractice in Australia.Discussion at the UIG indicated that most Australian companies adopteda prospective approach and this was the practice in many overseascountries.To reach a consensus, 11 of the 16 UIG members must vote for, and nomore than two vote against, the proposed ruling.A majority of members favoured the prospective approach but there weremore than two members who did not think it correct. The group does notplan to discuss the issue any further.- Peter Day has been appointed chairman of the UIG in place of PeterEdwards who died last year. Day is currently managing director of GroupBusiness Services at CRA Ltd. He is a former chairman of the AustralianAccounting Standards Board and a former president of the Group of 100.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BULGARIA: ACCOUNTING FOR BANKS STANDARD APPROVEDA new National Accounting Standard (NAS) 16 has been approved by thegovernment in Bulgaria to replace the existing NAS 16. It deals withaccounting for banks and non-banking financial institutions.The new standard focuses mainly on financial statements, but it alsodeals with branches of foreign banks and non-banking organisations,performing banking transactions in Bulgaria with a permit (licence)issued by the Bulgarian National Bank.In this standard the Bulgarian National Bank is defined as theauthorised organisation to determine rules of accounting for bankoperations. The most significant difference between the old standardand the new one is that the detailed regulation of the principles ofaccounting for bank operations - which were described at length in theold standard - is absent in the latter. The other difference is thatthe primary accounting documents and ledgers, such as journal of theoperations, trial balance, general ledger, operation ledger etc, weredescribed in detail in the old standard. The structure of the NationalBank Chart of Accounts, in effect since 1 June 1995, was elaborated inthe old Chart of Accounts, while the new standard only briefly mentionsthe existence of such a Chart of Accounts.Opinions differ. Some experts think that the new Chart of Accounts ismuch more concise and clearer. Others - mainly bank experts - say thatit is much more incomplete and insufficient.NAS 16 has the following structure:- General provisions - describing the regulations and institutions theyare applicable for.- Definitions - giving definitions to the term financial institution,bank transaction, bank operation, individual item, accounting date,values.- Characteristics of the accounting policy.- Specific rules of accounting for bank operations.- Periodic financial statements. Financial statements.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE: PEER REVIEW RESULTS PUBLISHEDThe auditors' association, the Compagnie Nationale des Commissaires auxComptes (CNCC), and the stock market regulator, the Commission desOperations de Bourse (COB), have published their annual report for 1994on the review of audit files of listed companies and investment funds.The report notes that 94% of the cases were satisfactory, but theynoted problems concerning the treatment of intangibles in groupaccounts, the methods for determining provisions, and the completenessof the financial information provided by companies.COB and CNCC operate joint committees which review the audit files oflisted companies. This year the committees looked at 90 companies onthe main market and 37 on the second market as well as 39 investmentfunds.The review committees noted that the evaluation of internal controlshad improved and overall the number of problems noted had fallen,suggesting an improvement in audit quality. However, they said that themost common problems concerned the calculation of goodwill inconsolidated accounts and other intangibles and their depreciation.They also thought that the choices made by companies in excluding orincluding companies within the consolidation were not well-documentedor explained. They criticised the methods used by some companies incalculating provisions.CNCC has a programme of peer review for all audit engagements, althoughCOB participates only in the examination of the files of listedcompanies. In the year under review, in addition to the work on listedcompanies, CNCC looked at 4,400 audit files throughout France,involving the work of 2,200 auditors.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE: FREE SERVICES FOR NEW COMPANIESThe Ordre des Experts Comptables has undertaken a series of initiativesdesigned to encourage newly-formed businesses to use the services ofaccounting firms. These will involve free start-up advice and budgetpreparation, as well as reduced fees for work during the first threeyears of a company's life.An agreement signed by Rene Richol, president Ordre, and the Ministerof Finance in 1994 provided for free services for individualentrepreneurs in the first year of their activity, including budgetsand ultimately preparations of the first tax return. To this has nowbeen added two further agreements, with the Centres de gestion agrees(management centres) and the chambers of commerce.Historically the members of the Ordre have regarded the managementcentres, a government initiative to provide free advice to smallbusinesses, as competitors, but they have now agreed to providemanagement training for management centre clients, and developdiagnostic models which would help new small businesses to develop.The Ordre is offering up to three years of work at reduced fees forbusinesses which are members of an Association for the Development ofYoung Businesses. In addition it has agreed with the nationalorganisation of chambers of commerce to provide budgets for businessseeking finance. The chambers of commerce will help validate forecasts.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ISRAEL: COMMISSION REJECTS AUDIT STANDARDIn a surprise move, the Securities Commission has stated that it willnot accept accounts with new style audit report. In December 1995 theInstitute published a new version of the audit reports as part of itsplan to adopt many of the IFAC and IASC standards as soon as possible.The extended report refers specifically to the extent of the auditors'work. The standard which was to apply to all accounts ending or after31 December 1995 was firmly rejected by the Commission which claimedthat the new report is an attempt to reduce the auditors'responsibilities and liabilities.The Institute has stated that its only intention remains to explainclearly the extent of the work of the auditor and reduce theexpectation gap of shareholders and the public. The Institute hasalways contended that it has the sole right to set standards andtherefore the Auditors' Council (an office of the Ministry of Justice)stepping in to settle the dispute has taken the profession by surprise.The Ministry of Justice is now preparing a legal opinion as to theauthority of the Institute to set standards. Meanwhile the Institutehas agreed that the new standard will only be used on auditors' reportssigned after mid February. Members of the Institute's central committeeand members in general fear that it is yet another example of theSecurities Commission trying to 'muscle in' on the standards makingprocess. After years of disputes concerning accounting standards, inthe end a joint committee with the Institute, Securities Commission,Industrialists and the tax authorities was formed. It was assumed thatthe audit standards would remain the sole prerogative of the Institute.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ISRAEL: QUALITY CONTROL RULE FACES REBELLIONIsrael Pinini, treasurer of the Institute, has mounted a final effortto prevent the adoption of the new standard for quality control inaccountant's office. He hopes that within a few days he will havesufficient members (300) to call a special general meeting to block thenew standard, due to be adopted this month. Small practices contendthat the administration and requirements for specialised departmentswill create a two tier practice or drive them out of the profession.The Institute sees the standard as a prelude to adopting ISO 9000.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ISRAEL: LAW INCREASES AUDITORS' LIABILITIESThe new company law currently passing through the Knesset (parliament)has further increased the profession's anxieties about professionalnegligence claims. The new law proposes the auditors must report on allthe actions of directors. The proposal is that they must examine andcomment on not only financial matters but also all aspects ofmanagement and administration and the affect on the company,shareholders, other interested parties, and the general public.Meanwhile the director is personally indemnified against his actions.In addition it is proposed that auditors fees will be set in generalmeeting of the members only. This right cannot be delegated to thedirectors, even on a temporary basis.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ISRAEL: ROTATION OF AUDITORS IS A MYTHGovernment companies are required to change auditors every three years.In practice the management of the companies postpone the changewhenever possible. The latest example is the Electricity Corporation,one of the largest and most profitable companies in Israel. Despite therequirement to appoint a new auditor, the management have successfullypostponed the change indefinitely. As a result, Somekh Chaikan (PriceWaterhouse) remain the auditors and Kost Levary & Forer (Ernst & Young)lose out.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ITALY: COOPERS' AUDIT APPOINTMENT REVOKEDCoopers & Lybrand have suffered a serious blow as a result of theGemina affair. In September a major merger operation - SuperGemina-Ferfin - was announced followed soon after by revelations of heavylosses within the Gemina group.In a newsletter published last month (January), Commissione Nazionaleper le Societa e la Borsa (Consob - the companies and stock marketregulator which also supervises the roll of approved audit firms),announced that it has instructed Coopers not to use the services of itspartner Renato Bellani for a period of two years. Moreover, theaccountants have had their three-year 1995-1997 appointment as Gemina'sauditors revoked.In announcing its decision, Consob said: 'The penalty has been adoptedon the basis of the checks carried out on the audit work for the 1992and 1993 financial statements of Gemina Ratealfactor, of the Geminagroup consolidated accounts for 1993 and consolidated accounts of RCSEditori at 31 December 1992 and 31 December 1993.'Following Consob's decision, Coopers said that it seems that Consob haschosen the Gemina affair to set a pilot decision. 'For the first time,in fact, a form of objective responsibility has been adopted withregard to the principal auditors of a group, putting the blame ontothem for the work done by others.'Making their complaint against the regulator, Coopers said that thelosses which were the subject of Consob's investigations in the Geminacase, arose in the hire purchase sales sector of RCS Libri & GrandiOpere and that these losses were not brought into evidence quicklybecause of serious shortcomings in the internal controls of thecompany. But RCS Libri & Grandi Opere was audited by another firm,while Coopers audited its parent, RCS Editori, and the group parentGemina. Coopers, in accordance with current practice, relied on thework done by the other, well-qualified, audit firm, which had auditedRCS Libri & Grandi Opere for many years.Coopers claim that their work was wholly correct and say that thelosses investigated by Consob, in so far as they were reflected inGemina's consolidated accounts, arose from sources that were not withinCoopers' competence. 'Consob's decision is therefore unjust and Cooperswill appeal to the regional administrative tribunal to have itannulled,' said the firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ITALY: PROFESSION DISPUTE RAGES ONThe long-running dispute between Italy's dottori commercialisti(commercial practitioner accountants) and ragionieri (bookkeeperaccountants) on professional titles is continuing. In mid-December thedottori commercialisti's national council wrote to Prime MinisterLamberto Dini, in his temporary capacity as Justice Minister, toexpress its concern and seek remedial action. The dottoricommercialisti are expected to mount a publicity campaign in which theproblem of professional safeguards for the public will be highlighted.As university graduates, they object to the use of the titlecommercialisti by ragionieri. On the other hand, the ragionieri, whoalso wrote to Dini in mid-December, would like to see a single role ofaccountants, with the two titles unified. They say that the dottoricommercialisti have brought too many onto their roll, creating anemployment problem that they are trying to solve by taking market sharefrom the ragionieri.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND: AGREEMENT REACHED ON JOINT EDAs part of the commitment by New Zealand and Australia to harmoniseaccounting standards, the two accounting standard-setting bodies haveagreed to issue a joint exposure draft (ED) on financial reporting byLife Insurance companies.April Mackenzie, director of Accounting and Professional Standards forthe New Zealand Accountants Society, said the main issue is taking theED jointly through the final stages. She compared the problems posed bydifferent regulatory requirements in each country, with those faced byEU members when tackling harmonisation on other issues.Mackenzie said that in developing financial reporting standardsparticular notice is paid to the position of the InternationalAccounting Standards Committee (IASC). She believes the achievements ofthe IASC will influence New Zealand accounting practices even more overtime.IASC was represented at a meeting of delegates from standard-settingbodies in Australia, UK and South Africa, hosted by the New ZealandSociety last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND: NEW CHEQUE LAW AFFECTS ACCOUNTANTSNew Zealand accountants can no longer deposit crossed non-negotiablecheques, which are made out in the name of client, in their trustaccounts. Under new banking laws, crossed cheques now cannot beendorsed for payment to another person and can only be paid into theaccount of the named payee. This means accountants who receive paymentson behalf of clients have to make special arrangements to ensure theycan continue to bank the payments in their trust accounts. Preferablythey must ensure the cheque is made out to the accountancy firm insteadof in the client's name. Alternatively they must arrange for opencheques.A request to the New Zealand parliament seeking exemption for trustaccount operators to continue depositing cheques made out to clients,into their trust accounts was refused. The law-makers decided that togive accountants and lawyers this exemption from the new law, wouldweaken the protection now provided by the new non-transferableregulations.While admitting accountants will suffer some inconvenience, parliamentdecided it was more important for the writer of a cheque to ensure itwas paid only to the payee.In the past there was a widely held belief that crossing a chequeprevented it from being endorsed and transferred to a person other thanthe payee named. In fact under banking law which existed up to 1January 1996, it did not.The new law, aimed at preventing fraud says that now a crossed chequebearing the words 'Not transferable', 'Non transferable' or 'Accountpayee' can only be paid to the named payee. Thieves will no longer beable to cash stolen cheques by forging an endorsement to themselves orto a third party.Another provision of the new banking law is that banks no longer haveto physically transfer paper cheques to the branches on which they aredrawn. Now the details can be done electronically - cutting costs andspeeding up cheque clearance.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND: SHARING THE COST OF STANDARDSThe president of the New Zealand Accountants Society, Colin Notley,agrees with those who argue that the cost of researching and developingstandards should be shared by the business community and others whobenefit from their application.This argument, said Notley, has been given added strength because NewZealand's Financial Reporting Standards, when approved by theAccounting Standards Review Board, now carry legal backing.'In one sense the Society's Financial Reporting Standards Board - whichdoes the preliminary work reviewing standards - has become a researchand working arm of government,' added Notley.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED KINGDOM: 'EFFECTIVENESS' SHOULD GO SAYS APBInterpretation of the word 'effectiveness' when asking directors toreport on internal financial control effectiveness is a sticking point,according to the Auditing Practices Board (APB). The APB has releasedthe text of a letter it has sent to Sir Ronald Hampel, chairman of thenewly formed 'Committee on Corporate Governance', setting out itsprincipal conclusions following consultation concerning reporting byauditors on the matter.To build on progress made to date, the APB considers that the HampelCommittee should:- Consider further how best to report on internal financial control. Inparticular there is the need either to define much more closely themeaning of the term 'effectiveness' or consider whether there are otheroptions that would meet the spirit of the original Cadbury proposal butavoid the need to interpret the term effectiveness. Announcing the APBconclusions, APB chairman Ian Plaistowe said: 'We believe that auditorswill find it difficult to report on internal financial controleffectiveness unless words are changed. The APB would support wordsalong the lines of statements used by the BOC Group plc and The Coca-Cola Company.' The report of the BOC Group directors states: 'Thedirectors believe that the Group's system of internal financial controlprovides reasonable but not absolute assurance that assets aresafeguarded, transactions are authorised and recorded properly and thatmaterial errors and irregularities are either prevented or would bedetected within a timely period.'- Study further the role of internal auditors in reporting on internalcontrol. The Cadbury Report did not deal, other than in passingreference, with the role of internal audit. Internal auditors have anintegral part to play in any regime in which directors and auditorsreport on internal controls. In particular, they are likely to considerthe wider concept of non-financial internal controls, whereas the workof external auditors is focused more on internal financial controls.The APB letter is a culmination of feedback and consultation whichbegan in December 1994 when the APB published Guidance for directors.Implementation of the guidance has resulted in many listed companiescarrying out detailed reviews of their internal financial controls andcommentators believe that, as a result, controls are improving. The APBheld a public debate in June 1995, and in written responses to itsApril 1995 discussion paper Internal financial control effectiveness,commentators expressed strong reservations about the practicality ofauditors reporting on directors' opinions on the effectiveness ofinternal financial controls. Philip Ashton, chairman of the APBInternal Control Working Party said: 'Now the Hampel Committee is inbusiness, it is timely to look at the issues causing difficulty. Also 1January 1996 was the date on which it became compulsory for directorsto report on internal controls.'The APB also supports the majority of companies which responded toInternal financial control effectiveness in calling for a two-yearmoratorium on further reforms. 'This will give everyone an opportunityto see the best way forward, particularly the Hampel Committee one itgets fully underway,' said Plaistowe.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED KINGDOM: ACCA SEEKS CHARTERED DESCRIPTIONThe Chartered Association of Certified Accountants (ACCA) is one stepaway from changing its name to the Association of Chartered CertifiedAccountants, and calling its members chartered certified accountants.The move follows a Privy Council decision, that in principle, it has noobjection to the inclusion of the term chartered in the descriptions ofmembers of any of the accountancy bodies which has a Royal Charter.ACCA's Council will now seek the approval of members at the May 1996AGM with a view to making a prompt application to the Privy Council.Michael Harvey, ACCA's president said: 'The option chartered certifiedaccountant would enable the Association to retain the ACCA/FCCAdesignation and build on the well-established certified brand.'ACCA confirmed that from 1 January 1996, it is no longer a member ofthe accountancy profession's Joint Disciplinary scheme (JDS). ACCAclaims to have paid 27% (around #850,000) of the costs of running theJDS compared to 12% when funding arrangements were agreed in the early1980s, despite not having referred one of its 48,000 or so members inover ten years.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED KINGDOM: PURE CASHFLOW STATEMENT PROPOSEDThe Accounting Standards Board (ASB) proposes to introduce a purecashflow statements and to drop the present concept of cashequivalents. FRED 10, Revision of FRS1 cashflow statements, states thatthe definition of cash equivalents has been problematic becausetreasury management practices can vary widely.FRED 10 proposes that instead of including cash equivalents -investments with repayment dates of up to three months, flows of cashonly would be measured - cash comprising cash in hand and depositsrepayable on demand, net of bank overdrafts. If the ASB's proposals areadopted, the UK would be the only country to use pure cash as the basisfor preparing cashflow statements.FRED 10 also proposes:- A new section on management of liquid resources to provide improvedinformation on treasury activities.- The order and headings for cashflows to be altered to accord moreclosely with those most likely to be used in the directors' owncommentary.- To tie the cashflow statement more closely into the balance sheet byfocusing on the effect of cashflows on the widely used financialindicator 'net debt'.Introducing the Exposure Draft, ASB chairman Sir David Tweedie said:'The ASB believes that the changes represent a significant step forwardand will be of real benefit to both preparers and users of accounts.Not the least of the improvements is the move to a pure cashflowstatement, which I am sure is a major advance.'Comments on FRED 10 are invited by 8 March 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996COUNCILS APPROVE MERGER PROPOSALSThe Councils of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England andWales (ICAEW) and the Chartered Institute of Management Accountantshave circulated detailed merger proposals to their members forconsultation.The consultative document, A vision of excellence, sets out the casefor merging the two bodies and explains the key benefits to members ofwhat it describes as a 'new world class structure'. These benefitsinclude:- greater resources to counter increased competition from non-accountants- improved services for members and their clients- increased influence with Government and the European Commission- common high standards for students in business and practice- lower subscriptions for many members.Discussion events have been organised around the UK and overseas andplans have been made to undertake extensive market research into themerger. The consultation and research findings will help the Councilsdecide whether to ask members to vote on the merger formally at aSpecial Meeting in June of this year.ICAEW president Keith Woodley said: 'I am delighted that our twoCouncils have voted in favour of these proposals as I believe that thisis the right way forward for the profession.'But an ICAEW member based at a Big 6 firm in London told WAR: 'Thiswould be a step backwards for the profession. Management accountantswill never be treated at the same level as chartered accountants.'Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED KINGDOM: EXEMPTION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES ON CARDSNine out of ten small companies may be freed from all existingaccounting standards if proposals put forward by a working party of theConsultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies (CCAB) are implemented.The CCAB working party on Big GAAP/Little GAAP's proposed new Financialreporting standard for smaller enterprises, nicknamed 'Fresse', woulddramatically reduce the disclosure requirements in small companies.Fresse, which would be issued alongside standards for larger companies,would replace more than 600 pages of rules with a mere 40. It maintainsthe measurement principles in existing standards although they havebeen simplified in other areas, and will cover companies entitled tomake use of exemptions under the Companies Act.Fresse would apply to companies with a turnover of less than #2.8m,fewer than 50 employees or less than #1.4m of assets but not tocompanies where there is a public interest. It could also be applied tosmall non-corporate entities.The closing date for comments is 29 March 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES: AMEX'S VICTORY ON FLORIDA LAWAmerican Express (Amex) Tax and Business Services prevailed in itschallenge of a Florida statute which prohibited the company's employeesfrom informing clients that they were Certified Public Accountants(CPAs).Previously, the Florida State Board of Accountancy only allowed CPAs toadvertise their certification if they were employed by a licensedaccounting firm with CPA ownership. As a corporation, Amex did not fitthat bill.Amex's lawsuit against the state board claimed that the Florida statutewas a violation of its employees' constitutional right to free speech.A Florida federal district court agreed with that charge and issued apermanent injunction against the state enforcing its statute. 'Tellingconsumers that our employees are qualified, trained CPAs is a(constitutional) right,' said Sarah McKenzie, national director forAmex. 'This information is important to consumers as they make choicesabout their financial advisors.'McKenzie said that statutes like Florida's were designed to insulatetraditional CPA firms from competition. Although the court's decisionpertains strictly to the state of Florida, she predicted it will havefar reaching effects on the accounting industry.Florida's attorney general said that the State Board of Accountancy wasdisappointed with the court's ruling and had not yet decided whether itwould appeal.Amex employees provide accounting, tax and financial planning services,but do not perform any attest functions. Audits and other attestationengagements remain the sole province of licensed CPA firms.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES: ORANGE COUNTY CLAIMS KPMG WAS NEGLIGENTOfficials of bankrupt Orange County, California recently filed suitagainst the county's former auditor, KPMG Peat Marwick. The lawsuitclaims that KPMG was negligent in performing its duties, that the firmdid not adequately warn county administrators of the high-risk natureof certain investments.Damages of up to $3bn are sought by Orange County. Defendants to theaction include KPMG partners and principals worldwide.The negligence claim had been expected for several months. Earlier thecounty had sued its former investment adviser, Merrill Lynch for asimilar amount.KPMG officials said that the claim was just another attempt by thecounty to hold someone else responsible for its investment losses. Theystressed that the firm was not hired as an investment adviser of thecounty. KPMG's only role was to render judgement on the county'sfinancial statements and firm officials said the accounts accuratelyportrayed Orange County finances.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES: BANKERS PRESS FASB FOR FAS 115 RELIEFThere is nothing like an interest rate swing to change a banker'sperspective.During 1994, bankers were forced to make difficult decisions abouttheir investments. Implementing FAS 115, Accounting for certaininvestments in debt and equity securities, required banks to classifytheir investments as trading securities, available-for-sale or held-to-maturity. Difference accounting rules applied to each class ofinvestments.Some of the banks most volatile investments were classified as held-to-maturity to insulate bank earnings from price fluctuations. Because ofthe banks' stated intent to hold these investments, they were notrequired to be written down to market values as bond prices plunged in1994.The interest rate scenario improved appreciable in 1995, however, asdid the value of the bankers' investments. So leading up to year-end1995, bankers lobbied the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB),for relief from their decisions of a year earlier. FASB accommodatedthem by allowing a one-time reassessment and reclassification. Assetsin the held-to-maturity category were allowed to be moved into anothercategory between 15 November and 31 December 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996DTTI - A STORY OF TWO HALVESDeloitte Touche Tohmatsu International are to do an Arthur Andersen andsplit their accounting and consulting business into two separate legalentities. The consulting arm will be called Deloitte & ToucheConsulting Group and the accounting practice, Deloitte & Touche. Theprocess will begin this year although both entities will operate underthe administrative wing of DTTI.Meanwhile, DTTI's UK member Touche Ross have changed their name toDeloitte & Touche from 1 February, after reaching an agreement withCoopers & Lybrand which own the Deloitte name in the UK.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BDO GO FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTHJanuary has been a busy month for the BDO Binder network, having gaineda plethora of new affiliates and members. Mann Judd is BDO's new memberfirm in the Bahamas, and is one of the foremost accounting and auditingfirms in the area, with insolvency as a specialism. The network hasalso been joined by Icelandic firm BDO Samend and Almagor & Co inIsrael and a top ten Venezuelan firm called ContAlfa. The network isalso pleased to welcome National Brothers, a leading accounting andconsulting firm in Jordan, as a full member.In addition, Visura Treuhand Gesellschaft, the Swiss member firm of theBDO Binder network, has announced its successful merger with JaggiTreuhand, a top management consultancy firm in Berne.$1bn BDO Binder is the seventh largest accounting and consultingorganisation in the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996E&Y EMBARK ON AN EASTERN ADVENTUREFollowing the establishment of offices in Israel by the Big 6, Ernst &Young's office (Kost Levary & Forer) have now acquired an office inHaifa as a result of the merger with one of the oldest establishedoffices there, Rone Stettmer & Co. The practice now boasts over 250staff and 63 public company audits in Israel.E&Y are also set to open offices in the former Soviet Union countriesof Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. E&Y already have over 60 staff inAlmaty, capital of Kazakhstan.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MRI PLUNGE INTO SCANDINAVIANinth-ranking global accounting and business advisers Moore RowlandInternational (MRI), have strengthened their position on the Nordicmainland by the recruitment of a correspondent firm in Finland calledTilimerkono. And the majority of MRI's member firms in Norway'sRevisorGruppen have merged with Nexia's former associate RevisionNoraudit and will rank number six in size in Norway with gross fees ofNOK160m. The firm will have 17 offices, with main ones in Oslo, Bergenand Boda.Kjetil Rivelsrud, chairman of Revision Noraudit said: 'We look forwardto working closely with MRI's large member firms in Denmark and Swedenbetween whom a significant amount of referred work already flows.'Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996STEIN TO LEAD KPMG'S INTERNATIONAL SERVICESJeffrey Stein, partner in charge of KPMG's International Executive TaxServices practice, has been appointed as partner in charge ofinternational services for the $2.3bn US-based KPMG Peat Marwick. Steinassumes leadership of a practice which aims to assist multinationalorganisations in gaining global market shares by anticipating thechanging needs of the marketplace.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ACCOUNTING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996HLB ENJOYS A SINGAPORE SLINGGlobal accountancy group HLB International has strengthened its networkin the Asia Pacific region with the appointment of a new member firm inSingapore. The firm, Loke Lum & Partners, has an extensive client basewith international business activity and has already referredassignments to HLB members in several countries including Australia,Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia and Hungary.HLB chief executive Peter Frost said: 'The Asia Pacific is a keydevelopment area for HLB, targeted for significant expansion in thefuture, and we are delighted to appoint a dedicated new representativefor the group in Singapore.'Back to Headline List WT02-B40-3IA074-000493-B044-122http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ft02.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012546 text/html 463977HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:22:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:00 GMTContent-length: 463789Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ft02.html Sample Issue Copyright FINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TORIES BRACED FOR MINORITY GOVERNMENT: SENIOR MINISTERS ADMIT MAJOR MAY LOSE COMMONS MAJORITY BEFORE END OF 1996 (584 words) TAX SELF-ASSESSMENT WILL HIT SMALL BUSINESS, SAYS LABOUR (348 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: BOXER ARRESTED AFTER FIREWORKS ACCIDENT (46 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: ULSTER SHOOTING (38 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: HOSTAGES 'IN GOOD HEALTH' (30 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: POLICE HUNT ARMED GANG (36 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM (48 words) WALDEGRAVE GETS TOUGH ON SPENDING TO FINANCE TAX CUTS (553 words) AILING KING FAHD HANDS OVER POWER TO SAUDI PRINCE: MOVE ENDS SPECULATION OVER SUCCESSION BUT FUELS DOUBT ON RULER'S HEALTH (500 words) CHIRAC CONCEDES DIALOGUE NEEDED ON REFORMS (410 words) SCALFARO SEEKS CLARITY ON POLLS (471 words) SAMPAIO LEADS AS PORTUGAL NEARS VOTE (427 words) RUSSIA PLEDGES TOUGH LINE ON ECONOMY (273 words) PARTIES WEIGH UP RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY (984 words) PACT TO OPEN UP STATE CONTRACTS (242 words) GENE CLONING RAISES HOPES (178 words) EUROPEAN PRESS REVIEW: BEACON FOR EMERGING DEMOCRACY - RUSSIA (903 words) ZEROUAL PICKS LITTLE-KNOWN DIPLOMAT AS PM (421 words) JAPAN PUBLIC PRESSED ON LOAN BAILOUT (599 words) INDONESIA'S CONGLOMERATES LOOK TO MARKET FORCES (314 words) CONSERVATIVE ABDULLAH TAKES REINS OF POWER (795 words) TALKS TO RESUME ON US BUDGET IMPASSE (387 words) RHODES' HEIRS RETURN TO ZAMBIA'S COPPER MINES: AFTER 25 YEARS OF NATIONALISATION, BOARDROOMS IN JOHANNESBURG AND LONDON MAY AGAIN DETERMINE THE FUTURE OF ITS MAIN INDUSTRY (918 words) INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INDICATORS (1260 words) SRI LANKA'S WAR EUPHORIA FADES (531 words) ZEDILLO RESHUFFLES CABINET (380 words) FT GUIDE TO 1996 (3955 words) FIAT STEPS UP DRIVE FOR IMPORT POSITION (594 words) POOREST DEPEND ON BENEFITS 'FOR 70% OF INCOME' (417 words) TORIES WARN OVER NICHOLSON ATTACKS (513 words) SALES SUCCESS LESS SWEET AS CHEWERS AVOID SUGAR (527 words) ECONOMIC GROWTH PROSPECTS SUFFER DOUBLE BLOW (455 words) WALDEGRAVE RESOLVES TO START EARLY: NEW YEAR AIMS INCLUDE PUSHING THE PFI AND TACKLING FRAUD (743 words) POLICY FOR TERRORISM INSURANCE UNDER ATTACK: AS THE IRA CEASEFIRE HAS LITTLE EFFECT ON PREMIUMS, BUSINESSES QUESTION THE ROLE OF REINSURER POOL RE (796 words) BIG THAW LEADS TO WATER CUTS (232 words) NEW YEAR PLAN CONDEMNED: SCOTTISH BANK HOLIDAYS (148 words) PLEA FOR HELP OVER FRAUD PROBE: NHS TRUSTS (130 words) SAINSBURY CUTS 200 PRICES: FOOD RETAILING (78 words) FISHING PATROL MOVES INTO DISPUTED AREA (426 words) THIS WEEK: NERVES BEGIN TO FRAY OVER BUDGET IMPASSE - DATELINE / WASHINGTON, ANGER THE THE 'CLOWNS OF CONGRESS' IS RISING (832 words) THIS WEEK: FT GUIDE TO THE MILLENNIUM COMMISSION? (936 words) THIS WEEK: FILM AND VIDEO (312 words) PEOPLE: JOHN BROWNE, BP'S MASTER OF RECOVERY - A CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO DEBT DOES NOT RULE OUT A NEW PHASE OF GROWTH (882 words) MANAGEMENT: BIG IDEAS, BIG BOOKS - SEVEN WISE MEN GIVE THEIR OPINIONS ON THE CHALLENGES COMPANIES ARE LIKELY TO FACE IN 1996 (1112 words) MANAGEMENT: A PRODUCT OF POETRY - RUPERT MORRIS WONDERS HOW FAMOUS VERSE COULD BE USED IN ADVERTISING (746 words) MANAGEMENT: LIQUID THERAPY FOR THE NEW YEAR (897 words) MANAGEMENT: TEGE - FAST TRACK (564 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: HOTELIER'S STARCK CHOICE - IAN SCHRAGER'S HOTELS ARE FOR THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD CHINTZ BUT WANT SOMETHING DIFFERENT (1133 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: BANGKOK GETS TOUGH ON MOTORISTS (382 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: CARRIERS CUT FARES (188 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: AIRPORT ON TRACK (115 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: CASH IN THE SKY (181 words) BUSINESS TRAVEL: AIRPORT THREATENED (87 words) MEDIA FUTURES: POBOX AND THE MAGIC COOKIE (963 words) MEDIA FUTURES: HOME SHOPPING TAKES A TUMBLE FROM ITS TROLLEY - ENTHUSIASTIC PREDICTIONS OF A COUCH-POTATO FUTURE WERE PREMATURE (1415 words) MEDIA FUTURES: CYBER SIGHTINGS (244 words) SPORT: GREEN TURNS DARK FOR THE STRUGGLING GOLF CLUB PRO (946 words) ARCHITECTURE: YEAR OF THE MILLENNIAL RE-THINK (815 words) ARTS: MAN OF MUSIC WITH PERIOD APPEAL - ANDREW CLARK TALKS TO THE CONDUCTOR WHO CHALLENGES OUR ASSUMPTIONS AND OPENS OUR EARS TO THE PAST (1531 words) ARTS: TALES FROM ARABIA - THEATRE (421 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): AMSTERDAM (62 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): GLASGOW (51 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): NEW YORK (61 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): WASHINGTON (77 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): LONDON (30 words) ARTS (OPENINGS): LEEDS (38 words) ARTS: TODAY'S TELEVISION (174 words) AN ABSENCE OF INFLATION: THE FEELGOOD FACTOR IS SET TO REMAIN ELUSIVE IN 1996 (1141 words) NEITHER BOOM NOR BUST: CONDITIONS ARE NOT RIGHT FOR SHARPLY LOWER US INTEREST RATES (1084 words) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR: WAYS TO VIEW SUPPORT FOR STEELMAKING PLANT (206 words) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR: CANADIAN PEOPLE CAUGHT IN THE TRAPPER'S SNARE (212 words) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR: BREWING UP CONTROVERSY (88 words) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR: DIAGNOSING MIDDLE-CLASS ANGST (296 words) LETTERS TO THE EDITOR: OBSTACLES FACING THE SPREAD OF DEMOCRACY (176 words) LEADING ARTICLE: WHEN POLITICS REPLACES POLICY (676 words) LEADING ARTICLE: ITALY AND THE EU PRESIDENCY (674 words) EUROPE UNLOCKED FOR DEALERS: ON THE FIRST DAY OF TRADING UNDER NEW RULES BREAKING DOWN EU BORDERS, JOHN GAPPER AND RICHARD LAPPER ASSESS WHO THE WINNERS AND LOSERS WILL BE (1421 words) OBSERVER: NATWEST SEEKS TOP GUN (336 words) OBSERVER: CAR MAINTENANCE (153 words) OBSERVER: COLLECT CALL (92 words) OBSERVER: HONOUR GUARD (198 words) OBSERVER: CAR WARS (138 words) OBSERVER: SAFETY FIRST (18 words) EU STATES SLOW TO ADOPT DIRECTIVE ON INVESTMENT: ONLY SEVEN COUNTRIES READY FOR CROSS-BORDER REFORM (508 words) THE LEX COLUMN: GOING FOR GROWTH (247 words) THE LEX COLUMN: EUROPE (345 words) THE LEX COLUMN: JAPAN (257 words) THE LEX COLUMN: EMERGING MARKETS (218 words) PENSION FUNDS RAISE RETURNS BUT MISS OUT ON BIG US GAINS (425 words) CHANGES SOUGHT IN TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY (330 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): CHRISTMAS BRINGS CHEER TO TRADING STATEMENTS - UK RETAILERS (305 words) NEW LOOK RETAILER SOLD TO INSTITUTIONS FOR POUNDS 170M (378 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): GREENBURY GUIDELINES WILL BE PUT TO THE TEST - OTHER COMPANIES (349 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): CABLE AND WIRELESS - OTHER COMPANIES (92 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): US COMPANIES - OTHER COMPANIES (84 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): BANCO SANTANDER - OTHER COMPANIES (71 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): FOKKER - OTHER COMPANIES (73 words) FORTE TO EXPAND THROUGH MERIDIEN (478 words) LONDON BRACES ITSELF FOR A REPO REVOLUTION: AN OPEN MARKET IN SALE AND REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS FOR UK GOVERNMENT BONDS STARTS TODAY (890 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: DISNEY AIMS TO PUMP UP THE VOLUME (380 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: DANA PETROLEUM PLANS LISTING AND SEEKS POUNDS 16M (103 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: MEDIOBANCA TO GIVE FERFIN OFFER TERMS (272 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: HEALTH GROUPS ABANDON MERGER (216 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: VICTORS AND VICTIMS OF BOARDROOM UPHEAVAL - TIM BURT LOOKS AT THE HIGH NUMBER OF COMPANIES STARTING THE YEAR WITH A CHANGE OF LEADERSHIP (487 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: NATIONWIDE LOOKS TO LIFE OPERATION (391 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: FRENCH BANK SEEKS SHORT-TERM FINANCE (343 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: HYUNDAI TO ACCELERATE DECENTRALISATION - SOUTH KOREA'S BIGGEST FAMILY-RUN 'CHAEBOL' IS MOVING WITH THE TIMES (848 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: NETSCAPE LEADS THE FASHION FOR US NEW ISSUES - FT WRITERS LOOK AT THE BEST PERFORMING SHARES AROUND THE WORLD IN 1995 / BEST AND WORST SECTORS (598 words) INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS: THOMAS LOCKER'S BID FOR PENTRE ATTACKED (183 words) MARKETS: ANXIOUS EYES FOCUS ON COPPER - COMMODITIES (338 words) MARKETS: ASSESSING THE POWER OF MULTINATIONALS - GLOBAL INVESTOR (1129 words) MARKETS: TIME TO REWRITE INFLATION TARGET - ECONOMICS NOTEBOOK (929 words) EMERGING MARKETS: THAILAND - NEWS ROUND-UP (59 words) EMERGING MARKETS: HONG KONG - NEWS ROUND-UP (103 words) EMERGING MARKETS: INDONESIA - NEWS ROUND-UP (135 words) EMERGING MARKETS: PHILIPPINES - NEWS ROUND-UP (133 words) EMERGING MARKETS: TRADERS PIN HOPES ON DOLLAR - CURRENCY MARKETS (314 words) EMERGING MARKETS: LOOKING AHEAD TO BRIGHTER PROSPECTS - THE EMERGING INVESTOR (924 words) EMERGING MARKETS: ING BARING SECURITIES EMERGING MARKETS INDICES (267 words) EQUITY MARKETS: INVESTORS FACE A DEARTH OF ECONOMIC DATA - NEW YORK (229 words) EQUITY MARKETS: STRATEGY - OTHER MARKETS (317 words) EQUITY MARKETS: TOKYO - OTHER MARKETS (126 words) EQUITY MARKETS: HONG KONG - OTHER MARKETS (92 words) EQUITY MARKETS: FRANKFURT - OTHER MARKETS (186 words) EQUITY MARKETS: DUBLIN - OTHER MARKETS (182 words) EQUITY MARKETS: YEAR EXPECTED TO OPEN ON POSITIVE NOTE - LONDON (246 words) EQUITY MARKETS: CVRD MANDATE SUGGESTS END OF THE GOLDEN 3% FEE - INTERNATIONAL OFFERINGS (836 words) EQUITY MARKETS: GOLDMAN SACHS REMAINS AT THE TOP (124 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: TOKYO (236 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: A STEP AWAY FROM CITY TRADITION - OPEN GILT REPO TRADING (1116 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: FRANKFURT (235 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: LONDON (231 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: INVESTORS ASSESS THEIR STRATEGY FOR 1996 - GOVERNMENT BONDS (854 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: NEW YORK (225 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: INTEREST RATES AT A GLANCE (71 words) WORLD BOND MARKETS: US TREASURY BOND FUTURES (54 words) ECONOMIC DIARY: OTHER ECONOMIC NEWS (186 words) FT GUIDE TO THE WEEK (1746 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: MEXICAN BUS CRASH KILLS 25 (20 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: MOSCOW REVELLERS FREEZE TO DEATH (45 words) SOCCER CLUBS IN EGYPT WINOVER TV FEES: GOVERNMENT PITCHES IN TO BOOST ROYALTIES (640 words) JAMAICA PONDERS AN ECONOMIC VICTORY OF SORTS (550 words) MURDER HUNT CONTINUING (97 words) OBSERVER: FOOD FOR THOUGHT (164 words) 100 YEARS AGO: AMERICAN FINANCE (122 words) 50 YEARS AGO: MOTOR EXPORTS (65 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS MONTH): OCE-VAN DER GRINTEN - OTHER COMPANIES (69 words) COMPANY NEWS (THIS MONTH): PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH TO LEAD TO STRONG EARNINGS - US RESULTS (201 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: PRISON MOVE FOR MAFIOSO (33 words) WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: GROZNY DEATH BLAST (41 words) ARGENTINE CONGRESS URGED TO SPEED LAWS (381 words) ISRAEL HAILS 'CONSTRUCTIVE' ATTITUDE FROM SYRIANS (364 words) SUBSIDY WILL HAVE TO EXCEED DOLLARS 300M: NUCLEAR PRIVATISATION: DECOMMISSIONING MAY LAST MORE THAN 100 YEARS (410 words) SHOPPERS STABBED (74 words) UK COMPANY NEWS: RESULTS (203 words) CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TORIES BRACED FOR MINORITY GOVERNMENT: SENIOR MINISTERS ADMIT MAJOR MAYLOSE COMMONS MAJORITY BEFORE END OF 1996   By JAMES BLITZ, Lobby CorrespondentGovernment ministers yesterday contemplated the probability that MrJohn Major will lead a minority administration later this year, amidfears that the Conservatives can expect to lose more seats in the Houseof Commons.As left and rightwing Tories indulged in mutual recriminations over therecent defection of Miss Emma Nicholson, MP for Devon West andTorridge, to the Liberal Democrats, senior ministers privately admittedthat the government could expect to lose its Commons majority beforethe end of 1996 - and that it may rely for survival on the support ofthe nine Ulster Unionist MPs.Ministers played down claims by one left-of-centre Tory that at leastsix other MPs were prepared to defect to opposition parties. Yetseveral admitted that by-elections triggered by the deaths of MPs wouldput the Tories into a Commons minority this year. The departure of MissNicholson means the government can now expect two pending by-electionsto cut its Commons majority to just one, if Sir Richard Body, whoremains outside the Tory whip, is excluded from calculations.However, despite increasing signs that his party may have to rely ontheir support in any No Confidence motion, Sir Patrick Mayhew, NorthernIreland secretary, insisted there would be 'no special treatment' forthe UUP.'I recognise no difference in the essential equation by reason ofevents in the last few days or even a longer period,' he told BBC Radio4's Today programme.Other ministers, however, were already contemplating the need forconcessions to the UUP, with one privately conceding that relationswith the Ulster parties would be 'critical' to the government'sfortunes.Calculations about the government's majority coincided with signs thatthe delicate truce between left and rightwing Tories appeared to betottering in the wake of the defection.Mr Michael Portillo, defence secretary, launched a strong attack onMiss Nicholson, rubbishing her claims that the reason for her defectionhad been the party's shift to the right.'It is very silly to say that the party has tilted to the right - thatis completely incredible,' he told BBC radio. 'I think the party isprobably much the same. We have a broad breadth of opinion within theparty.'Mr John Redwood, last year's beaten Tory leadership challenger, alsoattacked the idea of a rightward shift by the government, claiming MrMajor's cabinet reshuffle last July had promoted left of centre MPs.However, Sir Edward Heath, former prime minister, rounded on MrPortillo, claiming the party had clearly taken an anti-European stanceand that Miss Nicholson's defection should be heeded. 'There is nodoubt at all that the party has moved to the right,' he said. 'Thatcan't be denied . . . it may be denied, but if it is denied it is afalse denial.'Mr Peter Temple-Morris, a pro-European backbencher, also demanded ahalt to the 'torrent of personal abuse' heaped on Miss Nicholson andcalled on ministers to rise above the warfare between the party'swings.'I would just like them to behave as if they were one cabinet, visiblefor all to see and not in such a way where undoubtedly the unhappinessproduced has led to two defections in three months. We cannot affordany more and I trust we will not have any more,' he said.Tory warning, Page 6Editorial Comment, Page 15[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TAX SELF-ASSESSMENT WILL HIT SMALL BUSINESS, SAYS LABOUR   By JAMES BLITZThe Treasury's plan to allow self-employed managers of small businessesto assess their own income tax liabilities will come under a strongattack from the Labour party this week amid claims that it will addsignificantly to company costs.Labour claims self-assessment will place new burdens on smallbusinesses running into hundreds of millions of pounds. It estimatesthe scheme will create extra recurrent costs of Pounds 130m to Pounds250m a year for self-employed business managers and mean big increasesin red tape.Mr Andrew Smith, Labour's shadow chief secretary, is also concerned thescheme contains a 'hidden tax bombshell'. He said yesterday theintroduction of self-assessment later this year would increase theTreasury's tax take by some Pounds 850m in 1997-98.Labour is expected to raise its objections to the scheme in the Commonson Thursday when the Finance Bill is published.Mr Smith said the increase in tax revenue would occur because theself-employed would make their assessments next year on the basis ofcurrent-year activities rather than those for the previous year.Because of anticipated increases in inflation and economic growth, thechange to current-year assessment would allow the Treasury to take morein tax from the self-employed.'While the principle of self-assessment makes sense, the way thegovernment is going about it on the current deadlines is a disaster,'said Mr Smith.He revealed that Labour would call for aspects of self-assessment to bedelayed to avoid confusion.But Mr Smith would give no guarantee that Labour would abandon theself-assessment plans, arguing that a new government might create newdifficulties by reversing changes of such magnitude.A spokesman for the Inland Revenue confirmed that the government wouldreceive the additional Pounds 850m in 1997-98. But he said it was a'one-off shift' that would not be repeated in future years.'Overall, self-assessment amounts to a clearer system with moredefinite deadlines - and one which people will find easier to operate,'he said.[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:BOXER ARRESTED AFTER FIREWORKS ACCIDENTFormer boxing champion Chris Eubank was arrested and released on bailafter two women were injured during a new year fireworks display heheld on Brighton's seafront. More than 100 people were arrested at newyear celebrations throughout the country.[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: ULSTER SHOOTINGA man was critically ill last night after he was shot while sittingwith a woman in his car in Lurgan, Co Armagh. Ulster Unionists claimedthe IRA was behind the shooting.[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:HOSTAGES 'IN GOOD HEALTH'Four westerners, including two Britons, held hostage by separatists inKashmir are in good health after nearly six months in captivity, Indianauthorities said.[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:POLICE HUNT ARMED GANGPolice were searching for a four-man gang after a community centrecaretaker was killed and two other men injured while trying to stop amugging in Bristol's St Paul's area.[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEMThe Spanish peseta climbed a further place in the EMS grid, in anenvironment where some investors favoured high-yielding currencies. Theorder of currencies in the EMS grid, and the spread between strongestand weakest, was otherwise unchanged.Currencies, Page 24[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WALDEGRAVE GETS TOUGH ON SPENDING TO FINANCE TAX CUTS   By ROBERT PESTON, Political EditorRemorseless pressure to bring down public spending to finance nextyear's widely expected tax cuts has been promised by Mr WilliamWaldegrave, chief secretary to the Treasury, in a new year interview.The chief secretary said he had a long-term aim of seeing publicspending fall to around 35 per cent of gross domestic product, comparedwith about 42 per cent at present.He said this should not be seen 'against the background of a slavishtarget of numbers' but because of a 'genuine belief that too much isdone (by government) and a good deal of it is act-ually hindering theeconomy'.His views on the potential for shrinking the government's share of theeconomy are strikingly different from those of Mr Kenneth Clarke, thechancellor, who is not persuaded that there is scope to get theproportion much below 40 per cent of GDP without damaging publicservices.There is also a significant difference between Mr Waldegrave and MrClarke on European monetary union. Mr Clarke believes that the decisionto participate in a single currency is primarily an economic one.However, Mr Waldegrave said the decision to join was primarily 'an actof political will and choice'.He also hinted that Mr John Major's successful campaign to persuade theEU to study the implications of two-tier monetary union - with only asmall minority of countries joining the proposed single currency - ismotivated by a desire to delay the project.'I do think that it is possible to imagine technical questions whichwill be raised which will worry those who are going in very much,' MrWaldegrave said. 'The damage from a badly established union will bequite considerable.'The chief secretary also made it clear that he will contest anycriticism he may face in the Scott report on arms sales to Iraq, due tobe published in the next few weeks. Leaked drafts of the reportcriticised Mr Waldegrave for failing as a Foreign Office minister inthe late 1980s to announce an apparent softening in the government'spolicy on the arms embargo with Iraq.Mr Waldegrave, who has made further submissions to Lord Justice Scott,said: 'My conscience is entirely clear.' He would only considerresigning if he could be persuaded that his 'memory of the wholebusiness is so wrong'.He added that it would not only be his memory that was at fault butthat of 'the whole Foreign Office'.On next year's public expenditure negotiations, he said he would startvisiting ministries with a view to securing cuts in the early spring.One of the initial targets of his scrutiny will be the Pounds 15bn costto government of public bodies at arm's length from ministries andquangos. He said he was looking for savings of several hundred millionpounds in their running costs. He will also maintain pressure onspending departments to substitute private finance forgovernment-financed capital projects. 'In terms of extra cash flowthere is probably more to come from that,' he said.His other target will be to step up the government's fight againstfraud, especially in the social security budget.Waldegrave's aims, Page 6[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996AILING KING FAHD HANDS OVER POWER TO SAUDI PRINCE: MOVE ENDSSPECULATION OVER SUCCESSION BUT FUELS DOUBT ON RULER'S HEALTH   By ROULA KHALAF, Middle East CorrespondentSaudi Arabia's King Fahd handed over the running of the governmentyesterday to his half-brother, Crown Prince Abdullah, in a developmentlikely to raise further doubts about the king's health but endspeculation about succession in the kingdom.A royal order carried by the official Saudi Press Agency said the73-year-old monarch, who is believed to have suffered a minor strokelast November, was handing over 'management of government affairs' tothe crown prince while he recuperates.Prince Abdullah, who is two years younger than the king, is deputyprime minister and head of the powerful 57,000-man National Guard. Heis seen as more conservative and less internationally minded than theking, though diplomats said he was unlikely to change the kingdom'sforeign and economic policies.Saudi Arabia is the world's largest oil exporter and a close ally ofthe US. The decree said the prince would take over while the kingenjoyed 'rest and recuperation'.The decision makes official a role the prince has played since the kingfell ill.Although he will officially now chair cabinet meetings and representthe king on official visits, the move may prove temporary if the king'shealth improves, diplomats said yesterday.'It sounds more like a technical move, a kind of regency,' said onediplomat in the kingdom. 'The king is still king. What we don't know ishow much he will still be involved and this will depend on his health.'The king left hospital on December 8 after suffering what wasofficially termed a 'sudden indisposition' but is known to have been astroke.Diabetic and overweight, King Fahd was seen on television yesterdayaided by a walking stick as he received Crown Prince Abdullah andPrince Sultan, the defence minister.Saudi officials yesterday suggested the move was aimed at putting anend to speculation of a power struggle within the kingdom.The talk had been fuelled in recent months by two big shocks. The firstwas the monarch's illness, the second a car bomb on November 13 whichdestroyed a US-staffed Saudi National Guard communications centre inRiyadh, the capital.Islamic fundamentalists opposed to the regime have latched on to theseevents from their base in London and claimed a power struggle hasbroken out in the royal family.They viewed the bomb attack on the national guards as an attempt toundermine Crown Prince Abdullah.Yesterday's move preceded the unveiling of Saudi Arabia's 1996 budget.Early indications suggested the kingdom would continue public sectorretrenchment, maintaining expenditures at SR150bn (Pounds 25.8bn), thesame as in 1995.Faced with a cash crunch resulting from the collapse of oil prices andthe cost of the 1990-91 Gulf war, Saudi Arabia has since 1994 embarkedon a policy of cutting government expenditures and raising non-oilrevenues.Conservative Abdullah takes reins of power, Page 3[London Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CHIRAC CONCEDES DIALOGUE NEEDED ON REFORMS   By ANDREW JACK   PARISMr Jacques Chirac, the French president, made a sharp break with thepractice of his predecessor, Mr Francois Mitterrand, on Sunday night byraising the political content of the country's traditional New Year'sEve address from its head of state.In an address lasting nearly 15 minutes and broadcast on mosttelevision news channels, Mr Chirac devoted much of his time todefending his decisions over the last few months and how they tied into his election campaign promises.He made patriotic play of France's historical mission and globalimportance, and its continued commitment to brotherhood, tolerance andjustice.Referring to the widespread strike action since last November, whichwas prompted by his government's proposed social security reforms, hecalled the resulting period one of 'crisis'.In his strongest statement of support for Mr Alain Juppe, he praisedthe 'courage and determination' of the prime minister, as well as therest of the government.However, in a sign of implicit criticism, he said that one lesson to bedrawn from the experience was the need for greater dialogue andconsultation - something which he acknowledged had not beencharacteristic of France in the past.Another lesson - in a jibe at his political predecessors - was that 'itis no longer possible to govern as we have for the last 20 years' withonly piecemeal reforms. He stressed the need for a country able to copewith 'global competition'.He said his aim remained to build a 'new France' based on justice,unity and resonsibility, and his top priority remained to reduceunemployment - which remains at more than 11.5 per cent.He placed less emphasis than in a previous television interview lastOctober on fiscal rigour, but talked about the need to set up acreative, productive economy. He pledged that taxes - which have risensince his election - would be cut as soon as possible.President Chirac made time to discuss the French commitment to Europe -a point brought home by the EU's flag hanging alongside that of his owncountry on the wall behind him.However, he also stressed the need for change in the administration ofthe EU so that it was 'more attentive' to the daily needs of theFrench, including their 'social hopes' and the 'real priority' ofemployment.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SCALFARO SEEKS CLARITY ON POLLS   By ROBERT GRAHAM   ROMEPresident Oscar Luigi Scalfaro has appealed to Italy's politicalparties to come forward with clear ideas on how long the government ofMr Lamberto Dini should last and to give a firm calendar for the lifeof the current parliament.The head of state's appeal was contained in his annual messagedelivered on New Year's eve.The highly political message was delivered in advance of this week'smeeting of the parliamentary group leaders to fix the terms of a debateon the future of the government following the resignation tendered lastSaturday by Mr Dini, the prime minister.As expected President Scalfaro rejected the resignation, insistingparliament must decide. In his message, President Scalfaro reinforcedthis point. 'In a few days the debate in the chamber of deputies willprovide the right opportunity to know precisely what the variouspolitical groups want and to see whether a consensus emerges that isboth clear to the general public and useful to the head of state.'The debate is likely to be staged next week, allowing further time forthe political leaders to negotiate behind the scenes. Until now none ofthe main political parties has come forward with a proposal either forthe continuance of the Dini government or a date for general elections.But Mr Dini, who has been in close touch with the main party leaders,appeared confident over the weekend that he would remain in office.Backed by President Scalfaro, he has argued strongly that the countrycannot afford a government crisis and a general election during Italy'ssix-month presidency of the European Union which lasts until June.Despite underlining the importance of parliament, the tone throughoutPresident Scalfaro's 35-minute New Year's message was of a man whointended to use his limited constitutional powers to the full. He madehis own preferences plain.He went out of his way to praise the 11 month premiership of Mr Dini -so indicating his desire to see the former deputy director of the Bankof Italy remain at the helm during Italy's EU presidency. He also saidhe would like to see the current legislature carry out a proper reformof the constitution in time for the celebration in 1998 of the 50thanniversary of its introduction. This was seen as a none too subtlehint that parliament should not be dissolved before institutionalreform has been tackled.Yesterday several political parties took exception to what theyregarded as President Scalfaro's overtly partisan stance. In particularthe president's message was attacked by the rightwing NationalAlliance, by the Greens and by Reconstructed Communism, which wasformed from the hardline members of the former Communist party.Editorial comment, Page 15[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SAMPAIO LEADS AS PORTUGAL NEARS VOTE   By PETER WISE   LISBONCampaigning for Portugal's presidential election on January 14 beganthis week with Mr Jorge Sampaio, the Socialist candidate, showing aclear lead over Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, prime minister for 10 yearsuntil his centre-right Social Democrats were beaten in October'sgeneral election.Mr Sampaio, a former Socialist party leader who stepped down as mayorof Lisbon to run for the presidency, was given 41.6 per cent of thevote in a newspaper poll yesterday, compared with 34.9 per cent for MrCavaco Silva. A weekend poll based on a broader sample of more recentinterviews gave them 50 per cent and 34 per cent respectively.Since the return of democracy in 1974, Portugal has consistentlyelected presidents from the party opposed to the government so thateach acts as a counterweight to the other. Mr Cavaco Silva says thatPortugal will 'capsize' if all political weight is shifted to theSocialists, who are also dominant in local government.However, the polls indicate that most voters are inclined to provideadditional support for the Socialists, who are four seats short of aparliamentary majority, by electing Mr Sampaio. Under Portugal's 'semi-presidentialist' constitution, the president has the power to dissolveparliament and call an early election when governments run intodifficulties.Mr Antonio Guterres, the prime minister, is campaigning for the backingof a Socialist president. This would help his minority government meetelection commitments both to spend more on social reforms and exercisethe budgetary discipline required to meet the convergence targets forEuropean economic and monetary union.Ministers say Mr Cavaco Silva would seize the first opportunity todismiss the government if he won the election, although he has pledgedto co-operate fully with the Socialists in the interests of stability.The former prime minister's attempt at a transition from an aloofdecision-maker to the kind of benevolent figure of tolerance andconcern that Mr Ma rio Soares, the outgoing Socialist president, hasmade popular is proving difficult to achieve.Despite popular respect for his integrity, support for Mr Sampaio, aless charismatic leader, appears to be based more on disapproval of hisrival, whose government had grown increasingly unpopular before itsdefeat, and on backing for Mr Guterres.The government is avoiding decisive measures, including thepresentation of the 1996 budget, until after the presidential vote. Ithopes the political honeymoon that followed its election can beprolonged long enough to benefit Mr Sampaio.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996RUSSIA PLEDGES TOUGH LINE ON ECONOMY   By JOHN THORNHILL   MOSCOWRussia's economics ministry yesterday pledged it would continue topursue a harsh monetary policy designed to stabilise the economy andcut the monthly rate of inflation to below 2 per cent despite thestrong anti-government protest vote in last month's parliamentaryelections.However, the ministry's tough stance, contained in an annual economicforecast, was seemingly at odds with the the softer rhetoric employedby President Boris Yeltsin in his address to the nation on New Year'sEve.'The main task for 1996 is that those in Russia who today are poorshould begin to live better,' he said, promising the government wouldrectify the problem of delayed wage and pension payments which hascaused great social distress.Mr Yeltsin also lashed out at the corruption in financial circles whichwas responsible for diverting money intended for social spending.Last week, Mr Yeltsin criticised the economics ministry, employingrhetoric reminiscent of the Stalinist era to denounce 'saboteurs' whowere responsible for undermining the reform programme.He promised to increase payments to pensioners by compensating them forsavings eroded by the hyper-inflation of the early reform years.Mr Yeltsin's pledges have led some economists to fear that thegovernment may consider loosening its monetary policy pushing upinflation early this year. The government may come under intensepressure to increase spending on social protection to curry electoralfavour before the presidential election in June.But ministers have repeatedly argued that there is no contradictionbetween tight monetary policies and a rise in the standard of living.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PARTIES WEIGH UP RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY   By ROBERT GRAHAMPolitical decisions in Italy are rarely made in a hurry.No one wishes to assume the responsibility - and risk - of the firstmove. This is why the politicians will take their time in deciding thefate of Prime Minister Lamberto Dini's government even though they havehad ample notice of the administration's limited duration.Mr Dini tendered his resignation on Saturday to President Oscar LuigiScalfaro, after approving an additional financial package for the 1996budget. This was his last self-appointed task.President Scalfaro has now thrown the responsibility back to parliamentto decide what should happen next. This will take the form of aparliamentary debate later this week or early next week.Having acquired a taste of power over the last 11 months, Mr Dini ismore than willing to stay on. Moreover, President Scalfaro, who has thefinal say on a date for the next general election, is clearly anxiousthe former director general of the Bank of Italy should remain inoffice.President Scalfaro believes it is too late for a big political shake-upnow that Italy has the responsibility (since January 1) of thepresidency of the European Union. He thus wants Mr Dini to remain primeminister - probably with a revamped cabinet - for the duration of thesix-month presidency. But this seems to be part of a broader strategyby Mr Scalfaro, a former Christian Democrat interior minister, to allowparliament to survive until 1997, thus permitting more time for arecreation of the centre grouping which dominated post-war Italianpolitics until 1992.The parliamentary debate is expected to focus on three broad scenarios:Mr Dini heads the government to ensure a stable EU presidency andpermit elections around June.Mr Dini presides over a caretaker government with elections held inlate February or early March.A broad-based government is formed lasting up to two years to permit aprogramme of big institutional reforms.The first scenario involves several variations. For instance, Mr Dinicould seek to maintain the backing of the centre-left parties, headedby the Party of the Democratic Left (PDS) who supported his governmentof non-parliamentarians all last year. This would provide a fragilemajority in parliament unless a prior understanding was reached withthe rightwing alliance headed by Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the former primeminister. The government would be little more than a caretaker, whilethe parties indulged in a six-month election campaign.Alternatively Mr Dini, who has no political base of his own, could tryto broaden the backing for the government to include the small centreparties in the rightwing alliance. This would have the advantage oflessening the exposure of the centre-left as the government's mainbacker and would provide some chance of parliament pushing through afew reforms in the next few months. It would also help offset thedestabilising effect of the populist Northern League, which, withalmost 80 deputies, retains considerable power to swing votes.The second scenario is straight-forward and would mean parliament beingdissolved shortly after the debate on the government's future. Mr Diniwould remain in office but with no real executive power. Given that itnormally takes a good six weeks to two months to form a governmentafter an election, Italy would be without an effective administrationprobably until May.The third scenario is the most complex. At a minimum it would require acommitment from the PDS, some of the centre parties and the bulk of MrBerlusconi's rightwing alliance to back the idea of carrying out overthe next two years important institutional reforms such asstrengthening the prime minister's position and ending the duplicationof the bicameral system. This would be done either by allowing a'technical' government to continue as the executive while a specialbicameral commission was formed to draw up the reforms; or a newgovernment would be formed, drawing ministers from the partiessupporting it. The onus would then be on the government to draw up thereforms.Mr Berlusconi has been exploring this idea of a broad-based governmentover the Christmas break. His scheduled trial later this month forcorruption probably played a part in his change of mind. But the PDS issceptical of his chances, and the rightwing National Alliance (AN), hismain ally, is openly hostile to the idea. The parties themselves arechanging too fast for a broad-based alliance to survive and be useful.The PDS has the power to force elections simply by refusing to continuebacking Mr Dini; but of late Mr Massimo D'Alema, the party leader, hasdropped his insistence on an early vote. This is because thePDS-dominated centre-left is increasingly divided on strategy and besetby doubts about being led in an election by the uncharismatic Mr RomanoProdi, the Bologna academic and former head of Iri, the state holdingcompany.The centre-left staked much on striking an electoral deal with amovement headed by Mr Antonio Di Pietro, the former Milan magistrate.But Mr Di Pietro may now be prevented from entering politics because ofhis own problems with the law that have arisen as a result ofinvestigations over his abuse of office before he joined the Milanmagistrates' anti-corruption team.Against this background, the simplest option for the political partiesis to allow Mr Dini to stay with the excuse that Italy needs anidentifiable government to play its full role as EU chairman. This is aconvenient fig-leaf behind which the politicians can hide theirconfusion. But it will merely postpone the day of reckoning at theballot-box and is unlikely to provide an authoritative government, evenif Mr Dini has proven to be a skilled and ambitious operator of thesystem.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PACT TO OPEN UP STATE CONTRACTS   By GUY DE JONQUIERES   LONDONPublic procurement contracts valued at several billion dollars a yearwill be thrown open to international competition under a World TradeOrganisation agreement which took effect yesterday.The agreement covers more countries and purchasers - and applies to awider range of contracts - than existing rules agreed under theGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 15 years ago.In addition to covering services for the first time, the new rulesextend to procurement by sub-central purchasers, such as states,provinces, departments and utilities, as well as to centralgovernments.Though not all WTO members are obliged to participate in the agreement,it has been ratified by more than 20 governments, including the US, theEuropean Union's 15 members, Japan, South Korea and Switzerland.Singapore and several other countries plan to subscribe to it.The accord excludes defence contracts, EU telecoms and the US regionaland urban public transport sector.The complex new rules set a variety of thresholds, denominated inSpecial Drawing Rights, above which contracts must be opened tocompetition. The threshold for central government procurement isSDR130,000 (Pounds 125,000), for sub-central purchasers aboutSDR200,000, and for utilities roughly SDR400.000.The agreement also lays down specified tendering procedures, to ensurethat foreign bidders and foreign goods and services are treated on thesame basis as those in the purchaser's home country.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996GENE CLONING RAISES HOPES   By DANIEL GREEN   LONDONA gene that has been linked with obesity has been cloned, a step thatbrings closer a new generation of treatments for the chronicallyoverweight.Two companies, Millennium of the US and Roche of Switzerland, describethe cloning - effectively the manufacture - of the 'ob' gene in thelatest issue of the journal Cell.The ob gene triggers the manufacture of a protein, leptin, which lastyear was been shown to affect the weight of mice with no significantside effects. But the relationship between leptin and weight in humanshas not yet been established precisely.The two companies claim to have narrowed research to the gene'sactivity in the brain, but further work is probably needed beforedevelopment of an obesity drug based on the ob gene could start.Last year, the US biotechnology company Amgen paid Dollars 20m for tothe Rockefeller Institute in New York, which first identified the gene,for the rights to products arising from it.[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EUROPEAN PRESS REVIEW: BEACON FOR EMERGING DEMOCRACY - RUSSIA   By JOHN THORNHILLDemocracy can be a baffling business. In Soviet times, Russia's voterscould vote for only one party whose political philosophy was force-fedto them from birth. In last month's parliamentary elections they had achoice of 43 parties with each one claiming to have the only answer toRussia's woes.Such a drastic democratic upheaval has clearly left many Russiansbewildered and may help explain why more than one-fifth of them optedfor the familiar and voted for the return of the Communists. But theelections also proved an education for Russia's political leaders whoare now scrambling to learn the lessons before the all-importantpresidential elections scheduled in six months' time.The Magnitogorsk Worker, the local newspaper for the Urals industrialtown founded as part of Stalin's industrialisation drive, encapsulatedmany of the confusions and controversies that came to dominate thecampaign. In so doing it reflected, in microcosm, the social pain andideological uncertainties that continue to bedevil Russia.The newspaper, founded in 1930 and still proudly bearing a Sovietemblem on its front page urging the proletariat of the world to unite,provided full, lively, and generally fair coverage of the campaign,encouraging those who see the media as an important factor in thedevelopment of a healthy civil society.Like most of Russia's local newspapers, the Magnitogorsk Worker couldhave been under enormous pressure from many quarters. The list of sixparliamentary candidates for the city seat included the deputy head ofthe local administration and a director of the steel combine whichemploys 60,000 workers and dominates the region's economy.But Mr Georgy Tikhonov, the chief editor, argued that the newspaper'srole was simply to provide an objective forum for the debate andencourage readers to participate in the vote. 'This newspaper does notagitate for or against particular candidates. . . it agitates forsomething else: for the widest possibility for people to discuss openlyone or another candidacy and the course of the campaign itself. Read,think, and make your choice]' the newspaper stated.In comparison with most western newspapers, the Magnitogorsk Workerprovided few reports and opinions from its journalists but carriedextensive personal contributions from the candidates and scores ofletters from its readers.Mr Alexander Pochinok, the incumbent deputy who represented the thenpro-government Russia's Choice party in the previous vote in 1993, wasthe dominant figure in the campaign for one of Russia's 225directly-elected seats.Although he supported the government's harsh monetary policies whichmany critics blamed for Russia's social ills, Mr Pochinok boldlylaunched his campaign by concentrating on social problems and promisingto improve the lot of the elderly.But his attempt to seize the mantle of social concern was fiercelycontested by the Communist candidate who wrote an emotional tiradeagainst the government's policies and promised a restoration of thecertainties of the Soviet era.These themes were echoed in the opinions of the newspapers' readers whoexpressed impassioned and disparate views.'During the war, millions were evacuated here and resettled. They weregiven work and a roof but now they have been thrown out. Every honestperson will vote for the Communists,' said one.'I do not want to return to the miserable plague-stricken camp of thepast but I fear the thorny road forward to civilisation,' commentedanother.One reader planned not to participate in the elections at all giventhey were merely a 'political spectacle distracting the country fromits true problems' while another condemned the newspaper itself forgiving too much space to the 'so-called democrats'.The Magnitogorsk Worker made clear it was aware of some dirty electoraltactics during the campaign but did not identify who was responsiblefor them in order not to prejudice opinions.In the week before the vote, it carried an item about a pensioner whohad been contacted by someone claiming to represent the local telephonecompany.'Vote correctly and your telephone bill will be paid in advance for ayear,' the mysterious caller promised.On the eve of the elections, the newspaper urged its readers to go tothe polls although it recognised that many voters were still confusedby the extraordinary range of parties on the ballot paper.The results were slow to trickle in and the Magnitogorsk Worker did notpublish the preliminary outcome until three days after the poll. Theelectors of Magnitogorsk had returned the pro-market Mr Pochinok astheir local candidate but they had also lodged a strong protest votebacking Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky's ultra-nationalist Liberal Democraticparty and the Communists in the simultaneous ballot for the seatsassigned on the basis of proportional representation.In all, 39 parties - including Russia's Choice - failed to garnermore than the 5 per cent of the vote required to win any of the 225seats in the 450-strong parliament allocated by proportionalrepresentation. Mr Pochinok, for example, has been elected as arepresentative of a party which will be unable to form its own factionin parliament.One voter told the newspaper: 'Voting is most democratic. But you mustwrite that Hitler also came to power in Germany by democratic means. Wemust go forward to the presidential elections but people must bevigilant.'[London Page 2]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ZEROUAL PICKS LITTLE-KNOWN DIPLOMAT AS PM   By ROULA KHALAFAlgerian President Liamine Zeroual has chosen a little-known careerdiplomat as the country's new prime minister.Mr Zeroual, elected president in November, on Sunday named Mr AhmedOuyahia, his 43-year-old head of cabinet, to replace Mr Mokdad Sifi whohad been asked to stay on until the end of the year.Most Algerians met Mr Ouyahia, who comes from the Berber province ofTizi-Ouzou, for the first time when he appeared on state televisionlast July to read a statement telling them that the last round of talkswith the banned Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) had collapsed. The FIShas been battling the government since 1992. Mr Ouyahia is not believedto have taken a lead part in the negotiations.That he is among the youngest prime ministers the country has knownpoints to an attempt by Mr Zeroual to reach out to a younger generationin a country where more than 70 per cent of the people are under theage of 30. But Mr Ouyahia's appointment sheds little light on MrZeroual's post election politics.'Zeroual has opted for a safe pair of hands, a skilled functionaryrather than a political heavyweight,' said one Algerian expertyesterday. 'It means the composition of the government is not whatreally concerns him.'Mr Ouyahia's government is not expected to last longer than a yearbecause Mr Zeroual has promised legislative elections, although he hasyet to commit himself to a specific date.The prime minister's task will centre on overseeing economic reformsagreed with the International Monetary Fund and preparing for theelections.Mr Ouyahia is perhaps best known among his colleagues for arranging anaccord to end the conflict between Tuareg rebels and the Maligovernment in 1992, a task which won him recognition as a skilfulnegotiator.He was named ambassador to Mali to oversee implementation of theaccord, before becoming state secretary for co-operation and Maghrebaffairs in 1993.Although some experts have suggested the choice of a diplomat withnegotiating skills points to a determination on the part of thepresident to seek national reconciliation, any negotiations with theFIS or other opposition parties which opposed the presidential electionare likely to be conducted directly from the president's office ratherthan that of the prime minister.In a system in which the presidency enjoys wide powers, the primeminister's office is entrusted with more of a management role.[London Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996JAPAN PUBLIC PRESSED ON LOAN BAILOUT   By GERARD BAKER   TOKYOMr Tomiichi Murayama, Japan's prime minster, has urged an increasinglysceptical Japanese public to accept the government's plan to spend morethan Y685bn (Pounds 4.37bn) in bailing out the country's failed housingloan companies.In a New Year message to the nation, Mr Murayama signalled the start ofwhat is likely to be a fierce political struggle over the bailout inthe new parliamentary session which begins later this month.The prime minister acknowledged the unpopularity of the plan, whichwill cost every individual in the country at least Y5,500, but said ithad been an unavoidable and 'painful' decision.He promised a full investigation into the causes of the failure of theseven companies. 'I will try from now on to shed light on the entireproblem,' he added.Last month the cabinet agreed to allocate Y685bn from next year'sbudget to pay for the cost of partially reimbursing creditors of thebankrupt housing lenders. The government also committed itself tospending more if the final costs of liquidation turn out to be greaterthan is forecast.The companies, which were established by the leading banks in the1970s, are on the verge of collapse under a pile of nonperforming loanswhich were advanced mostly in a bout of reckless lending to theproperty sector during the bubble economy of the late 1980s.Popular opposition to the principle of spending taxpayers' money hasescalated since the decision was announced and will be exploited byopposition parties when the parliamentary discussion of the nationalbudget begins at the end of January.Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the newly elected leader of the main opposition NewFrontier party, signalled his determination at the weekend to opposethe bailout if the government did not provide a satisfactory anddetailed account of who was responsible for the costly mess.The government has already attempted to propitiate the public's angerby hastily removing the senior bureaucrat at the ministry of finance,Mr Kyosuke Shinozawa. Mr Shinozawa, the administrative vice ministerfor finance, resigned last week, in part to take responsibility for thehousing loan problem.But the opposition wants the blame for the fiasco to be spread muchmore liberally among both politicians and bureaucrats.In its sights are Mr Masayoshi Takemura, the finance minister, and mostintriguingly, Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, the international trade ministerand leader of the Liberal Democratic party, the largest coalitionpartner. Mr Hashimoto was finance minister during the period when mostof the reckless lending of the housing loan companies was undertaken.In 1990 the finance ministry issued guidelines to all financialinstitutions to curtail their lending to property-related companies.But the instructions did not apply to the housing lenders whichcontinued to pour money into highly speculative real estate projects.The finance ministry has promised a full inquiry into the circumstancesof the housing lenders' demise, and has promised that those foundresponsible, bankers, politicians and bureaucrats, will be held toaccount.But even a spate of resignations may not prove enough in the currentpolitical heat. Many members of the socialist party, the second largestcoalition member, are profoundly unhappy about the bailout, as are someofficials in the finance ministry.If the political pressure intensifies, some members of the coalitionmay break ranks and oppose the deal.Defeat for the government on such a crucial part of its budget plansfor 1996 would have potentially disastrous consequences for itsviability.[London Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INDONESIA'S CONGLOMERATES LOOK TO MARKET FORCES   By GREG EARL   JAKARTAIndonesia's big conglomerates, long regarded as 'crony capitalists'receiving government favours, are becoming much more dependent onmarket forces for their growth, according to a study.The study of sales and asset growth of the country's top groups,conducted by the Indonesian Business Data Centre, a private agency,also shows that 300 businesses are responsible for about half thecountry's gross domestic product.The centre's director, Mr Christianto Wibisono, said the study showed adistinct move away from reliance on government-awarded licences forbusiness growth in Indonesia. He said only 27 of the groups were nowdependent on managed trading and monopoly arrangements although many ofthe larger groups had been established under those business conditions.The 300 groups are estimated to have increased sales by 15 per cent in1994 to Dollars 74bn (Pounds 48bn).The figures point to some increased concentration in the hands of thelargest groups with the 10 largest recording a 17 per cent increase insales to Dollars 26bn. There were 31 groups with total sales of Dollars350m, accounting for 55 per cent of total sales, whereas in 1993 therewere estimated to have been 24 groups with that level of salesaccounting for 49 per cent of total revenue.Concentration is more evident on an assets basis with 56 groupscontrolling three quarters of the Dollars 118bn in total assets of the300 businesses.The dominance of the economy by people of Chinese descent is underlinedby the fact that only 79 of the 300 groups are owned by ethnicIndonesians and 203 by non-ethnic Indonesians, predominantly Chinese.While there are few surprises among the company's largest companies,several new players are fast emerging, with 11 groups estimated to havegrown by 50 per cent in 1994.[London Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CONSERVATIVE ABDULLAH TAKES REINS OF POWER   By ROULA KHALAFSaudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah, who was yesterday entrusted withthe running of the government by his half-brother King Fahd, has beendescribed as more conservative than the king, less likely toaccommodate the west and possibly prone to pumping less oil to raiseprices.However, as experts and diplomats were quick to point out, Saudi Arabiarun by the crown prince is likely to follow the same economic andforeign affairs policies the west has become accustomed to under KingFahd.If the king's health improves, the handing over of the running of thegovernment may be no more than a temporary measure and, until CrownPrince Abdullah takes over for good, King Fahd will continue to havethe final word on big decisions.One of more than 30 surviving sons of the late King Abdul Aziz, the71-year-old crown prince is known as a traditional bedouin who enjoysimportant ties to the tribes of Saudi Arabia. The fact that he had adifferent mother from the king's other powerful brothers has meant thathe comes from a less prominent branch than the other sons of King AbdulAziz.But as the closest in age to King Fahd, he was named crown prince whenthe latter took over in 1982. Although this has been a source ofrivalry with the rest of the clan, the sons of Abdul Aziz are known tostick together when times get rough.The crown prince is well respected and known for a stutter which seemsto disappear when giving public speeches. The bedouin base is his mainsource of strength. Since 1963, he has commanded the National Guard, alargely bedouin force which looks after internal security and acts ascounterweight to the army.In view of his strong links to Syria and the Palestinians, as well as areported reluctance to allow American troops to set up their base inSaudi Arabia during the 1990 Gulf war, the crown prince is believed tobe less internationally minded than his half-brother. He is not knownto speak English, for example, and has played a role in cultivatinglinks with the Arab world.This, however, say diplomats, is unlikely to have a bearing on theKingdom's close ties to the west, especially the US. 'The US allianceis a vital strategic alliance which the Saudis will not do much tochange,' a diplomat said.Moreover, according to Saudi observers, the crown prince played aprominent part in drumming up public support within the Kingdom for theGulf war.'He is more decisive than the king but less reflective perhaps,' saidone veteran Saudi observer who knows the crown prince. 'The king isvery cautious and tends to see procrastination as a virtue. Abdullah isless hesitant in his style and quicker to judge.'Such a style, said the observer, may translate into more forcefuldealings with Islamic fundamentalists who have bombarded the kingdomwith faxes from a propaganda base in London.Islamic dissidents are also suspected of having perpetrated theNovember 13 bomb attack on a US-staffed Saudi National Guardcommunications centre in Riyadh.As the budget unveiled yesterday suggests, economic reforms started in1994 will continue. Faced with collapse of oil prices, Saudi Arabia hashad to clamp down on spending in recent years, give the private sectora larger role and boost non-oil revenues.In an address to the nation, Crown Prince Abdullah said: 'No doubt youknow the financial situation that emerged from the (1991) Gulf war andthat your government had (earlier) promised to continue its treatmentso matters could return to what they used to be - strength andbalance.'The kingdom in recent years has been committed to keeping crude outputat 8m barrels a day in order to avoid a repeat of the mid 1980s, whenit was faced with falling prices and falling production. Diplomats saidyesterday that the crown prince was in the 1970s believed to favour apolicy of holding back production.'I think the crown prince will continue the policy of keeping oilprices stable, and the kingdom cannot relax on the economic front butwill have to continue with reforms,' a diplomat said.As reforms are pursued, however, diplomats said that for as long as thecrown prince was only acting on behalf of the king, he would have tofind a way to accommodate the king's other prominent brothers tominimise friction.This may mean that he will resort to consultation and seek theco-operation of powerful members such as Prince Sultan, defenceminister and next in line of succession.[London Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TALKS TO RESUME ON US BUDGET IMPASSE   By PATTI WALDMEIR   WASHINGTONUS President Bill Clinton will meet congressional Republican leaderslater today to resume talks on ending the protracted federal budgetdispute, after extended negotiations over the New Year weekend failedto yield agreement either on balancing the budget, or on the moreimmediate problem of ending the partial government shutdown.Mr Clinton and Republicans met throughout Saturday and Sunday, beforerecessing for New Year's Day. Both sides said no significant decisionswere taken during those negotiations, which focused on outlining areasof disagreement.But Mr Bob Dole, Senate majority leader, said negotiators were nowready to 'start making the tough decisions'. And there were signs ofsome flexibility from radical freshmen Republicans in Congress: severalof them, interviewed on weekend television programmes, made clear thatthey were willing to compromise on the Dollars 245bn (Pounds 159bn) taxcut included in their plan, saying balancing the budget was moreimportant than cutting taxes. Mr Clinton favours a much more modest taxcut.Mr Mike McCurry, the White House spokesman, said today's negotiationswould focus on 'trade-offs' between cuts in healthcare spending, taxesand welfare needed to balance the budget over seven years, as agreed byboth sides in November. There was no sign at the weekend that the twosides had resolved the basic philosophical dispute which underlies thebudget impasse: whether to shift power away from the federal governmentto the states, as the Republicans want; and whether to curb guaranteesof healthcare for the poor and elderly.Both issues are likely to influence the outcome of this year'spresidential election campaign, which will soon shift into top gearwith a concentration of state presidential primary elections inFebruary and March.Parallel efforts will resume today to solve the more immediate problemof getting federal employees back to work, and ending the shutdown,which has already lasted more than a fortnight.The President and First Lady spent New Year's Eve and Day away from thefrustrations of the budget impasse, celebrating with 1,000 friends atthe Hilton Head resort in South Carolina, where they attended atraditional New Year seminar to debate subjects such as 'morals,manners, and today's pop culture' and 'politics, media and the declineof civility'.[London Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996RHODES' HEIRS RETURN TO ZAMBIA'S COPPER MINES: AFTER 25 YEARS OFNATIONALISATION, BOARDROOMS IN JOHANNESBURG AND LONDON MAY AGAINDETERMINE THE FUTURE OF ITS MAIN INDUSTRY   By TONY HAWKINSCecil John Rhodes would have relished the irony.Twenty five years after Kenneth Kaunda, Zambia's founding president,nationalised the country's copper mines, the government of PresidentFrederick Chiluba may be on the verge of taking the first step towardsmeeting its promise to put the industry back into the private sector.Negotiations with Anglo American Corporation for a feasibility studyfor the development of the Konkola copper mining project are close toconclusion, say industry officials.It would be a move as rich in symbolism as the 1969 take-over itself,seen at the time as heralding a new era for a country that was oncelittle more than a fiefdom of Rhodes' British South Africa Company.Rhodes' vision of the company blazing a commercial trail from the Capeto Cairo, in the name of an empire run by Englishmen, 'is now buried -I hope and pray, never to rise again in this part of Africa,' declaredMr Kaunda, architect of what turned out a disastrous socialistprogramme.Once again, however, boardrooms in Johannesburg and London coulddetermine the development of an industry still at the heart of Zambia'seconomy, accounting for more than 90 per cent of export earnings.With reserves at the Nchanga copper mine, which supplies ore to thestate-owned Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM), likely to beexhausted by the end of the decade, the government is under mountingpressure to give the go-ahead for the Dollars 600m (Pounds 390m)Konkola project.Although widely anticipated, the decision to invite the South Africanmining house, which has a 27.3 per cent stake in ZCCM, to prepare astudy and lead a consortium to develop the new mine will becontroversial, not just because Anglo American is being invited back.The Konkola decision will also have far-reaching implications for theprivatisation of ZCCM itself.While Zambia's privatisation programme has accelerated in the past year - by the end of September, 87 out of 217 business units had beenprocessed, resulting in a significant inflow of new investment andexpertise - progress in dealing with the politically sensitive coppermining industry has been slow.Whereas privatisation of dozens of small state-owned businesses haspassed off with little controversy, the sale of the crown jewels, inthe form of ZCCM, is a different matter, not least because Mr Kaunda isback on the campaign trail, preparing to contest next October'spresidential elections.United Nations Conference on Trade and Development figures, publishedlast month in the World Investment Report, estimate an inflow of morethan Dollars 350m in new foreign investment since the 1991 elections.In the last year a number of multinationals have returned to, orexpanded operations in, Zambia by buying state-owned companies.The list includes Tate & Lyle in sugar, Unilever and HJ Heinz in foodprocessing and toiletries, the Commonwealth Development Corporation incement and agriculture, South African Breweries in brewing and AngloAmerican in hotels.The net result is that Zambia attracted more foreign investment in1991/94 than any other sub-Saharan country, except oil exportersNigeria and Angola.Nevertheless, the announcement of ZCCM's privatisation just monthsbefore elections may seriously damage the prospects of Mr Chiluba'sMovement for Multiparty Democracy.The past four years of structural adjustment have been extremelypainful, with falling per capita incomes, rising unemployment, highinflation and interest rates and plummeting industrial production.That all of this was necessary to turn around an economy brought to itsknees by 27 years of mismanagement by Mr Kaunda's United NationalIndependence party (UNIP) may count for little when voters come to casttheir ballots.Economic reform would have paid dividends far more rapidly had theprivatisation programme, now beginning to show real results, beenimplemented both sooner and more efficiently; had the country not hadtwo droughts; and, most important, had the copper mines been able toexploit a period of strong demand and high prices.Figures for the first nine months of 1995 point to copper output ofabout 325,000 tonnes this year, down 8 per cent on 1994 and less thanhalf the average of over 700,000 tonnes a year in the late 1960s.In cost of production terms, ZCCM is in the top 10 per cent of globalproducers. Competitiveness will deteriorate further when costs grow asNchanga nears the end of its economic life, and the industry suffersfrom the cumulative effects of undercapitalisation, inadequate skills,reinvestment and maintenance spending, and weak management.If all goes to plan, Konkola will be developed as a joint venturebetween the government, whose contribution is likely to take the formof providing already existing smelting and refining capacity - therebyfurther weakening the rump of ZCCM itself - and a Anglo-ledconsortium, which may take some 60 per cent of the equity in thescheme.While such an arrangement makes sound commercial sense, it will leaveMr Chiluba open to the criticism of privatising ZCCM by stealth.An agreement in principle to develop Konkola, however, will reassure anincreasingly restive donor community.The response from the finance minister, Mr Ronald Penza, struck anequivocal note, speaking of the need for 'the utmost caution' inprivatising the mines.'We must have the necessary political support,' he said - which wasinterpreted by some donors as political shorthand for more delay.[London Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INDICATORS-----------------------------------------------------------------------                       PRICES AND COMPETITIVENESS-----------------------------------------------------------------------Yearly figures are shown in index form with the common base year of1985. The real exchange rate is an index throughout; other quarterlyand monthly figures show the percentage change over the correspondingperiod in the previous year and are positive unless otherwise stated.-----------------------------------------------------------------------                              UNITED STATES-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986           101.9      98.6     102.1      99.4     85.01987           105.6     100.7     103.9      96.7     76.21988           109.9     103.2     106.8      99.1     71.01989           115.2     108.5     109.9     101.1     75.11990           121.5     113.9     113.5     104.3     73.41991           126.6     116.3     117.3     107.8     74.01992           130.4     117.7     120.1     108.4     74.01993           134.3     119.2     123.1     107.7     76.31994           137.8     119.9     126.5     105.1     74.2-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     2.7       1.3       2.4      -2.9     71.61st qtr 1995     2.8       1.7       2.1      -2.1     70.22nd qtr 1995     3.1       2.1       2.3      -1.2     66.53rd qtr 1995     2.6       1.6       2.7      -0.6     68.6-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    2.7       1.7       2.2      -3.2     72.6January 1995     2.8       1.7       2.2      -3.1     71.8February         2.9       1.7       2.0      -1.7     70.9March            2.8       1.8       2.2      -1.4     68.2April            3.0       2.1       2.3      -1.4     66.2May              3.2       2.2       2.2      -1.2     66.8June             3.0       2.1       2.3      -1.1     66.8July             2.8       1.7       2.8      -0.6     66.8August           2.6       1.3       2.8      -0.5     68.8September        2.5       1.8       2.6      -0.7     70.1October          2.8       2.1       2.7November         2.6       2.0-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                  JAPAN-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986           100.9      95.3     101.4     102.8    118.41987           101.3      92.5     103.1     100.1    122.91988           102.4      92.3     107.8      96.9    130.91989           105.1      94.2     114.0      96.9    123.91990           108.4      95.7     120.1      99.8    108.51991           111.9      96.8     124.3     104.0    114.51992           114.0      95.9     125.6     112.9    115.91993           115.4      94.3     125.8     118.9    133.61994           116.2      92.6     128.3     118.5    139.2-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     0.8      -1.1       2.4      -4.3    139.41st qtr 1995     0.0      -0.8       4.0      -4.0    140.82nd qtr 1995    -0.1      -0.5       2.2      -3.4    153.73rd qtr 1995    -0.2      -0.7       3.7      -0.3    138.6-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    0.5      -0.9       1.4      -4.6    138.6January 1995     0.5      -0.9       4.8      -3.2    137.4February         0.0      -0.8       3.7      -5.2    138.4March           -0.4      -0.5       3.4      -3.6    146.0April           -0.2      -0.4       3.5      -4.5    155.3May             -0.1      -0.5       3.5      -3.7    152.8June             0.0      -0.6       0.8      -2.0    153.0July            -0.1      -0.7       6.4      -0.3    147.3August          -0.4      -0.7       0.3      -0.2    138.2September       -0.1      -0.6       2.4      -0.4    130.2October         -0.9      -0.6       2.1November        -0.9-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                 GERMANY-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986            99.9      97.5     103.6     103.8    107.41987           100.1      95.0     107.9     107.1    110.81988           101.4      96.2     112.6     106.9    109.81989           104.2      99.3     117.1     108.0    105.31990           107.0     101.0     123.5     110.3    107.61991           110.9     103.4     131.3     115.0    105.11992           116.6     104.9     138.2     121.5    107.51993           121.7     105.1     145.6     125.9    108.81994           125.1     105.7     150.8     118.1    107.4-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     2.6       1.3       2.9      -7.9    108.91st qtr 1995     2.0       1.7       1.9              112.42nd qtr 1995     1.9       1.9       3.8              114.03rd qtr 1995     1.7       1.9                        112.6-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    2.5       1.6        na      -6.4    109.0January 1995     2.2       1.6        na              110.7February         2.0       1.8        na              111.4March            1.9       1.8        na              114.8April            2.0       2.0        na              115.0May              1.8       1.9        na              113.5June             2.0       2.0        na              113.4July             1.8       2.0        na              113.9August           1.7       1.8        na              112.0September        1.8       1.9        na              111.9October          1.8       1.6        naNovember         1.7                  na-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                   FRANCE-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986           102.5      97.2     104.5     101.6    103.41987           105.9      97.8     107.8     103.0    104.81988           108.8     102.8     111.1     104.1    102.11989           112.6     108.4     115.4     105.2    100.11990           116.5     107.1     120.6     109.6    103.41991           120.2     105.8     125.8     113.4    101.11992           123.1     104.0     130.3     115.6    104.71993           125.6     101.1     133.7     118.1    107.01994           127.7     102.5     136.7              106.5-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     1.6       5.3       2.1              106.81st qtr 1995     1.7       0.7       2.0              106.42nd qtr 1995     1.6       1.1       2.0              106.73rd qtr 1995     1.8      -0.2                        107.1-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    1.6        na        na        na    106.2January 1995     1.7        na        na        na    105.7February         1.7        na        na        na    105.9March            1.8        na        na        na    107.5April            1.6        na        na        na    108.3May              1.6        na        na        na    105.8June             1.6        na        na        na    106.3July             1.5        na        na        na    107.0August           1.9        na        na        na    107.1September        2.0        na        na        na    107.3October          1.8        na        na        naNovember         1.9        na        na        na-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                ITALY-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986           106.1     100.2     104.8     102.7    101.31987           111.0     103.2     111.6     105.5    102.11988           116.5     106.8     118.4     109.7    100.91989           124.2     113.1     125.6     112.3    105.71990           131.8     117.8     134.7     118.8    112.51991           140.3     121.7     147.9     129.5    113.61992           147.7     124.0     155.9     134.3    110.01993           153.9     128.7     161.6     136.7     95.71994           160.0     133.5     167.0     137.9     93.7-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     3.8       4.8       2.9      -0.4     92.71st qtr 1995     4.4       6.5       2.5       0.4     89.92nd qtr 1995     5.5       8.8       2.3               87.73rd qtr 1995     5.7       9.0       3.6               92.9-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    4.1       5.4       3.0        na     92.1January 1995     3.9       5.6       2.8        na     92.6February         4.3       6.3       2.4        na     91.9March            4.9       7.5       2.3        na     85.7April            5.2       8.2       2.3        na     84.0May              5.5       9.0       2.3        na     89.0June             5.8       9.2       2.2        na     89.8July             5.6       9.2       3.5        na     92.0August           5.8       9.0       3.4        na     93.7September        5.8       8.7       3.9        na     94.7October          5.8       3.9                  naNovember         6.0                            na-----------------------------------------------------------------------                              UNITED KINGDOM-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                              Unit     Real              Consumer  Producer            labour   exchange               prices    prices   Earnings   costs     rate-----------------------------------------------------------------------1985           100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0    100.01986           103.4     101.4     107.7     105.1     94.31987           107.7     104.9     116.3     107.5     94.51988           113.0     108.7     126.2     110.3    102.31989           121.8     113.9     137.2     115.1    101.71990           133.3     121.0     150.1     122.7    102.91991           141.2     127.5     162.4     129.5    106.11992           146.4     131.5     173.1     130.5    103.01993           148.7     136.7     180.9     130.4     95.11994           152.4     140.1     189.5     130.4     96.4-----------------------------------------------------------------------4th qtr 1994     2.6       2.5       5.2      -0.3     96.01st qtr 1995     3.4       3.6       5.0       2.0     94.22nd qtr 1995     3.4       4.2       4.7       3.1     91.03rd qtr 1995     3.7       4.4       4.3       3.7     91.0-----------------------------------------------------------------------December 1994    2.9       2.8       5.8       2.1     95.9January 1995     3.3       3.5       4.6       2.2     95.9February         3.4       3.6       5.6       2.5     94.4March            3.5       3.8       4.8       1.2     92.5April            3.3       4.2       5.2       2.8     91.2May              3.4       4.2       4.5       3.4     91.0June             3.5       4.2       4.4       3.0     90.8July             3.5       4.5       4.9       4.0     90.4August           3.6       4.4       4.2       3.4     91.2September        3.9       4.4       3.9       3.6     91.5October          3.2       4.4       3.9       4.1November         3.1       4.3-----------------------------------------------------------------------Statistics for Germany apply only to western Germany. Data supplied byDatastream and WEFA from national government and IMF sources, and by JPMorgan, New York. Consumer prices: not seasonally adjusted. Producerprices: not seasonally adjusted, US - finished goods, Japan -manufactured goods, Germany - industrial products, France - intermediategoods, Italy - total producer prices, UK - manufactured products.Earnings index: not seasonally adjusted, refers to earnings inmanufacturing except France and Italy (wage rates in industry). Hourlyexcept Japan (monthly) and UK (weekly). Unit labour costs: seasonallyadjusted, measured in domestic currencies. Germany - mining andmanufacturing, other countries - manufacturing industry. Real exchangerate: JP Morgan real effective exchange rate index versus 18 industrialcountry currencies, adjusted for change in relative wholesale price ofdomestic manufactures. A fall in the index indicates improvedinternational competitiveness.-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SRI LANKA'S WAR EUPHORIA FADES   By AMAL JAYASINGHE   COLOMBOThe euphoria that erupted when Sri Lanka's military scored asignificant victory last month over separatist Tamil rebels in theirnorthern stronghold of Jaffna has sharply diminished with steep priceincreases coming into effect in the New Year to pay mounting war bills.President Chandrika Kumaratunga yesterday promised to press ahead witha carrot-and-stick strategy to end more than two decades of ethnicviolence which has claimed more than 50,000 lives.'The economic cost of the war will have an all-round effect in terms ofhigher prices,' Mr GL Peiris, deputy finance minister, said. 'This isa war for peace, so there is no question that we have to find theresources for it.'The government estimates that the war against the Liberation Tigers ofTamil Eelam (LTTE) will cost Dollars 760m (Pounds 495m) this year, upfrom a provisional Dollars 640m in 1995.The seemingly unending fighting was felt by the tiny Colombo StockExchange, which shed 33 per cent of its value during 1995. Amid fallingforeign reserves, the Sri Lankan rupee depreciated by 8 per centagainst the dollar in 1995.Yesterday the government lifted a ban on local banks raising capitalabroad, in an attempt to reduce domestic interest rates, which lastmonth galloped to 105 per cent amid a cash flow crisis.It is also raising telecommunications charges by 20 per cent, bus faresby 50 per cent and electricity tariffs by 20 to 100 per cent, dependingon the rate of consumption.However, Mr AS Jayewardena, the central bank governor, said theeconomic picture should improve in 1996, with foreign capital inflowsexpected to rise with the sale of state enterprises.The government is hoping to attract Dollars 420m in foreign capitalfrom privatisation, including the sale of the telecommunicationsoperator and the national airline, AirLanka. The projections areconsidered too optimistic by private analysts.Government politicians said the rising prices and the government'sfailure to turn the military success into a political victory hadturned initial enthusiasm into despondency.Despite the fall of Jaffna, the Tigers have shown that they are stillable to carry out spectacular guerrilla attacks using suicide bombers.Army camps and convoys have been targeted by lone Tiger guerrillasladen with explosives.Tamils who fled the fighting in Jaffna are sheltered in areas of thecountry's north still under rebel dominance. The Tigers say they willnot allow civilians to cross over to government-held areas of Jaffna,though defence analysts say that doing so would help the Tigers to gohome and revert to hit-and-run attacks against the army.The military on the other hand is ill-equipped to supply its35,000strong force in Jaffna because all land routes to the region aredominated by the rebels. They depend on the minuscule air force and thenavy.Mr Anuruddha Ratwatte, deputy defence minister, said the army wouldsoon open a land route to Jaffna. It would mean a fresh offensive thatwould cost many more lives, officials said, and the army was alreadybracing for it.[London Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ZEDILLO RESHUFFLES CABINET   By DANIEL DOMBEY   MEXICO CITYA year to the day after he lost his finance minister in the fall-outfrom Mexico's botched devaluation, President Ernesto Zedillo last weekmade further changes to a government still struggling with theunpopularity unleashed by the currency crisis.Mr Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza, who as energy minister was criticised forlinks to the old guard of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary party,has been replaced, along with Ms Norma Samaniego, the country'scomptroller general, who was thought to be keeping too low a profile toget to grips with Mexico's allegedly rampant corruption. Mr CarlosSalomon, the head of Mr Zedillo's press office and frequent target ofcomplaints about the administration's news management at times whenspeculation about government changes unsettled the peso, has also beenremoved.The alterations leave key economic posts unchanged and do not indicateany big shift in strategy. While the new energy secretary, Mr JesusReyes Heroles, spent much of the previous administration advocating amore interventionist economic approach, the new comptroller general, MrArsenio Farell, helped push through the wage-labour pacts that thenprovided the centrepiece of economic policy.Mr Zedillo's supporters claim the alterations draw a line under thepolitical difficulties of the government's first year and set the stagefor further reform. But other observers deem the changes a tardyreaction to months of criticism.'This is a defensive move. It does not take the initiative as a morethorough going reshuffle would have done,' said Mr Juan Molinar, apolitics professor at El Colegio de Mexico, a graduate researchinstitution.Mr Zedillo does not face a nationwide electoral test untilcongressional elections due in 1997. But he can ill afford a repetitionthis year of 1995's election results, which saw the main right-wingopposition party establish control over roughly a third of localgovernment, and win three of five governorship elections.With the government predicting an economic recovery of only 3 per centgrowth this year, Mr Zedillo's new appointees will find themselves thefocus of added attention in their tasks of managing the government'srelationship with the press, reducing bureaucratic profligacy andreforming and attracting new investment to the country's energy sector.[London Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FT GUIDE TO 1996JANUARY1st Italy takes over the presidency of the European Union, the EU'scustoms union with Turkey starts, and Copenhagen begins its term asEuropean Cultural Capital. Austria celebrates its 1,000th anniversaryas a nation this year.8th The return of George Michael, whose new single, Jesus To A Child,goes on sale today. It is his first release since he ended his contractwith Sony Music, and also the first record release for DreamWorks, runby its billionaire co-founder, David Geffen.12th - 17th Fifth World Hot Air Airships Championships in Aosta, Italy.14th Portuguese presidential elections - first round. OutgoingPresident Mario Soares, who is completing his second five-year term,cannot stand again.17th Silvio Berlusconi, leader of the Forza Italia movement, goes ontrial in Milan, charged with bribing officials of the Guardia diFinanza (financial police). A guilty verdict could destroy Forza Italiaand damage the right-wing alliance of which it is the core.19th Annual summit of Comesa (Common Market of Eastern and SouthernAfrica) in Windhoek.Japan - US aviation talks in Tokyo.20th Palestinians elect their own assembly for the first time inhistory. Over a million registered voters in Gaza and the West Bankwill choose a legislative council and a president of the council.Yassir Arafat leads the betting to become president. His Fatah party isexpected to do less well, but will almost certainly emerge as thesingle biggest bloc.21st The approximate start of Ramadan, the Islamic month of fasting.The precise timing depends on the first sighting of the crescent moon.Office hours in some countries are limited.23rd Another Milanese corruption trial. Giorgio Armani, GianfrancoFerre and other Italian fashion stars face the court charged withcorruption over allegations that fashion houses paid tax inspectors forlenient audits.28th Superbowl XXX in Phoenix closes the American football season.FEBRUARY1st - 6th The annual gathering of the political and business clans atthe World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.2nd Daiwa Bank due to withdraw from the US for concealing bond tradinglosses.7th Haiti continues its crawl towards democracy, as PresidentJean-Bertrand Aristide hands over power to Mr Rene Preval, hisideological clone, who won the December election. But Mr Aristide isnot ready for retirement and will stand again in 2000.9th A look at one of the few artistic phenomena to have run the courseof the century: 'Abstraction in the 20th century: Total Risk, Freedom,Discipline', an exhibition at New York's Guggenheim Museum until May12.14th The cricket World Cup starts, to be played in India, Pakistan andSri Lanka. Traditionally the World Cup chains most of south Asia to thetelevision set while evoking only modest interest elsewhere.Now is the time to claim that you are the long lost heir to the Tsaristcrown. At New York's Metropolitan Museum from the 16th, the exhibitionFaberge in America features Imperial Easter Eggs commissioned by thelast Tsars. Later in February, the remains of Russia's final Tsar,Nicholas II, will be buried in St Petersburg.18th Polish referendum on methods of privatisation.19th The Chinese Year of the Rat begins. Rat years have been auspiciousfor Japanese stock prices.20th A good day for rice growers outside Indonesia. This year IdulFitri, the celebration at the end of Ramadan, the Islamic fastingmonth, falls before the main Indonesian rice harvest is completed. Ricedemand peaks during Idul Fitri, so the country's rice bowl managers arescouring the world for supplies.20th New Hampshire opens the US presidential primary season proper,though Iowa will have chosen the first delegates in party caucuses onFebruary 12. Bill Clinton is unopposed on the Democratic side so themain interest centres on whether any Republican can stop Senator BobDole. After New Hampshire the primaries come thicker, faster andearlier than ever, with 24 states holding them by March 26. The twomain parties' nominations could thus be decided by Easter.MARCH1st - 2nd Heads of state meet for the first ever Asian-EU Summit inBangkok.2nd Alan Greenspan's second four-year term as chairman of the FederalReserve Board expires. President Bill Clinton will probably nominatehim for a third term, in order to minimise disruption in the financialmarkets during the election campaign.3rd Spain holds general elections a year before schedule, with theconservative Popular party expecting its first crack at government.Knee-deep in scandals, Felipe Gonzalez's minority Socialist governmentcould not postpone the day any longer, as its allies have walked out.But Gonzalez is still a man to watch, and the outcome could be closerthan the conservatives think.8th United Nations troops to leave Rwanda.Japan's budget to be passed at an ordinary parliamentary session.15th - 17th Swedish Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson formally hands overpower to his successor Goran Persson at a Social Democratic partycongress.16th - 17th Robert Mugabe seeks a new term in Zimbabwean presidentialelections.Gianni Agnelli, 74, is expected to hand over as Fiat chairman to CesareRomiti, 72, perhaps some time around Agnelli's 75th birthday on March12. Romiti, only the second non - family chairman in Fiat's history,will preside over an interregnum, probably preparing for the fourthgeneration: Giovanni Alberto, Gianni's nephew.23rd Taiwan holds its first presidential election by universal suffrage.25th - 27th Inter - American Development Bank annual meeting in BuenosAires.29th The EU's inter-governmental conference to review the Maastrichttreaty opens in Turin. The conference later switches to monthlymeetings between EU foreign ministers. The IGC will consider beefing upthe EU's common foreign and security policy, and extending powers tothe European Parliament. Germany is leading calls for more majorityvoting, but the UK is resisting. Insiders therefore predict an IGCdeadlock in late 1996, followed by an agreement with a new governmentafter the UK general election, to be held by April 1997.APRIL1st The world's largest bank, the newly merged Bank of Tokyo -Mitsubishi, opens. The bank will not just be big - by Japanesestandards it will also be financially strong, with one of the lowestproportions of non-performing loans on its balance sheet and a widepresence in international markets.The merger is expected to herald a broader consolidation of theJapanese banking industry, as the other large banks seek partners toenable them to compete with the new giant.1st China plans to slash import tariffs on 4,000 items to an average 23per cent in its quest for WTO membership.9th - 12th International Atomic Energy Agency conference in Vienna on10 years after the Chernobyl disaster11th Uniquely in recent European history, a former prime minister goeson trial charged with complicity in a murder. Giulio Andreotti of Italyfaces a Perugia court over the death in 1979 of the journalist MinoPecorelli.11th - 12th US Masters golf in Augusta14th South Korean parliamentary elections15th - 16th European Bank for Reconstruction and Development annualmeeting in Sofia.15th - 16th Ministerial meeting between the EU and Rio Group countriesin Cochabamba, Bolivia.16th - 18th President Clinton visits Japan.20th to May 11th Unctad four-yearly conference in Midrand, SouthAfrica. The heads of state of 187 countries are invited.21st Queen Elizabeth II turns 70India will probably go to the polls in April for a general electionunlikely to deliver a strong, single party government. The campaignwill be dominated by opposition allegations of Congress partycorruption. Congress will portray the right-wing, Hindu nationalistBharatiya Janata party as being divisively based on religion. Economicissues may not feature heavily, aside from BJP appeals to 'economicnationalism'.30th Deadline for completing negotiations on liberalising basictelecommunications services, under auspices of the World TradeOrganisation.MAY9th The day by which South Africa has to unveil its new constitution.Among the issues to be resolved are whether there will still be agovernment of national unity and the powers of the provinces.9th - 20th The Cannes Film Festival16th The Dominican Republic votes in a presidential election which, forthe first time in 30 years, will involve neither Joaqun Balaguer norJuan Bosch, the two octogenarians who have dominated the country'spolitics. Mr Bosch has retired because of poor health, while MrBalaguer cannot stand for a seventh term because changes in theconstitution prevent consecutive terms.17th The trial of Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols for the OklahomaCity bombing of 1995 is due to open.17th to August 25th. The Glyndebourne Festival Opera in southernEngland. The pick of the 1996 festival will be Handel's 'Theodora' andBerg's 'Lulu'.21st - 22nd Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Developmentannual meeting of finance, foreign and trade ministers.22nd Degas: Beyond Impressionism exhibition. Degas achieved fame withhis work of the 1870s and 1880s, above all with pictures of the balletand the racecourse, but his experimental later work has never beenproperly studied, and this will be the first big show devoted to it. Itruns at the National Gallery, London, until August 26, and moves to theArt Institute of Chicago in September.22nd World Health Organisation publishes the World Health Report, whichis expected to highlight the danger of bacterial resistance to drugs.Such infections as tuberculosis and gonorrhea have become resistant todrugs and have outpaced the development of antibiotics to control them.22nd - 24th The African Development Bank annual meeting in Abidjan.31st The World Health Organisation marks World No-Tobacco Day.31st - June 1st The Czech Republic's first general election since its'velvet divorce' from Slovakia in 1992. The centre-right Prime MinisterVaclav Klaus leads the polls.JUNE5th Opec general conference in Vienna.Vietnam's eighth Communist party congress is due to take place in Hanoithis month.8th - 30th European Championship soccer. Can the persistently mediocreEngland team use home advantage to win its first important trophy in 30years? The game against the Netherlands should be testing, and the oneagainst Scotland colourful. The match with the least tourist potentialis Bulgaria versus Romania in Newcastle. The Germans, the Italians andthe Dutch are the best bets to win the championship, and the Turks arethe worst.10th Annual meeting of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),attended by central bankers from around the world.The Italian general elections, expected this February, May, June orsometime later. It is a mystery when Italy's political parties willagree to hold the early polls. If the elections are not held in thefirst half of 1996, the life of parliament will probably be prolongeduntil the spring of 1997.16th Scheduled date for the Russian presidential elections, and theyear's most likely source of political shock. The Russian constitutionvests vast powers in the presidency, and some analysts fear that aCommunist candidate, or, even worse, an ultra-nationalist, may win.However, businessmen and politicians close to Russian President BorisYeltsin are already urging him to postpone the poll. Will Yeltsin befit to fight?21st - 30th Gays and lesbians hold the Europride conference inCopenhagen.22nd - 23rd EU summit of heads of state and government in Florence.24th The Wimbledon tennis tournament starts, and the search for Britishheroes (anyone who reaches the second round) is on.27th - 29th Heads of government and finance ministers from the Group ofSeven leading industrial countries gather in Lyons for their annualeconomic summit. In recent years the G7 has tried to scale back thepomp and ceremony which accompanies these jamborees, but it is not yetclear that President Jacques Chirac, the host, will be able to resistarranging something spectacular. France, which is chairing the G7 in1996, wants the meeting to concentrate on development, while theleaders are also expected to use the meeting to accelerate reform ofUnited Nations institutions.30th Hong Kong enters its last year under British rule.JULY1st Ireland takes over the EU presidency.7th - 12th Eleventh International Conference on Aids in Vancouver.19th The Proms. The world's biggest music festival enters its secondcentury under new director Nicholas Kenyon. At London's Royal AlbertHall until September 14.19th The centenary edition of the modern Olympics meets a steamysouthern summer in Atlanta, Georgia, which perhaps explains why themost sought-after seats have been for the swimming and divingcompetititions. Going on the off-chance is not advised since just aboutall tickets are long gone by lottery or to sponsors. A total of 26sports will be on display, with only women's softball as a newcomer(don't sniff, the fastballs come in at 90mph). Some refinementselsewhere: for instance, mountain bikes have been added to the cyclingclassification. The Games end on August 4.20th The Salzburg Festival, until August 31. Of the three new operaproductions, the most intriguing is Beethoven's 'Fidelio', which pairsoctogenarian conductor Georg Solti with radical Germanproducer-designer Herbert Wernicke. The other show to catch is thePierre Boulez-Peter Stein production of Schoenberg's 'Moses und Aron'.Some time this summer Stanley Kubrick, one of Hollywood's mostinfluential but least productive film makers, starts shooting Eyes WideShut starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman in London. Kubrick, alegendary figure in the film world, has written, directed and produceda string of successes from 2001: A Space Odyssey to Dr Strangelove. Heis a notorious perfectionist - the actor Jack Nicholson said he 'givesnew meaning to the word meticulous' - and has not made a film sinceFull Metal Jacket in 1987.31st Japan-US semiconductor accord to expire.AUGUST11th - 31st The 50th Edinburgh International Festival. Productions byRobert Wilson, Robert Lepage and Peter Stein, orchestras fromCleveland, Moscow, New York and Oslo, plus Houston Grand Opera.12th Liberian presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled.12th - 15th US Republican party national convention in San Diego,California, followed from August 27 to 29 by the Democratic partynational convention in Chicago, Illinois. Both are later than usualbecause of the Olympics. The main order of business for both is tocrown candidates for president and vice president, with the latterusually providing what suspense there is. But conventions, by alsoendorsing party platforms, can set a tone for the autumn campaign forthe White House. The harsh rightwing notes sounded by the Republicansin Houston in 1992 got George Bush off on the wrong foot, while theleft's anti-war riots in Chicago in 1968 gave Hubert Humphrey ahandicap he never overcame. Party managers try to script conventionbusiness to the last minute, ensuring that candidates get maximumexposure, but perfect discipline is often hard to impose on committeddelegates.16th Indonesia's President Suharto delivers the annual State of theNation address, marking his country's Independence Day on August 17. Heis not a man for saying a lot in public, so few of his citizens willwatch anything else on television today. This year's speech will bemore interesting than most, because Mr Suharto will outline how hethinks the country should behave as it prepares for the five - yearlyelections which begin in 1997. Deciphering a speech from the man whohas run the country for 28 years usually requires the delphic qualitiesof a Javanese dukun. But identifying who he thinks should win theelections shouldn't be difficult.19th Bill Clinton turns 50. If he loses the White House in November, hefaces the prospect of a great many rounds of golf.25th - 26th London celebrates the 31st Notting Hill Carnival. On thesecond day, Britain takes a summer Bank Holiday.SEPTEMBER1st The second anniversary of the IRA ceasefire, if peace holds inNorthern Ireland.9th The 20th anniversary of Mao's death will be cause for cautiousrecognition by the Chinese Communist party, which has a deep fear thatanniversaries will be turned into occasions for popular protest. Eventhe party faithful have mixed views about Mao - he is officiallyreckoned to have been '70 per cent right, 30 per cent wrong' in hisrole as the Great Helmsman.9th - 13th Britain's Trades Union Congress holds its annual conferencein Blackpool.14th Jewish New Year 5757 starts.17th United Nations General Assembly opens in New York.19th Fiftieth anniversary of Winston Churchill's call for a 'UnitedStates of Europe'.20th - 22nd The Pope visits France.30th Crunch time arrives for Spain's prospects for joining the Europeansingle currency. This is the deadline for submitting the crucial 1997budget. The Euro was launched in Madrid, but Spain won't be a foundingmember unless the government - possibly a new conservativeadministration - manages to slash the public sector deficit. Not thatSpain is the only EU member facing this particular problem.30th The British Labour's party conference runs in Blackpool untilOctober 4. If Labour can avoid turbulence, it will surely romp home in1997 - or possibly earlier. This means that the party's detailed taxplans are expected to be kept in reserve until the last minute, whilethe conference will only be asked to rubber stamp the final elements ofLabour's policy review, including a long-awaited statement on socialsecurity reforms. Tony Blair should already be profiting from twoby-election victories early in the New Year, and will attempt toexploit the government's vanishing majority on key issues such asEurope.OCTOBER1st - 3rd The annual meetings of the IMF and World Bank in Washington.8th - 11th The British Tory party conference in Bournemouth. PossiblyJohn Major's last as prime minister, so pretenders will bid for thesuccession.15th-29th: British International Motor Show at the National ExhibitionCentre near Birmingham. The days of bikini - clad models draped acrossshiny bonnets at motor fairs have generally given way to sobersalesmanship. This show opens to the public from October 18.16th Organisers of 1995's Million Man March are planning a MillionFamily March in Washington for today.29th Last possible date for Israeli elections to be held.29th The winner of the Booker Prize, Britain's most prestigiousliterary award, is named in London. Expect critical face-gouging. Lastyear, super-heavyweight Salman Rushdie (4-5 favourite for The Moor'sLast Sigh) was stylishly outpointed by fast-punching middleweight PatBarker (5-1; The Ghost Road). Things can only get bloodier.30th Helmut Kohl will have been German chancellor for 5,144 days, aslong as Konrad Adenauer, who took the job in 1949 aged 73. Havingoutrun his idol, Mr Kohl must hang on until 2001 to become the longestserving chancellor ever, upstaging Bismarck, who held office for 6,940days from 1871 to 1890. Will he make it? Mr Kohl says he expects toquit in 1998. But Der Spiegel, the news magazine Mr Kohl refuses toread, already calls him 'Bismarck in a cardigan'.NOVEMBER5th US election day - for president and vice president, all 435 seatsin the House of Representatives and 33 in the Senate, plus a full cardof state and local races. This could be a pivotal election ifRepublicans win the White House and hold on to majorities in Congress.Bill Clinton is still favourite for a second term, but not by much.With eight of 15 incumbent Democrats not seeking re-election,Republicans hope to increase their current 53 seats in Senate to afilibuster-proof 60. The House, now with 236 Republicans, is often morevolatile. Voter turn-out may approach 60 per cent only if the field isfleshed out by interesting independent or third party candidates (RossPerot helped lift it to 55 per cent in 1992).10th - 12th The Confederation of British Industry annual conference inHarrogate.11th Germans begin their annual goose-eating binge. Germany may be ahighly developed industrial nation, but it still fusses over customsand likes to observe saints' days, possibly because these havedeveloped a commercial momentum. The feast day in this case is StMartin's, and the carnival starts in the Rhineland at 11.11am.13th - 17th The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation's World FoodSummit in Rome. Heads of state and government meet from November 16 to17.26th Kenneth Clarke, the British chancellor, will deliver his fourthBudget or Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, will deliver his first.If Mr Clarke is still at Number 11, the 1996 Budget should be much like1995's: modest tax cuts paid for with modest cuts in public spendingplans. If Mr Brown has moved in, the content is less clear. Not onlyhas Labour avoided revealing much about its tax plans, but Mr Brown maydiscover that Mr Clarke has left him little room for manoeuvre.Incoming governments traditionally say they have had to scale backtheir plans because 'the books have been left in much worse shape thanwe expected'.The Bibliotheque Nationale de France, dubbed the 'tres grandebibliotheque', is scheduled to open to the public in Paris late thismonth. Approved by former President Francois Mitterrand in 1988, andbuilt at a cost of FFr8bn, four angled tower blocks symbolise openbooks, surrounding a suspended garden. The public will have access to400,000 books.DECEMBER6th-7th EU summit in Dublin. The Netherlands takes over the presidencyat the start of 1997.9th - 13th Singapore hosts the first World Trade Organisationministerial meeting.10th The Nobel peace prize is awarded in Oslo.On a date in December yet to be fixed, the US Electoral College meetsto certify the results of the November election. The winner in thenational popular vote can still lose the election if his opponentcarries states with a majority in the Electoral College. These areapportioned, winner-take-all, according to state population, rangingfrom California's 54 delegates to three each for various smallerstates.The world's tallest office buildings are due to be completed in thecentre of Kuala Lumpur in 1996, and to be dedicated this month. At 450metres, the twin Petronas Towers will be slightly taller than Chicago'sSears building. The project forms part of the plan of Dr MahathirMohamad, the prime minister, to turn Malaysia into a fullyindustrialised country by 2020. Opponents accuse him of indulging ingrandiose schemes of questionable economic benefit. Furthermore, theyadd, the towers will soon be overtaken by other Far Eastern rivals.Russian economists and western agencies have predicted that 1996 willbe the first year that Russia's nascent market economy experiencespositive growth. The Organisation for Economic Co - operation andDevelopment, for instance, forecasts a growth rate of 2 per cent. Aneconomic upswing could boost the flagging political fortunes of Russianreformers; on the other hand, political instability could stillundermine the country's economic prospects.Some time towards the end of 1996, or otherwise early in 1997, 10msavers and borrowers with Britain's Halifax Building Society will getfree Halifax shares when the society floats.[London Page 5]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FIAT STEPS UP DRIVE FOR IMPORT POSITION   By JOHN GRIFFITHSFiat Auto UK is restructuring its dealer networks as part of a campaignto regain its status as one of the UK new car market's biggestimporters.The company is reorganising its 220-strong Fiat dealer network andincreasing its Alfa-Romeo dealerships by 25 per cent.The moves strengthening the dealer networks come as the Italian group'swholly-owned UK subsidiary prepares today to launch its Bravo and Bravamodels. They are intended to challenge Ford's Escort, Vauxhall's Astraand other similar-sized models in one of the biggest sectors of the UKnew car market. Fiat spent more than Pounds 1bn developing the newmodels.The models appear set to return the Fiat brand to the 4 per cent-plusmarket share levels not seen since the early 1980s. Mr James Blades,Fiat Auto UK's managing director, now expects final figures to showthat Fiat's market share in 1995 reached 3.6 per cent, with total salesapproaching 75,000 including about 3,000 Alfa-Romeo sales.Fiat's UK market share peaked in 1979 at 4.9 per cent, with sales ofLancia models at the time lifting the group's share above 5 per cent.Yet for much of the 1980s, its share slid downwards - mainly becauseof the parent group's failure to invest in new models. By 1992 it hadslumped to less than 2 per cent.So poor were Lancia sales that Fiat has stopped importing them to theUK altogether, while sales of Alfa-Romeo - bought by Fiat in 1987 -currently represent less than 0.2 per cent of the UK market.However, the launch of two small cars, the Punto and Cinquecento, hasalready brought about a strong revival. Mr Blades said: 'We are nowworking hard to ensure that further growth is stable and sustainable.That means making further inroads to fleets so as not to be subject tothe whims of private buyers.'Fiat's concern in this respect is illustrated by Society of MotorManufacturers and Traders statistics showing that the total new carmarket in the UK grew 2 per cent in the first 11 months of 1995. Withinthis total, fleet demand grew 7 per cent whereas sales to privatebuyers have stagnated.The importance of the fleet sector to manufacturers and importers isunderlined by the fact that around 47 per cent of new cars in 1996 areexpected to be bought by fleets.Fiat's sales to fleets in 1995 played a big part in its outperformanceof the new car market overall. At 67,400, Fiat's total sales in thefirst 11 months were 20 per cent higher than in the same period in1994, compared with only a 2 per cent rise in the UK new car marketoverall. Within the total, however, sales to fleets have jumped 43 percent. The importance of Bravo/Brava to Fiat's further UK growth isunderlined by the fact that the model segment in which they willcompete accounts for more than 30 per cent of the fleet market.Under the dealer restructuring, Fiat is retaining the overall size ofthe network at about 220 dealers but replacing many of the smaller,less committed outlets with facilities owned by the bigger retailinggroups.As a result of the shake-up, now in its final stages, some 30 per centof the network is owned by members of the UK's top 100 retailing groupswhich are capable of making the substantial investment that Fiat wantsto see.[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996POOREST DEPEND ON BENEFITS 'FOR 70% OF INCOME'   By GRAHAM BOWLEYThe poorest 20 per cent of households get almost three-quarters oftheir income from state benefits, government statisticians have found.Cash benefits made up 70 per cent of the gross income of the bottomfifth of Britain's households in the past financial year (1994-95),according to the Central Statistical Office's latest survey of economictrends.Taxes and government benefits trebled the share of total income of thepoorest 20 per cent of households, the study shows.Their share of total UK income grew from 2.3 per cent before taxes andbenefits to 6.9 per cent after taxes and benefits.Before tax, the top fifth of households earned 20 times more than thelowest fifth but only four times as much after taxes and benefits.The top 20 per cent of households paid 19.6 per cent of their grossincome in income tax compared with 11 per cent paid by otherhouseholds.State pensions accounted for almost three-quarters of the cash benefitsreceived by retired households, the study finds.The distribution of income before tax is more equal among those stillat work than those who have retired.But the distribution of after-tax income is more equal among retiredthan among working households.The CSO gives, for the first time, a regional breakdown of grossdomestic product and investment. This shows that in 1994 - the latestyear for which complete figures are available - the south-east, hometo 31 per cent of the population, accounted for about 36 per cent ofGDP.The north-west, which was the second most productive region, produced9.9 per cent of the UK's total GDP.Northern Ireland accounted for the lowest proportion of GDP at 2.3 percent.The south-east also had the highest GDP per capita at Pounds 11,407 perhead - compared with the UK average of Pounds 9,768.The lowest was Northern Ireland where it was Pounds 8,027 per head andWales where the figure was Pounds 8,274.But this gap is narrowing. Growth in GDP per head has been higher inNorthern Ireland than any other region since 1990.Income from employment was the source of more than 65 per cent of GDPin Scotland, whereas it accounted for less than 61 per cent in EastAnglia and the south-west.Economic Trends, No. 506, Central Statistical Office, Great GeorgeStreet, London SW1P 3AQ.[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TORIES WARN OVER NICHOLSON ATTACKS   By JAMES BLITZ, Lobby CorrespondentSenior left-of-centre Con-servatives yesterday warned the government totone down its attacks on Miss Emma Nicholson, the MP for Devon West andTorridge, following her defection to the Liberal Democrats last week.As her decision to quit the Conservatives continued to inflame thelong-running battle between leftwing and rightwing Tories, Mr PeterTemple-Morris, the MP for Leominster, condemned the 'torrent ofpersonal abuse' being heaped on Miss Nicholson. He argued that thecriticisms were not helping to settle pro-European Tory MPs in the wakeof her defection.In recent days Mr Michael Heseltine, the deputy prime minister, hasclaimed that Miss Nicholson's departure followed her repeated andunsuccessful attempts to gain a ministerial post in the government.Mr Michael Portillo, the defence secretary, compounded the criticismyesterday by arguing that Miss Nicholson had 'demonstrated a history ofdisloyalty' - in part by deciding to vote against Baroness Thatcher inthe 1990 Conservative leadership contest.However, Mr Temple-Morris, a Euro-enthusiast who, ironically, is oftenassociated with Mr Heseltine's cause, warned that the attacks on MissNicholson were further damaging party morale.'If someone does defect from the party, then that is bad enough withoutpersonalising things,' he said. 'But ministers are creating a situationin which the public probably has some sympathy with her.'Sir Edward Heath, the former prime minister, attacked the language withwhich Mr Portillo had castigated Miss Nicholson, insisting thatministers needed to understand why she had made such a move.'This is what I regret, that members of the cabinet should be indulgingin this sort of language and this approach,' he told BBC Radio 4'sToday programme. 'We should be making sure that other people who haveanxieties should have those anxieties removed so the public should seewe are not a bitterly divided party, that we have pulled ourselvestogether and can work together.'Ministers were yesterday hoping that the circumstances of MissNicholson's move were exceptional and would not be followed by furtherdefections.But party whips will be heeding the recent claim by Mr Hugh Dykes, theMP for Harrow East, that a further six Tories could defect toopposition parties before the next general election. Mr Dykes, one ofthe most staunchly pro-European of Conservatives, will have his everymove watched closely by Tory whips in the next few months.Others whose names have been speculated upon as possible defectors areMr Temple-Morris; Mr Robert Hicks, MP for Cornwall South East; SirKeith Speed, MP for Ashford; Mr George Walden, MP for Buckingham; andMr Tim Rathbone, MP for Lewes.None of these has been prepared to admit that he is seeking to move toanother party. However, two of them - Mr Hicks and Mr Walden - haveindicated dissatisfaction with the direction of politics at Westminsterby announcing that they will not be standing at the next generalelection. Sir Keith Speed is also standing down at the next election.[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SALES SUCCESS LESS SWEET AS CHEWERS AVOID SUGAR   By JOHN AUTHERSConsumers tried to cut down on their sugar in 1995, according to theannual survey for the chocolate and sweets markets carried out byCadbury Schweppes, the confectionery company.While Nestle's Kit Kat bar consolidated its lead over the Mars Bar -perceived as more fattening - in the chocolate market, the mostpopular sweet was Wrigley's Extra, a sugar-free chewing gum.Total consumption of chocolate declined slightly compared with 1994,from 530,000 tonnes to 526,000 tonnes, a trend which manufacturersattributed to the hot weather during the summer. But total spending onchocolate reached a new high of Pounds 3.2bn.Kit Kat sales rose 4 per cent to Pounds 200m while those of Mars Barsfell 2 per cent to Pounds 150m.A report in June by Datamonitor, the market research company, said KitKat's share of the chocolate snack market had stayed at about 17.4 percent between 1990 and 1994, while the Mars Bar's share had dropped from16 per cent to 11.7 per cent.Mars made changes to its product in 1995 in an attempt to appeal towomen and to make its bars seem less fattening, introducing bite-sizedversions and changing the recipe to make it taste lighter.Cadbury's Dairy Milk consolidated its place as the third most popularchocolate.In the market for sweets, Wrigley's Extra gum finished ahead of Polomints and Rowntree's Fruit Pastilles, according to the annual review byTrebor Bassett, the sugar confectionery division of Cadbury's. Orbit byWrigley, another sugar-free gum, came fourth, well ahead of the betterknown Wrigley's Spearmint, which was 17th.The total size of the market was less than half that for chocolate,with total sales of Pounds 1.4bn and 283,000 tonnes sold. Averagespending per capita for the year was Pounds 24.The hot summer weather also affected sales of sweets, which includecough lozenges in the top 20, according to Trebor Bassett. But itadded: 'There remains enormous future potential for market growth - westill have quite a way to go before we match the per capita consumptionfor sweets of our European neighbours.'-----------------------------------------------------------------------                   THE SWEET TOOTH TOP 20 (1995)-----------------------------------------------------------------------TOP CHOCOLATE BRANDS              TOP SWEET BRANDS----------------------------------------------------------------------- 1 Kit Kat                        1 Wrigley's Extra 2 Mars Bar                       2 Rowntree Polo 3 Cadbury's Dairy Milk           3 Rowntree Fruit Pastilles 4 Cadbury's Roses                4 Wrigley's Orbit Gum 5 Twix                           5 Trebor Softmints 6 Quality Street                 6 Trebor Extra Strong Mints 7 Snickers                       7 Maynards Original Wine Gums 8 Maltesers                      8 Mars Opal Fruits 9 Cadbury's Creme Egg            9 Leaf Chewits10 Galaxy Milk                   10 Bendicks Werthers Original11 Smarties                      11 Bassett's Liquorice Allsorts12 Cadbury's Time Out            12 Cadbury's Cholcolate Eclairs =  Cadbury's Crunchie           13 Mars Tunes14 Cadbury's Milk Tray           14 Mars Lockets =  Cadbury's Fruit & Nut        15 Warner Lambert Clorets16 Bounty                        16 Bassett's Jelly Babies17 Cadbury's Caramel             17 Wrigley's Spearmint Gum=  Thornton's Continental        18 Halls Mentholyptus19 Rolo                          19 Maynards Justfruits20 Cadbury's Flake               20 Trebor Murray Mints-----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: Cadbury Source: Trebor Bassett-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ECONOMIC GROWTH PROSPECTS SUFFER DOUBLE BLOW   By GRAHAM BOWLEY, Economics StaffA gloomier outlook for the UK economy emerged today with a leadingforecaster predicting that growth will slow in 1996 and with thepublication of a poll which shows that business confidence is at itslowest since 1992.The latest report by Cambridge Econometrics, the economic consultancy,says a slowdown in the rest of the world will depress Britain's exportsthis year. It says companies will also cut output as they try to sellthe stocks they built up in 1995.As a result, UK gross domestic product will grow by less than 2.5 percent in 1996 compared with 2.75 per cent last year. This predictionclashes with the official Treasury forecast of 3 per cent growth in1996.But growth will rebound in 1997 to 2.8 per cent, the forecasting groupsays. It thinks that spending by consumers will grow modestly in 1996and then expand strongly next year - partly because of expected taxcuts in the next Budget.Meanwhile, a survey of 2,000 businesses published today by Lloyds Bankshows that confidence is at its lowest level since the poll began in1992. For the first time, the survey shows an increase in thosebusinesses reporting cashflow problems and a slowdown in exportorders.Orders for goods and services continue to grow - but at the slowestrate since the second half of 1992. The poll shows that confidence hasdropped because economic growth has been disappointingly slow.Mr Michael Riding, the director of commercial banking at Lloyds Bank,said that although companies 'are still experiencing growth, they arehaving difficulty in coming to terms with managing in a low inflationeconomy. This, coupled with failed growth expectations, has made themsomewhat pessimistic - possibly unnecessarily'.Companies in the construction and retail sectors reported the slowestgrowth in orders, while manufacturing companies and hotels and cateringbusinesses reported strong growth. Companies told Lloyds Bank thatinvestment spending has slowed because of slower profit growth andincreased pressure on cashflow. However, Cambridge Econometricspredicts that investment will pick up in 1996 as the private financeinitiative fills much of the gap left by cuts in government capitalspending.The forecasting group says there is evidence of a build-up in stocks inthe motor vehicle, chemical and non-metallic mineral productindustries. It predicts that headline inflation will fall in the shortterm in response to lower mortgage interest rates, although theunderlying rate will remain broadly unchanged.In the longer term, headline inflation will rise to 3.7 per cent in1997 from 3.1 per cent at present.Absence of inflation, Page 14[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WALDEGRAVE RESOLVES TO START EARLY: NEW YEAR AIMS INCLUDE PUSHING THEPFI AND TACKLING FRAUD   By ROBERT CHOTELike the arrival of Christmas in the shops, negotiations between theTreasury and government departments over public spending seem to getearlier every year.The detail of the last public spending round was published only a monthago, at the time of the Budget. But Mr William Waldegrave, the chiefsecretary to the Treasury, is already preparing for the openingskirmishes of this year's battle.Mr Waldegrave said in an interview with the Financial Times that heplanned to emulate his predecessor, Mr Jonathan Aitken, by looking atthe spending of larger departments in spring, before the hagglingproper gets under way.The Department of Social Security will come under particular scrutiny,according to Mr Waldegrave. Its Pounds 90bn budget next year will beWhitehall's largest by far, so it is bound to be an important target inany search for savings.'It is essential that they are feeling the full force of thepossibilities of new ways of doing things,' Mr Waldegrave said. 'PeterLilley has exciting things to say about how benefits can be deliveredin a few years' time. What the Treasury has to see is whether 'a fewyears' time' can be made any shorter.'Mr Waldegrave has been criticised by some MPs for allowing too big anincrease in the DSS's running costs during the last spending round. Buthe argues that some cuts have actually cost money by weakening controlof the benefit system.Mr Waldegrave said it was clear that the proportion of social securityclaimed fraudulently - estimated at between 5 per cent and 10 per centfor some benefits - was much larger than most observers had thought.He noted that a pilot scheme to issue some claimants in London withswipecards was already saving money. 'One of the things I have to doearly in the new year is see what is a practicable, do-able,non-fantastic programme here which might generate another few hundredmillion,' he said.Mr Waldegrave said there was also scope to push the private financeinitiative, which attracts private sector funds and expertise intopublic sector infrastructure projects.'One thing we have broken the back of this year is institutionalresistance to the PFI, although it only generates a saving for publicexpenditure in terms of delivering better value for money,' he said.Mr Eddie George, the governor of the Bank of England, believes thateconomic activity may be slowed in the short term by an 'infrastructurehiatus' as private finance replaces direct public funding. But MrWaldegrave said he expected private money to be attracted more quicklythan the Treasury assumed in the Budget.There were no 'wonder drugs' which would deliver savings fromgovernment spending next year, Mr Waldegrave added. He ruled out theidea of taking a tougher line with the Department of National Heritagebecause of the extra revenue from the National Lottery.But Mr Waldegrave admitted he was attracted - although this was apersonal rather than a Treasury view - to the idea that artsorganisations could be funded through endowments. This would limit thecentralisation of public support for the arts, although it would notnecessarily save money.Mr Waldegrave said that in framing a long-term strategy for publicspending, it was unrealistic to aim for the low government shares ofnational income achieved in some Asia-Pacific countries.Nations such as the US, New Zealand and Switzerland were better rolemodels, implying a government share of national income of 35 per centor 36 per cent. Public spending stands at 42 per cent of nationalincome, compared with the formal target of less than 40 per cent.Mr Waldegrave said every chief secretary had the ambition of reaching astage where it was no longer necessary to hold public spendingnegotiations every year. He said it was worth investigating the ideathat departments could agree a tough settlement on the understandingthat their budgets were guaranteed for a number of years. But heconceded that departments would fear that a future chief secretarywould not feel bound by the pledge.So the annual ritual of the public spending negotiations remains withus. Every year departments will squeal about the pressure they areunder, and the chief secretary will proclaim one of the toughest roundsin living memory.[London Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996POLICY FOR TERRORISM INSURANCE UNDER ATTACK: AS THE IRA CEASEFIRE HASLITTLE EFFECT ON PREMIUMS, BUSINESSES QUESTION THE ROLE OF REINSURERPOOL RE   By RALPH ATKINSWhen the IRA bombed the City of London in 1992 and 1993, causing morethan Pounds 1bn in damage, businesses were thankful that anyone wasprepared to provide insurance against further attacks.With insurers set to exclude unlimited terrorism cover from commercialpolicies, the setting up of Pool Re - a state-backed 'reinsurance'company which would underwrite policies sold by conventional insurers- was seen as a sensible response.Nearly three years later, as many companies renegotiate policies duefor renewal, the mood has changed.Pool Re is criticised as expensive and inflexible. The Association ofInsurance and Risk Managers, which represents commercial insurancebuyers, reckons the high rates Pool Re charges are forcing companies tochoose between spending large amounts on terrorism cover - or riskgoing without.The IRA ceasefire has had a limited impact. Premium rates have fallen:a 20 per cent discount has been announced for next year. Pool Re alsocollects only 60 per cent of the policy premium at the start of theyear; the remaining 40 per cent is waived if total claims during theyear do not exceed a certain level (Pounds 75m in 1996).But terrorism cover used to be included in standard commercial propertypolicies at no additional cost. As Mr Leslie Lucas, Pool Re chiefexecutive, admits: 'Any policyholder is going to say that, if we oncehad it offered for nothing, any price is going to be too much.'There is also concern that the structure of Pool Re is preventing thedevelopment of an alternative terrorism insurance market.When Pool Re started in 1993 it had no capital and operated as amutual, pooling the resources of those who depended on its services. Itinsists member insurance companies only sell terrorism cover at ratesand on terms set by Pool Re. Premiums are pooled into an insurance fundwhich at the end of 1994 stood at Pounds 410m but is likely now to besubstantially higher. Because most insurers are Pool Re members,companies have little option but to buy Pool Re policies.Moreover, corporate groups cannot 'cherry pick' - buying insurancepolicies backed by Pool Re only for vulnerable properties. Apart fromsmaller sites, they have to buy cover for all or none.Rates are set according to formula varying by location. There is onlylimited scope for taking account of measures individual companies mighttake to reduce their exposure to terrorist attack.Mr Alan Gavaghan, the deputy chairman of insurance broker WillisCorroon, says: 'A lot of companies spend a lot of money on riskprevention action, not just things like sprinklers and shatter-proofwindows. They have put a lot of thought into it, but they are treatedin the same way as people with clapped-out warehouses.'Alternatives are available. Willis Corroon is one of five brokers whichcombined to provide terrorism insurance underwritten by syndicates atLloyd's of London which are not Pool Re members.Last month the facility was improved and policies paying out up toPounds 100m per terrorist attack are available. That means largecompanies could choose to insure just their most vulnerable properties.But the total amount of insurance coverage available is limited. Pricesmay also not be sufficiently attractive for companies to switch fromPool Re policies which provide unlimited cover. As Mr Jeremy Lowe, ofWillis Corroon, says: 'It is a viable alternative to Pool Re for thosewho want to be selective, rather than a competitor.'In spite of its criticism, the Association of Insurance and RiskManagers do not want to kill the idea of a pool.'The concept is a good one,' says Ms Ina Barker, executive director.'The premiums of the many pay for the claims of the few.' There is alsolittle sign that insurers and reinsurers are willing to return toproviding full terrorism cover without state back-up.The association's idea is that Pool Re should be funded by a flatcontribution, or levy, on all commercial property policies. That shouldallow a return to the automatic provision of terrorism cover. As fundsare built up by Pool Re - assuming there is no escalation of terrorism - there would be scope for contributions holidays.Potentially, Pool Re could evolve into a state-backed reinsurerproviding cover against other perils where the incidence is low butpotential costs could be catastrophic - London flooding is a possibleexample.The aim would be to achieve the basic principle of insurance -spreading big risks on the shoulders of many. Ms Barker says:'Terrorism insurance ought to be automatic for the benefit of society.'[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BIG THAW LEADS TO WATER CUTS   By PRESS ASSOCIATIONThousands of homes throughout the UK were flooded and whole communitiesfaced water shortages yesterday as the Christmas freeze gave way to adramatic thaw, bursting water mains and domestic water systems. In someareas, temperatures soared from - 20'C to around 7'C.In Scotland, 500,000 Strathclyde homes suffered burst pipes at somepoint over the holiday. Water rationing was introduced in parts ofNorthern Ireland as reservoirs ran low because of water leaks and burstpipes. More than 100,000 homes were affected and water tankers werebeing used in some areas.The Northern Ireland Housing Executive, which is responsible for publichousing, dealt with more than 5,000 calls. Plumbers ran short ofmaterials and the executive had to arrange special openings of supplystores to allow work to continue. Vast quantities of water were lostbecause affected schools, factories and offices were closed for theholidays.Thousands of consumers in the Carmarthen area of west Wales spentyesterday without water because of a burst main taking supplies fromthe river Towy. In England North West Water brought in extra staff tocope with phone calls, and other areas affected by the thaw includedNorthumberland, Tyneside and Wearside, East Anglia, Essex, and Suffolk.Thames Water said customers were cut off at various times but teamswere working to restore services.[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NEW YEAR PLAN CONDEMNED: SCOTTISH BANK HOLIDAYS   By PRESS ASSOCIATIONScottish nationalists yesterday attacked plans to bring Scottishbanking industry holidays into line with England. The move could makethis the last traditional new year holiday period north of the borderand set a precedent for other employers, warned Ms Anne McNair, theScottish National party's employment spokeswoman.Scotland has two new year bank holidays - January 1 and January 2 -whereas England and Wales have only January 1.Announcing SNP backing for a campaign by the main banking union Bifu,she said: 'Once again it seems that Scottish families and society aretaking second place to English clearing banks and the London StockExchange. Making Easter Monday a bank holiday instead of January 2, asis proposed, would make no sense since demand for banking services isfar greater at Easter than at new year.'[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PLEA FOR HELP OVER FRAUD PROBE: NHS TRUSTS   By JOHN AUTHERSThe National Health Service Executive has written to all 458 NHS trustsasking them to co-operate with a police investigation into an allegedfraud by locum agencies. The investigation follows routine checks lastyear by the Audit Commission, the NHS watchdog, at four hospitals innorth Wales.The Metropolitan Police's company fraud unit is now investigating theclaims. It believes that up to 80 trusts could have fallen victim tothe alleged fraud, which is said to have involved charging excessivefees or sending duplicate invoices for the services of locum doctorsand therapists. Four people have been arrested in connection with theallegations, and released on police bail. The total sum involved isalleged to be about Pounds 3m.[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SAINSBURY CUTS 200 PRICES: FOOD RETAILING   By PRESS ASSOCIATIONJ. Sainsbury fired a new year salvo in the supermarket price waryesterday by cutting the cost of more than 200 items by up to 50 percent during January. The move comes three days after frozen foodchainstore Iceland announced it was reducing some prices to those of1986. However, Sainsbury and other leading food retailers denied thatthe initiatives would trigger another round in the price war.[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FISHING PATROL MOVES INTO DISPUTED AREA   By BERNARD GRAYHMS Lindisfarne, a UK Fisheries Protection Vessel, yesterday went onpatrol in the controversial Irish Box fishing area between westernEngland and Ireland to mark the first day that Spanish trawlers werelegally entitled to work in the disputed zone.Also on standby to monitor the situation were three commerciallychartered patrol aircraft which are used to oversee fishing fleets inBritish waters.However, in spite of predictions of confrontation, none of the 20Spanish boats which have so far registered to work in the Irish Boxappeared.The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food pointed to the holidayseason as a possible explanation and added that fishing conditions werenot particularly favourable in the area at present.Meanwhile, arguments continued between British politicians about theagreement, which allows the large Spanish trawler fleet to use thearea, traditionally the preserve of Cornish fishing fleets.Mr David Harris, a Conservative MP whose constituency includes theNewlyn fishing port, said yesterday that Spanish access to the IrishBox would inevitably lead to further cuts in quotas, hurting the UKfishing industry.Mr Harris said he had written to Mr John Major, the prime minister,arguing that more control of fishing zones should be handed back toindividual European Union member states, rather than being regulated bythe European Commission through quotas.'The end result is going to be massive over-fishing of stocks alreadyunder pressure,' he said.Yet Mr Tony Baldry, the fishing minister, said that Spanish boats wouldnot be able to catch any additional fish by choosing to trawl in theIrish Box, rather than in other areas.'They will be policed equally fiercely on the catches that they take tomake sure the fish are the proper size and are within quota, as much asensuring that there are no more than 40 trawlers at any one time in theIrish Box,' he said.The two politicians also disagreed about whether Spanish boats wouldabide by the rules of the agreement to use the disputed waters.Mr Harris predicted that Spanish trawlers would use 'every trick in thebook' to skirt the rules, while Mr Baldry argued that the Spanish boatswould comply.'It will be a very stupid Spanish skipper who seeks to break therules,' said Mr Baldry. 'If he does so he will be brought into court,he will be prosecuted and he will be fined up to Pounds 50,000.'[London Page 7]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THIS WEEK:NERVES BEGIN TO FRAY OVER BUDGET IMPASSE - DATELINE / WASHINGTON, ANGERTHE THE 'CLOWNS OF CONGRESS' IS RISING   By JUREK MARTINIt is probable that the US government will still not be fullyfunctioning again this morning - and it is not possible to ignore therising tide of public and personal disgust with the wilfulness of thoseon the right wing of the US Congress who have brought about this prettypass.Note, from the outset, where the finger of blame is pointed: not atPresident Bill Clinton, though he may have contributed to the overallbudget impasse and is reaping political benefit from it; nor at SenatorBob Dole, though the majority leader might have been more resolute instanding up to his party's vizigoths if he did not need them for hispresidential ambitions.No, responsibility lies squarely with those so convinced of their ownrectitude and so insulated from the real world outside theirconservative salons and support groups that they cannot understand thedamage they are doing - not only to those affected by the longest, ifpartial, closure of the federal government ever, but also, ultimately,to their own cause of balancing the budget in seven years.It is doubtful that the impact of the suspension of government businesswill lop more than a fraction of 1 per cent off GNP. Importantindustries and cities have not ground to a halt because 280,000 federalbureaucrats have been laid off. No college football game, the opiate ofthe New Year season, has been cancelled.There has been damage, however: to the civil servants, not exactly fatcats, unpaid for two weeks over Christmas; to small federal contractorsdependent on government; to the 20,000 people who apply for passportsevery day and the 23,000 who register with social security; and to thesmall towns and businesses that live off the seasonal trade of greatnational parks like Yosemite in California, where the adjacent MariposaCounty has declared itself a disaster area.They may not amount to a collective blip in the national statistics,but their livelihoods are affected - for months ahead - and all aresome politician's constituents. To judge by their comments in streamsof US media interviews, they are mostly mad with what they frequentlycall 'the clowns of Congress', and soon some poll will doubtlessmeasure their anger.Perhaps more serious for the congressional right is the offence theyhave given to the chattering classes, who, when aroused, can still domuch to shape public opinion. Nothing has offended them more than thedenial of unfettered access to the most comprehensive collection everassembled in one place of the works of Johannes Vermeer, the Dutchmaster, at the National Gallery here in Washington.Last week, Rusty Powell, the gallery's director, was able to open itsdoors by releasing Dollars 30,000 from a private donor fund earmarkedfor future exhibitions. This was enough to make the Vermeers - but notthe rest of the formidable standing collection, nor the concurrentWinslow Homer exhibition - available to the public. And did they come,with lines in frigid weather stretching round the block for preciouspasses.But the money is only good for a week, which means that unless Congresscomes up with funding for the gallery pronto, the Vermeer exhibitioncannot complete its scheduled run until next month. And, like the smallbusinessmen in Mariposa County, just about all the gallery-goers havevented their spleen at Congress. One angry TV commentator suggestedthat, as a punishment, the 73 Republican freshmen in the House ofRepresentatives be permanently barred from looking at Vermeer'smasterpieces (though the impact of such contemplation might well besalutary).A more severe critic could go further by noting that few of theaffected are natural allies of the hard right. Art appeals to the eliteand is often decadent; passports are for foreign travel and thussomehow un-American; social security is for the weak; national parksmight be more profitable if opened up for oil drilling and commercialexploitation; and Washington itself, a veritable modern Sodom andGomorrah, would be better off turned into a pillar of salt.The last word should lie, surely, with the bureaucrats. While they areon unpaid furlough, members of Congress are receiving their salarycheques and, as is their wont during recess, travelling the globe. So agroup of US diplomats in Latin America ordered back to work to arrangeone such six-nation trip, sent this distinctly undiplomatic message tothe state department:'Frankly, we are disturbed by the thought that while American schoolchildren are being turned away from Smithsonian museums, nationalparks, monuments and memorials, some members of the US Congress arelooking forward to seeing exotic attractions like Copacabana, Iguazu,Cuzco, Macchu Picchu and Otavalo - largely at the expense of theparents of those school children.'Perhaps they should push the congressional delegation off a cliff, inthe manner of the Incas.[London Page 8]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THIS WEEK:FT GUIDE TO THE MILLENNIUM COMMISSION?   By ANTONY THORNCROFTWhat, exactly, is this Millennium Commission we keep hearing about? Thebody set up to plan the UK's celebration of the year 2000. Most othercountries hope to let off a few fireworks but the UK is taking it veryseriously indeed, and spending about Pounds 1.5bn.Whose idea was it? Lord Palumbo, former chairman of the Arts Council,thought the millennium a good excuse to spruce up Britain's nationalheritage - Stonehenge, the cathedrals, that sort of thing, and perhapsadd one or two modern landmarks. Prime minister John Major agreed, andPalumbo's idea has gathered great momentum.Organised by a quango of the great and the good, presumably? Spot on.Seven worthies, mixed to reflect the aristocracy, business, heritagelobby, science and women, plus a couple of politicians (VirginiaBottomley and Michael Heseltine) who are charged to give to it avote-gathering twist.Where on earth is the money coming from? From the UK national lottery,now a little over a year old. Projects to mark the millennium are oneof the five worthy causes that are getting great chunks of lotterycash, along with the arts, sport, the heritage industry and charities.To date the Millennium Commission has received almost Pounds 300m. Butunlike the other good causes, its good fortune ends on December 311999. After that, its share of the lottery cake will be divided amongthe other four.Hasn't the commission upset the Welsh? Yes, some of them. It wasdecided to spend about Pounds 600m on 12 landmark projects, the 20thcentury's gift to the future. These are to be spread conscientiouslyaround the UK. Wales was owed one, but the national rugby ground atCardiff Arms Park, and a proposed opera house for Cardiff Bay, eachapplied for Pounds 50m. Forced to choose between the two Welshpassions, rugby and music, the commission said 'No' to music and'Maybe' to rugby. The money will probably be spent refurbishing CardiffArms Park.So all this millennial cash is not spreading universal happiness? Noway. There are as many people whingeing as celebrating, especially inthe media. The commission is accused of being short on big ideas andlong on cautious pragmatism. It has imposed severe restrictions bydemanding that applicants should be able to provide half the cost ofany project, although some of this can be in land or labour. This makesthings hard for imaginative loonies.But some good must be coming from it? Well, the Tate Gallery is happy.It has Pounds 50m for its proposed gallery of modern art on Bankside;Kew Gardens has Pounds 21m for a millennium seed bank for plants; andPortsmouth Harbour picked up Pounds 40m to convert itself into theworld's classiest marina. Scotland has been sweetened with Pounds 46mfor a 'new' Hampden Park. These are among the landmark schemes.But I live in Twistelton-on-the-Marsh. I'll never get along to thesenational monuments. The commissioners have also set aside anotherPounds 600m to engender turn-of-the-millennium optimism at the grassroots. Over 300 groups of local activists have already received a goahead for good ideas. For example, there will be a new village hall forIngleton in Derbyshire, thanks to a millennium grant of Pounds 150,000;a coastal railway linking the Giant's Causeway and Bushmills inNorthern Ireland will please locals and tourists, at a cost of Pounds700,000; and Pounds 588,000 has been set aside for salmon ladders inthe River Thames.Strengthening communities and greening the land are buzzwords thecommissioners have taken to heart. The Pounds 42.5m for Sustrans, whichaims to cover the nation with 2,500 miles of cycle paths, just aboutsums it all up.What is going to happen in 2000? Good question. No one knows, althoughImagination, a group of creative whizzkids from London, and M2000,financed by Touche Ross and MAI among others, should have a good idea.They are the two consortia short-listed to organise the year-longcelebration, likely to be a cross between the Festival of Britain andDisney World. The winner will be chosen this month. Four sites havealso been short-listed: Greenwich, near London; the National ExhibitionCentre near Birmingham; Derby; and Stratford, in London.Greenwich, the chosen venue of M2000, is favourite, while Imaginationhas plumped for Birmingham.It depends whether the commissioners go for a site in London plumb onthe international dateline, or Birmingham, near the centre of the UK.With Pounds 100m of millennium money to oil the profit-making event, itshould be some celebration.And on December 31 2000, is it all over? The commissioners hope not.There will be the landmark buildings to enjoy, although there is noequivalent to the Crystal Palace or the Eiffel Tower on the horizon toamaze citizens of 2096. There will also be hundreds of village halls,urban parks and small woodlands.And there will be some bursaries, which are planned to continue adinfinitum. What are they. Can I have one? No reason why not. Thecommission is setting up a Pounds 100m endowment, which should produceabout Pounds 5m a year to be distributed in dollops of Pounds 2,000 andupwards to citizens who want to improve themselves, and then pass onthe improvement to their communities.More details will be announced this month, but you will probably haveto apply to a charity or a voluntary organisation for vetting. Goodluck.Millennial architecture: Colin Amery, Page 12[London Page 8]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THIS WEEK:FILM AND VIDEO   By NIGEL ANDREWSYou can always tell a new movie year. It stomps into view overturningChristmas trees and growling 'No more Mr Nice Guy'. 1996's firstaudiences are invited to choose between Seven (serial killer withhorrific murder methods), The Kingdom (ghoulies in a haunted hospital)and Four Rooms, which climaxes with Quentin Tarantino presiding overchopping a finger.Nevertheless, there are compensations to be found. The faint heartedcan take refuge in France's The Horseman On The Roof - more buckle andswash from director Jean-Paul Cyrano De Bergerac Rappeneau - and inSomething To Talk About, a marital comedy-drama with Julia Roberts. Shetwangs a pretty southern accent while Robert Duvall and Gena Rowlandsprovide power casting as Mom and Pop.In truth, even the nasties are not that nasty. The Kingdom, a weirdlyhilarious TV mini-series turned four-hour movie from Danish directorLars Von Trier, is more black comedy than spine chiller. And there ishumanity between the stomach-testing moments in Seven. Brad Pitt andMorgan Freeman play detectives sleuthing through a series of murderspatterned after the seven deadly sins.The moral is, if you want quality cinema you must take the rough withthe smooth. But you need not take Four Rooms at all. This quartet ofstories proves there are days when even wonder children like Tarantinoshould be locked in the nursery until they get the script right.On video, meanwhile, two films allow you to be adult and childlike atthe same time. Ed Wood is Tim Burton's funny-elegiac homage to theworld's greatest 'bad' director, with Martin Landau eating the sceneryas the horror actor Bela Lugosi.And Dianne Wiest similarly eats the scenery in Woody Allen's splendidshowbiz comedy Bullets Over Broadway. The two actors won last year'sbest-supporting Oscars.[London Page 8]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PEOPLE: JOHN BROWNE, BP'S MASTER OF RECOVERY - A CAUTIOUS APPROACH TODEBT DOES NOT RULE OUT A NEW PHASE OF GROWTH   By ROBERT CORZINEJohn Browne, British Petroleum's chief executive, has marked thecompletion of his first six months in office with the conclusion of aDollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.27bn) natural gas deal in Algeria.The project, which analysts say will help turn BP into a significantinternational gas company, attracted headlines mainly because of itslocation in a country struggling with an Islamist insurgency. But thedeal is also noteworthy in that it will form one of the foundations fora new phase of growth and capital investment at BP, whose lastexpansive foray triggered a debt crisis in 1992 and the departure ofRobert Horton, former chairman and chief executive.That episode still influences the thinking of John Browne and that ofSir David Simon, BP's chairman and the man who engineered the recoveryof the company's fortunes. 'We must not leverage this company everagain,' said one senior executive last week.But the company says a cautious approach to debt does not mean that BPis afraid to act decisively to ensure future growth. It has embarked onbig oil and gas projects in politically unsettled parts of the worldsuch as Colombia, Azerbaijan and Algeria.Such projects are a marked departure from BP's traditional core areas- Alaska and the UK sector of the North Sea. But during Browne's tenureas head of the company's upstream arm, the board came to accept thatpolitical risk is best spread across a range of projects in differentcountries. 'The real risk is having too much in one basket,' says oneBP executive, 'not in going to risky countries which could have amaterial effect to the company's bottom line.'Browne also placed emphasis on the 'phased development' of suchprojects. That allows the company to limit its financial exposureduring the early stages of a project, when there is likely to begreater uncertainty about whether it will prove technically,politically or commercially viable.Industry observers say Browne's greatest success was in re-shaping thestrategic direction of the exploration arm and ensuring that it had astring of possible projects to choose from. It now has sufficientassets to ensure that reserves can be replaced for another 10 years.That means that while many other oil companies hunt for new reserves,BP can focus on projects that are likely to offer the highest return.Yet analysts wonder whether Browne will have equal success tackling theproblems in BP's downstream division, the one part of the company ofwhich he has no direct experience and a sector in which big changes mayhave an impact on BP's customer base.He has recently devoted time to downstream issues, in particular to thefuture of the company's refineries. They, like much of the industry,suffer from thin margins and offer little scope for any technologicaladvantage over competitors. An announcement on the furtherrestructuring of the company's refining assets is expected this month.Browne, an engineer who believes technology can continuously enhanceBP's financial performance, is upbeat about chemicals - a segment inwhich proprietary technology can increase competitiveness and thedivision that BP has chosen to lead its expansion in Asia.An announcement on broader corporate aims is expected in March. Therehave been rumours in the industry that Browne has contemplated radicalchanges to the way BP conducts its business, with some observersspeculating that Browne, a former corporate treasurer, would like toadopt more of a 'merchant bank' approach to the industry.BP executives say he is more likely to maintain a step-by-stepapproach, and emulate Simon by setting simple targets related to BP'sfinancial and performance ambitions.One of his biggest challenges will be to maintain BP's strong financialperformance. 'You can grow from an uncompetitive base by cuttingcosts,' says one executive. 'The hard task is to grow from acompetitive base, and not just capture the chemicals cycle at its top.'That means BP will have to focus on efforts to keep margins as high aspossible even in a downturn.Browne's strategic aim is to create a 'distinctive' company - one withelements that competitors would have difficulty copying and one whichwould provide unusual financial returns to investors. He emphasises theimportance of relationships with host governments, partners andsuppliers.Browne also wants a 'unique' set of assets, including markets. But bigacquisitions of the type that landed BP in so much trouble in the pastappear to have been ruled out for now, although executives say BP willcontinue to make small-scale acquisitions.Browne's first six months have been made easier by BP's strongfinancial performance. But in future there is likely to be greaterinvestor interest in how he and his colleagues deal with the narrowerissues of the downstream assets and with capital investment decisions.Senior BP executives say investors are right to demand the highestcapital efficiency possible. After all, says one, 'the industry as awhole has a pretty bad track record. It hasn't spent money wisely.'What of BP specifically? 'We should expect to withstand toughscrutiny,' he says. 'But I don't believe BP will repeat the past.'[London Page 8]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT:BIG IDEAS, BIG BOOKS - SEVEN WISE MEN GIVE THEIR OPINIONS ON THECHALLENGES COMPANIES ARE LIKELY TO FACE IN 1996What will be the big management challenge of 1996? And what was thebest/most enjoyable/most instructive business book you read in 1995?On this page we print seven answers to these questions.Sumantra Ghoshal, professor of strategic management at London BusinessSchool:Challenge: Over the past few years many companies have focused onrationalisation and restructuring. Often this has requiredfragmentation of their organisations into small units and some radicaldecentralisation. Now, with much of the fat out of the system, thechallenge will be to reintegrate their fragmented organisations topursue new growth opportunities.Book: The Boundaryless Organisation by Ron Ashkenas, Dave Ulrich, ToddJick and Steve Kerr (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco).This is a wonderfully practical and down-to-earth book that is bothidea-rich and implementation-focused. It provides insightful ideas,clear examples and simple tools - a rare combination in the world ofbusiness publications.Gerry Robinson, chief executive, Granada Group:Challenge: Not to run out of steam. The 1980s was a period of hugegrowth and expansion through new markets, new technology and a globalview of business. The 1990s have been dominated by cost control, costcutting, streamlining and tighter management control in order tomaintain profitable growth. This must not become the main role ofmanagement - we must also use creativity, enthusiasm, leadership andsound strategic direction to improve a company's health and growth.Book: I have to confess that I did not read any business books at alllast year. This is not because I feel I have nothing to learn aboutbusiness but because I did not find the time.The most important book I read last year was unquestionably Wild Swansby Jung Chang (HarperCollins). Reading about China's culturalrevolution is more enlightening and satisfying than reading about thecorporate revolution.I am a strong believer in broadening the mind in spheres other thanbusiness.Tim Simpson, managing director, Arthur D Little:Challenge: 'Seventy per cent of all re-engineering projects fail',people will tell you, misquoting one of the big change gurus. My viewis not so pessimistic. Many companies have made large-scale change workfor them, and their performance has jumped as a result.But with the recovery faltering, and markets ever opening to worldcompetition, sustaining this performance improvement will be themanagement challenge of 1996.Book: 1995 was again notable more for books I wanted to read than thoseI found time for. But one which did hit home was the Fifth DisciplineFieldbook, by Senge and friends (Nicholas Brealey Publishing). Ease ofreading is one attraction - it's written for browsing and providesusable suggestions on almost every page.And its central proposition - that learning, and particularly teamlearning, is a key part of building competence in companies - isintuitively obvious. The book goes further, suggesting practical waysto manage the learning process and build competence faster. And itcomplements Senge's earlier, more theoretical work, with much morepractical experience.Peter Sutherland, chairman and managing director, Goldman SachsInternational:Challenge: To cope with the effects of globalisation. Within a veryshort time the world has decisively changed and management willincreasingly be required to focus on opportunities in, and challengesfrom, the emerging markets that will provide much of the economicdynamism for the world into the next millennium. An understanding ofrelatively familiar cultures and relationships will have to beaugmented by an under-standing of relatively different environments.Book: I am not proud to admit that I have virtually never read businessbooks (unless written by Sir John Harvey-Jones). In 1995, however, Ihave read some that I would recommend.The first of these is Corporate Level Strategy by Goold, Campbell andAlexander (Wiley), which looks at managing multi-business companiessuch as GE, ABB and Canon.My second and third books are not business books per se but I recommendthem because, in today's world, a good manager has to be tuned in todramatic political change in terms of national sovereignty. AndrewMarr's Ruling Britannia (Michael Joseph) is about more than Britain.It is about a world in transition. One doesn't have to agree with allhis conclusions to find his opinions both provocative and relevant.I would also include Where Did We Go Wrong - From the Gold Standard toEurope (Faber & Faber) by the remarkable Eric Roll, who analyses pasterrors in policy relating to the British economy and, above all, toBritish negativism towards European integration.Adair Turner, director-general, Confederation of British Industry:Challenge: Growing. British businesses have got very very good over thepast 10-15 years at being lean and mean, at increasing productivity.They need now to get better at investing for the long term, atmarketing, at creating new products. A stable economic climate shouldmake this possible.Book: Not business but economics, and not one but two. The State We'reIn by Will Hutton (Cape). Disagreed with lots of it and almost gave upafter the first two pages of polemic, but provocative and insightful ifyou persevere. And The World in 2020 by Hamish McRae (HarperCollins),crystal-ball gazing with insight.David Wellings, chief executive, Cadbury Schweppes:Challenge: The same as always. Putting forward the best face possibleon the past in order to attract investors; scanning the latest mountainfor that elusive and obstacle-strewn path to shareholder value; andensuring that managers of vision, tenacity and stamina are there tostep in when you eventually fall off the mountain.Book: Neville Bain's Successful Management (Macmillan Business). Sound,practical advice from a businessman to businessmen. Blessed relief fromconsultants peddling the latest irrelevant buzzword for keeping inshape 'corporate re-engineering' or motivation 'empowerment'.George Yip, adjunct professor of strategy at the University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles (UCLA):Challenge: Multinational companies will continue to face in 1996 thechallenge of globalisation and of building global capability.A successful global company today needs the capability to access and totransfer anywhere in the world technology, ideas, factors ofproduction, and other sources of competitive advantage.In this regard the biggest challenge will be moving executives aroundthe world in the face of escalating costs.Book: Strategic Alliances: An Entrepreneurial Approach to Globalizationby Michael Y. Yoshino and U. Srinivasa Rangan (Harvard Business SchoolPress).Strategic alliances are a major method for globalisation and this isthe best book I have read to date on the international aspects of thissubject.[London Page 9]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT:A PRODUCT OF POETRY - RUPERT MORRIS WONDERS HOW FAMOUS VERSE COULD BEUSED IN ADVERTISING   By RUPERT MORRISReaders of the Management Page may have noticed that Union Bank ofSwitzerland has been using poetry in its advertisements.'Thoughts that transcend time from Union Bank of Switzerland' haveappeared on global satellite and cable channels, featuring Sir JohnGielgud and others reading classic poems like Ozymandias, Ulysses andso on.The poetry was chosen, according to project manager VincentoTravaglione, to embody corporate values of 'responsibility, openness,courage and perseverance'.Of course, there is nothing new about poetry in advertising. In theearly years of this century, we were regaled with gems like these: TheOnoto, the Owl and the Waverley pen, They come as a boon and a blessingto men . .Or the following, proclaiming the attraction of Everybody's, a popularmagazine of the inter-war years: Oh Mr Porter, whatever shall I do? Iwas reading my Everybody's and got carried on to Crewe] Copy-writingwas in its infancy in those days, I suppose, which may explain whythese excruciating verses lasted for several years; and yet they wereprobably extremely effective, imprinting themselves on the popularconsciousness in much the same way as the catchiest pop songs.Nowadays, alas, advertisers are more image-conscious. You can't imaginethe Body Shop using some naff rhyme, can you? Ovaltine is thehonourable exception, resurrecting the delightful song of those 'happygirls and boys', the 'Ovalteenies'.But Advico Young and Rubicam, the Zurich agency which dreamed up theUBS campaign, have been doubly smart. Not only have they regaled TVviewers with some decent poems for a change, subtly enhancing theirclient's image; they have also done it on the cheap by using authorswho are long out of copyright.There is no end to the number of commercial interests that mightbenefit from a quick glance through the Oxford Book of English Verse.Brewers, for instance, need look no further than AE Housman. Indeed,Ind Coope should surely consider funding an AE Housman chair of poetryat its Burton-on-Trent headquarters.No modern copy-writer could improve on this passage from A ShropshireLad: Say, for what hop-yards meant, Or why was Burton built on Trent?Oh many a peer of England brews Livelier liquor than the Muse. And maltdoes more than Milton can To justify God's ways to man. Ale, man, ale'sthe stuff to drink For fellows whom it hurts to think.Your AB audience might blench somewhat at the last line, butself-conscious intellectuals are not usually beer drinkers anyway, so Idon't think we need worry.Haircare has been a fruitful medium for advertisers, and yet one doesfeel that there is a certain creative vacuum in this field.Purveyors of hair bleach must despair of that stubborn group ofindependent-minded modern women who refuse to emulate the models withflowing locks on their screens and become bottle blondes. Perhaps theyshould try a touch of Wordsworth: Earth hath not anything to show morefair  .And if that doesn't work, there's always Eliot: Stand on the highestpavement of the stair - Lean on a garden urn Weave, weave the sunlightin your hair On reflection, this verse might be more appropriate forwigmakers. But that's the joy of poetry as an advertising medium. It'sso flexible.Other products and services might not be so easy. It is certainly timethe army came up with something better than that macho stuff with younglads driving tanks, swimming, skiing and and generally behaving likewould-be contestants on Gladiators. How about something that brings outthose unchanging values of selfless patriotism? The Soldier, by RupertBrooke, has the right combination of gravitas and romanticism. But thatfirst line is a bit of a downer: 'If I should die . .' You might aswell make it a commercial for funeral services.Now there's a thought. Undertakers have been loath to advertise up tonow, but poetry might give them just the opportunity they need. Thewords of the American Stephen Vincent Benet spring to mind: You maybury my body in Sussex grass, You may bury my tongue in Champmedy, Ishall not be there, I shall rise and pass. Bury my heart at WoundedKnee.At Berry & Birnam we always respect the wishes of the departed. Organrefrigeration a speciality. Or something like that.[London Page 9]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT:LIQUID THERAPY FOR THE NEW YEAR   By LUCY KELLAWAYIhave not been myself recently. Not since I filled my body with astrange orange liquid at the start of the festive season. The incidentwas quite out of character and the memory of it leaves me feelingsheepish and puzzled even now. Lest you conclude that I went wild onthe mandarin liqueur, I should assure you that my liquid was imaginaryand that it has made me calmer, unflappable, ready for the new year.The bizarre story began when a lady named Deborah Marshall-Warrenoffered me a free trial of something called Orange Liquid Therapy. Shesaid this was a 'mental de-tox' session that involved hypnotism, deeprelaxation and direct suggestion to sooth all my stresses away. Halfwayround the bend with pre-Christmas strain at the time, I felt willing totry anything. When she told me her practice was in Regent Street, thatclinched it: I could sort myself out and do some Christmas shopping aswell.Yet when I arrived at her office, I started to feel uneasy. There wasan unnatural calm about Ms Marshall-Warren. Her eyes were red and shelooked as if she had been crying for weeks. We sat in a tiny cubicle ashot as the Sahara and lit by a large bright globe. 'I'm going to putyou under quickly', she said. Obediently, I sat in the chair and triedto relax. I looked at the spot on her hand. I closed my eyes. 'Feelyour calves filling with a warm, orange liquid', she crooned. 'It issoothing, tingling, and it is moving, up, up into your knees. Feel yourknees filling with a warm, orange liquid. It is soothing, tingling. Itis moving, up, up into your thighs . .' You get the picture.When I was full to the brim with orange liquid, I had to imagine itscrubbing out my cares, fears, anxieties, fizzing and dissolving themin much the same way that Domestos gets to work with stubborn householdstains. Then, when there was no more work for it to do, I was told topicture it slowly draining out through my fingers and toes. Clean andemptied, I was informed that I was feeling lighter, more confident,better able to cope and happier.Set down in black and white, orange liquid therapy sounds daft as abrush. I am constitutionally opposed to New Age nonsense. I do notbelieve in trendy miracle cures for complex problems. The sort ofstress relief that makes sense to me is to work less, drink less or togo on holiday.So imagine my bewilderment to find myself feeling much better after 45minutes of semi-conscious sloshing around in make-believe colouredfluid. Before entering the cubicle I felt tense, on the verge ofhysteria. Afterwards I was cheerful, unbothered even by Oxford Circusin the rain at rush hour, and more or less equal to Christmas.Yet when I tell my friends and colleagues my wonderful hypnotism storythey give me a wary look. As far as they are concerned, I've started ona slippery slope, and soon I will be pushing all kinds of dubiousmanagement gimmicks. I insist I am still the same person. They are notso sure. We shall see.1995 was the year in which the re-engineering craze died. Areplacement, developed by McKinsey and explained in the consultant'slatest quarterly bulletin is called: Do It, Then Fix It. I like thisnew fad more than the old one, because it comes in words of onesyllable. The idea behind it is equally hard to argue with: companiesshould work out what changes to their business need to be made, thenthey should carry them out without more ado. Once done, they shouldassess the result, and if it has flaws, they should swiftly put themright. Indeed, this seems to be such a sensible way of going aboutthings, it is a mystery to me why companies need McKinsey to spell itout to them.In the middle of all the change that companies are supposed to beundergoing, one thing remains constant: workers feel their bosses donot have their best interests at heart.Never mind all the empowerment, teamwork and egalitarian structures,employees take the same dim view of their managers as they always havedone. According to actuaries Watson Wyatt, less than half believe theircompany is well managed, or think that their bosses make the rightstrategic decisions.The only thing that has changed in recent years is that workers nowview their superiors as hypocrites: good at drawing up a set of valuesfor the company, less good at living by those values themselves.I realise it is not for me to volunteer new year's resolutions forothers, especially as I have not made any for myself. But might it notbe time for senior managers to start practising what they preach? Iused to think that human behaviour was difficult to change, inparticular that old dogs could not be taught new tricks. But now I amnot so sure. Dare I recommend a little hypnotherapy? On second thoughtsit would only work if they wanted to change. And that, surely, is theproblem.[London Page 9]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT: TEGE - FAST TRACK   By IAN RODGERWhy not start the new year by acquiring a share in Tege, the Swisscompany that is developing a french-fries vending machine?That's right, insert a Pounds 1 coin, wait about a minute and out popsa fresh, hot portion of french fries. Well, almost. The vending machineis still in the prototype stage and unlikely to be on the streets ofEurope until next spring.Nevertheless Tege's shares soared to a high of nearly SFr74 (Pounds41.50) on the Geneva Stock Exchange last May, valuing the company at animpressive SFr68m. They slid recently to SFr48 after it became apparentthat the planned launch would be delayed by about six months.The machine - or rather the french fries production system - is thebrainchild of Richard Sorensen, an American inventor. Sorensen joinedsix European investors, including Jacques Hennessy (of the Cognachouse) after an initial association with a US venture-capital companyturned sour.They claim to have put about Dollars 6m (Pounds 3.8m) into the ventureto date. Early last year they reversed into a derelict quoted Swissfunicular company, Tege, and transferred all the patents to it.Together they hold 55 per cent of Tege's 920,000 bearer shares.Patrick Bigger, a Swiss who is chief executive, said they chose a Swissincorporation because many of the institutional investors in theproject are Swiss and wanted a Swiss franc share. Operations, however,are based in England, where a three-month market test with 25 machinesis scheduled to start next March.The problem with producing french fries is that the fries quicklybecome soggy. Thus a vending machine can only work if it makes a freshportion every time. Sorensen's solution is to use potato powder.Once an order is made, a given amount of powder is measured and mixedwith water to achieve a dough-like substance. The dough cube is pressedthrough an extruder into french fries which fall into four steelbaskets in a pot of hot oil. The baskets revolve slowly around the oilpot and a minute later tip the fries into a chute where they fall intoa cardboard sleeve.The clever bit, claims Bigger, is the composition of the powder, whichcontains patented additives that make it form into a perfectlyconsistent dough within five seconds. Any dough left lying aboutquickly reverts to harmless dry powder.The oil is kept at 220'C, well below its boiling point, and isfrequently stirred even if no orders are being taken. It is alsoautomatically filtered and topped up for losses that go with the fries.Tege executives are now setting up licensing and marketing arrangementsin many countries and spinning out creative sales and profit forecasts.In one projection, 1999 net income comes in at SFr92.9m.They plan both to sell and lease machines and supply the magic powder.A machine will sell for about SFr15,000 and revenue and earningsprojections are based on portions being sold for Pounds 1, DM1.50(Pounds 0.67), FFr4.50 (Pounds 0.58), or SFr1.80. They assume theaverage machine will sell 50 portions a week.The company needs another Dollars 6m or so to cover its costs untilrevenues start flowing in. A convertible bond issue is the most likelyroute, says Bigger.[London Page 9]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL:HOTELIER'S STARCK CHOICE - IAN SCHRAGER'S HOTELS ARE FOR THOSE WHO CANAFFORD CHINTZ BUT WANT SOMETHING DIFFERENT   By ALICE RAWSTHORNOn paper, Ian Schrager looks like the sort of self-indulgentbusinessman who is rather too self-indulgent for his own good.He did, after all, fly 80 palm trees from Washington to the Delanohotel he opened in Miami last summer, because they were more attractivethan the local crop. And, after taking a closer look at the sand onnearby Miami Beach, he shipped in a ton-and-a-half of a superiorvariety.Yet Schrager is not just another architecture junkie who allowsaesthetic excess to cloud his business judgment. He can rattle off theprofit margins on almost every aspect of the Delano and of his threeNew York hotels. He has harnessed his love of design to turn them intothe hotels of choice for what he calls 'the generation that wantssomething different' - artists, actors, designers and musicians who canafford four-star or five-star establishments but find them ratherboring.The three New York hotels - the Royalton, Morgans and the Paramount -are almost always fully booked. The Delano in Miami is so popular thatlast month's American Vogue prefaced an article on other Miami hotelsby saying: 'If you can't get into the Delano . . . .'. Schrager is nowrenovating the Mondrian Hotel in Los Angeles and searching for a sitein London.The progress of his business career has been erratic, to say the least.He made his name in the late 1970s with Studio 54, a New York nightclubthat he ran with his university roommate, the late Steve Rubell. Studio54 captured the hedonistic spirit of the late 1970s. But in 1980Schrager and Rubell were sentenced to 3 1/2 years in prison for taxevasion.After their release they opened a nightclub, the Palladium, anddiversified into hotels. Neither had any experience of the business,but they knew what sort of place to open. 'There was no point inopening another luxury hotel,' says Schrager. 'That end of the businesswas well served by Claridges in London, the Bel Air in LA and theCarlyle in New York. They serve room service course by course atClaridges. You can't beat that.'They sensed a need for a new type of luxury hotel for the sort ofpeople who used to go to Studio 54 - people who wanted, and werewilling to pay for, the comfort and service they got in conventionalluxury hotels, but would prefer a less formal setting more in tune withtheir taste than the chintzy interior of Claridges.They started by renovating Morgans, a discreet mid-town hotel with 154rooms built in the late 1920s. Schrager commissioned Andree Putman, theFrench designer, to refurbish Morgans in her understatedly elegantmodernist style, but they were more adventurous in their choice ofdesigner for the next hotel, the Royalton, which they entrusted to theflamboyant Frenchman, Philippe Starck. Schrager worked with Starckagain on the Paramount, an equally extrovert but less expensive hotelthat opened in 1990.Each of the New York hotels has its own character. The Royalton is themost audacious. The Paramount is for people who love the Royalton butcannot quite afford it. And Morgans is the most discreet. Schragerensures there is a difference of at least Dollars 50 (Pounds 32)between the room rates: Dollars 250 for the Royalton, Dollars 200 forMorgans and Dollars 100 for the Paramount. They all have an averageoccupancy rate of more than 90 per cent, against the US industryaverage of 71 per cent.'Coming from the nightclub business was great training for running anhotel,' says Schrager. 'You're selling a commodity product. A nightclubsells the same drink and plays the same music as the competition. Theonly thing that differentiates them is production values. It's the samewith hotels.'Production values are Schrager's forte. Starck, with whom hecollaborated on the Delano's all-white interior and Alice In Wonderlandgarden, is prodigiously talented but notoriously difficult to workwith. Schrager's solution is to set up a project management team ofarchitects, art directors and buyers to implement Starck's ideas andbring them in on budget.'After doing three hotels with Philippe, we know what to expect,' saysSchrager. 'We don't panic when we get these weird faxes from him.' Thissystem has produced some of Starck's best work. He is one of theworld's most sought-after designers who receives three or four requestsa month to design hotels, but says 'no to all of them, except Ian'.All Schrager's hotels look expensive. The fittings are speciallycommissioned and the renovation budgets seem high - Dollars 28m for theDelano, Dollars 35m for the Royalton, Dollars 60m for the 610-roomParamount. But Schrager is careful to buy existing hotels which will beeasy to convert. 'We replace everything, even the plumbing, but leavethe rooms intact. You can get into trouble by banging on walls.' Hesays it would cost 'much more' to kit out his hotels in conventionalchintz than in a sumptuous Starck design.His latest project is the Mondrian in Los Angeles. It was purpose-builtas a 1960s apartment hotel and is now being redesigned by Starck, whosays he wants it to be 'very, very white with one or two symbols ofcolour' to emphasise the 'dreaminess of LA'. Schrager has asked artistJames Turrell to create a 'three-dimensional living art piece' for thefoyer 'so it will be like walking into an artwork.'As his hotel chain expands, Schrager has cut costs by pooling areassuch as purchasing and marketing. He is careful to concentrate on roomrental, and licenses out services such as bars, restaurants and gyms.Brian McNally, who has turned the Royalton's '44' into one ofManhattan's most chic restaurants, runs the Delano's Blue Room with popstar Madonna as a co-investor. Schrager even licenses the newsstands.'When we ran the newsstand at the Paramount, it lost Dollars 1,000 amonth. We've given it to a guy who knows the business and it makesDollars 4,500 a month.'The Mondrian is scheduled for completion in October and Schrager willthen expand outside the US. He has hunted for sites in London withoutsuccess, although Granada's hostile Pounds 3.3bn bid for Forte couldcreate some opportunities.'My customers travel on a certain axis,' says Schrager. 'New York,Miami and Los Angeles are on it, so are London and Paris. You couldn'topen hotels like mine just anywhere because there wouldn't be enoughpeople to fill it. And I'd put as much effort into a place with 17rooms as I would into one with 700.'[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL:BANGKOK GETS TOUGH ON MOTORISTSMore than 100 people were arrested on the first day of a campaign byBangkok police to force motorists to heed traffic regulations as partof an attempt to unsnarl the city's gridlock.In Bangkok, known for the world's worst traffic jams, drivers routinelyflout the rules. Violators often slip the police small bribes and areswiftly on their way.Car sales in 1995 are expected to have topped 500,000, making Thailandthe largest car market in south-east Asia. But only 8 per cent ofBangkok's land surface is covered by roads, compared to 25 per cent inNew York and Paris. Short trips in the city can take hours.Bangkok's traffic problem is affecting the city's development. Someforeign businesses have decided to locate elsewhere, and tourists spendless time and money in the capital, citing their aversion to thetraffic. The campaign is part of a plan by Thaksin Shinawatra, abillionaire businessman and deputy prime minister, who was elected lastJuly on a pledge that he would solve Bangkok's traffic problems in sixmonths or resign. Thaksin's deadline - January 26 - is approaching withno noticeable improvement in traffic conditions.However, the World Bank recently announced it will provide a Dollars150m (Pounds 97m) loan to Thailand to help alleviate its trafficproblems. Maurice Le-Blanc of the bank said: 'The government ofThailand has taken a leading role in the region in addressingenvironmental and road safety issues in an aggressive manner, which todate have proved very successful. This will further those efforts.'For those who can make it through the traffic, Bangkok's firstCyberpub has just opened, providing a focus for the party-lovingafter-work crowd. For Dollars 12 an hour, customers can sit at one of10 glass-topped tables equipped with a Compaq Presario.Getting into the spirit of things, an opening night trio of womenclicked on to a virtual dating service which bills itself as 'Your linkto true love'. As the picture and vital statistics of a young hunk fromNew York appeared on the screen, one adjusted her glasses and took acloser look.The Cyberpub is in the same ownership as the local upmarket Dusit Thanihotel chain.[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL: CARRIERS CUT FARESBritish Airways is cutting fares to almost 100 destinations untilJanuary 17 as part of of its World Offers. The largest saving, Pounds358, is on return flights to Harare, with prices starting at Pounds599. Fares to Nairobi start at Pounds 439, down Pounds 356. BA fares toAustralian cities Darwin and Perth will be Pounds 561, saving Pounds161 on the regular lowest fares, with Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns,Melbourne and Sydney prices cut by Pounds 124 to Pounds 699. USAir hasreduced its everyday advance purchase ticket prices for spring andsummer travel by up to 44 per cent. The move came a day after a flurryof winter fare cuts of up to 50 per cent initiated by Delta Air Lines,which was swiftly matched by most of its competitors.Italian air traffic controllers have signed a new wage agreement,ending their long fight for more money, a union official said. Theaccord will give controllers a 6 per cent salary rise for the period1994-95. More talks will be needed to hammer out a settlement for1996-97.[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL:AIRPORT ON TRACKHong Kong's new USDollars 20bn airport project, includinginfrastructure and reclamation, is almost half finished, the governmentsaid yesterday. At the start of last month the 10 core projects were 46per cent complete.Billy Lam, director of the new airport's co-ordination office, said theproject, which will replace congested Kai Tak airport, was on scheduleand within budget. Seven of the projects are government-funded.'Our target remains that the first planes will be flying out of HongKong's new international airport at Chek Lap Kok in April 1998 and I amconfident that the total cost will be within our budget of Dollars20.3bn,' Lam said.[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL:CASH IN THE SKYA high-tech business partly owned by a former Israel Air Forcecommander has miniaturised the technology needed to recognisebanknotes, and introduced a product it hopes will turn aircraft intoflying banks.Inflight Financial Services is negotiating with Israel's El Al airlineand US-based carriers such as United Airlines and Delta to install itsAero-Cash automatic currency exchange machine on regular flights.The company has developed a way of reducing bulky automatic exchangemachines to a lightweight, suitcase-sized package that easilyoperates on aircraft, it said. Company president Mony Lichman said themachine, which exchanges US dollars and seven European currencies forany other money, 'will become a fixture on airplanes and change the waytravellers bank'.United Airlines said it was considering using Aero-Cash on its flightsbut had not yet finalised terms. The machine accepts credit cards andwill charge no commission, Lichman said.Inflight Financial Services is a multinational company partly owned andmanaged by Israelis. Some of the development work on Aero-Cash was donein Belgium.[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUSINESS TRAVEL:AIRPORT THREATENEDRussian airport police intervened last week to prevent a group ofbusinessmen from taking control of the VIP lounge at Moscow's maininternational airport.Anatoly Koryakin, director of the Sheremetyevo-2 airport, said thebusinessmen had appeared in the lounge with a bailiff and police inwhat seemed to be a property dispute. Some were armed with Kalashnikovautomatic rifles.'Thanks to the intervention of airport security officers, order wasrestored and work on receiving official delegations continued,'Koryakin said.[London Page 10]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MEDIA FUTURES:POBOX AND THE MAGIC COOKIE   By TIM DICKSONWhich company will have the greatest effect on the development of theInternet this year? My answer is neither Microsoft nor Netscape. It isa tiny new company in Philadelphia called Pobox. com - spelt as if itwere an abbreviation of Post Office Box, but pronounced as the singleword 'Pobox'. Its product consists of a simple forwarding service thatis an electronic equivalent of a post office box.The system works as follows. Customers give out an e-mail addressending in pobox. com - like the one that appears at the bottom of thiscolumn. When their friends or colleagues send them e-mail at thataddress, a computer in Philadelphia looks up the recipient in a database and forwards the message immediately to their Internet provider.This service allows people to give out an e-mail address that isindependent of where they work or where they choose to buy Internetaccess. Moving from one Internet provider to another is simply a matterof sending a message to pobox. com giving a new forwarding address andquoting a 'magic cookie', a number that establishes the customer'sauthenticity.I have already discovered an advantage of the service. Having recentlymoved from London to Silicon Valley in order to work on a book, I haveswitched Internet providers. But my address has remained the same, andmessages sent to me as if I were in London are forwarded to me inCalifornia without my having had to tell anyone how to reach me.Yet people moving house are not the sole market. Other potential usersincludes customers of CompuServe, which allows people to use only anindecipherable string of numbers as their e-mail address.Equally attracted will be those who are embarrassed by the cumbersomelength or strange letter-and-number combination of their real e-mailaddress.The entrepreneurs behind Pobox. com are a pair of students at theUniversity of Pennsylvania, still living in a college dormitory: ReuvenBell, 23, whose subject is religious studies, and Meng-Weng Wong, 21, acomputer science major born in Singapore. The two launched theirservice in early 1995, and already have 3,000 users. In keeping withthe principle that most of the best Internet businesses start off bygiving things away, the pair offer a generous free trial lasting threemonths.Thereafter, the price for forwarding mail starts from Dollars 15 ayear, payable by credit card - with the incentive of six years for theprice of five to those who choose to pay Dollars 55 in advance.Three months is exactly right for the trial period. It is long enoughfor customers to become comfortable with the service and to give theirnew e-mail address to all their friends, but not long enough for anyoneto find it worthwhile to start again with a new name from scratch.So far, 850 electronic invoices have been sent out, and almost halfhave been paid. Because of a glitch in the billing software, Bell andWong have not yet had time to send out reminders. But early indicationsare promising, and the pair claim that an automated trawl of Internetnewsgroups has turned up more than 1,000 mentions of their service,only one of which was negative.Whether Pobox. com will make serious money or not is too early topredict. Its founders certainly hope so. Bell has just taken time offfrom his degree to work on the business 12 hours a day, and is planningto pursue some Wharton MBA courses on his return to academia. Moreover,the company already has imitators: a sign, surely, that others see thepotential in its idea.Even a modest success could have a sharp effect on the Net. It wouldremove the fear of changing e-mail address that forces many to staywith an unsatisfactory service provider. In doing so, Pobox. com'ssuccess would make a large global industry significantly morecompetitive.Talking of magic cookies, someone recently sent me the followingstory by e-mail. A woman who had eaten a delicious cookie at the cafeof a department store in Dallas asked for the recipe. 'We don't give itout,' said the waiter. However, the customer persisted and offered topay for the recipe.On hearing that the price would be 'two fifty', she agreed to charge itto her credit card along with the bill for her lunch, and was thenhanded the recipe on a printed sheet. Thirty days later, her Visastatement revealed she had been charged Dollars 250.The furious cookie lover called the company's head office, thinkingthat the real figure should have been Dollars 2.50, but was told therewas no mistake.The Dollars 250 was to insure that not just anyone could afford therecipe. Accordingly, her request for a refund had to be turned down,but the woman got her own back in the end.She copied the recipe into an e-mail, which she posted to all herfriends. They posted it to their friends, and they in turn to theirs.'I paid for it,' her e-mail said, 'so you can have it for free.'I find it hard to imagine that the department store named in the e-mailwould behave in such a pig-headed way.But even if apocryphal, the story illustrates the power of theInternet. By the time you read this, tens of thousands of people mayhave baked cookies according to the recipe without paying Dollars 250.And the name of the store chain will have been blackened on computerscreens all over the world.Tim. Jackson@pobox. com[London Page 11]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MEDIA FUTURES:HOME SHOPPING TAKES A TUMBLE FROM ITS TROLLEY - ENTHUSIASTIC PREDICTIONSOF A COUCH-POTATO FUTURE WERE PREMATURE   By WINSTON FLETCHERA funny thing has happened. Home shopping, that supposedlytrail-blazing benefit of interactive television, has fallen out of itssupermarket trolley.Less than a year ago the pundits were predicting a couch-potato futurefor us all. Sitting comfortably in front of our screens, we would surfthe stores and trawl the malls. Never again need we venture into therough, tough world of Marks and Spencer or Sainsbury's. We wouldclick-on, cruise-thru', and our cyber-shopping trollies would be filledby techno-magic.Well, it hasn't happened yet. But is it on its way?The picture is confused as there are two types of televisual homeshopping. First, conventional satellite/cable channels offeringmerchandise in a fairly traditional way. Second, shopping emporia -mostly American - are burgeoning on the Net.The more knowledgeable US home shopping gurus have long been suspiciousof the forecast explosion in their marketplace. QVC, America's largest,highest profile home-shopping channel, mostly sells jewellery (42 percent of its turnover) and clothing (18 per cent). For clothing, thereturn rate is about 40 per cent.A couple of years ago QVC's then retiring chairman, Joseph Segel, saidin a notable speech: 'The number of people tuned to a particularchannel when your advertising runs is likely to be a small fraction ofthe number you could reach with direct mail. The cost of running ashopping channel is much greater than most people realise. Some systemdevelopers and their software programmers assume that consumers areitching to be converted from passive to interactive TV viewers.Certainly there are some people who fit that mould. But I venture tosay that the great American public prefers just to watch television andlet someone else do the work.'In turn, futurologist John Naisbitt's well-informed Trend Letter - apublication understandably keen to embrace almost anything andeverything new under the sun - recently asked: 'Is the much-hyped ageof online shopping about to bloom? Not really.' The same issue of TrendLetter reported that 'merchants on the Internet are reluctant tosolicit credit-card numbers for payment, lest hackers steal accountnumbers' - a little cybernetic difficulty that has by no means beenresolved.Nonetheless, research estimates suggest that 2m online purchases weremade in the US in the last year. That sounds an awful lot until youremember that it equates to a single purchase by less than 1 per centof America's population. And Americans, particularly those living wayout nowhere, have always been catalogue shoppers, so direct marketinghas always been big business in the US.It is a far-flung country, and even with gasolene as cheap as Coke itdoesn't make a lot of sense to drive hundreds of miles for a rubbergrommet. In other words, established home shoppers may just beswitching media, from print to Net - without new shoppers beinginveigled into the couch-potato lifestyle.Where Americans are slow to lead, Europeans are even slower to follow.At the end of 1994 a study of the multimedia marketplace in Europecarried out by leading research group Inteco reported that the demandfor home shopping was non existent. 'No one in the study,' itproclaimed, 'showed any interest in being able to order goodselectronically.'The progress of home shopping in Britain confirms that. QVC startedwith a bang in the UK but sales appear to be stabilising at aboutPounds 50m annually - not a lot with which to run a full-time channeland supply some 300,000 customers.Part of the reason for this disappointing growth is the result, Isuspect, of the hype attached to the phrase 'virtual reality'.Televisual shopping, it is claimed, provides 'virtual reality'. In avirtual reality supermarket you can whiz round the aisles picking up apack of this and a jar of that as you skid past the shelves. It soundsso futuristic, so clever, that we have been seduced into believing itwould be wonderful. But would it?It would certainly be fun once or twice, like a video game. But we allknow what has happened to the sales of video games. The problem is thatvirtual reality really doesn't bear much resemblance to reality.We encounter reality through our five senses: sight, sound, smell,taste and touch. So-called virtual reality offers reality in - at best- two dimensions: sight and sound. Sight is the most important singlesense involved when we go shopping. But it is not the only one.As supermarkets are well aware, smell is all-important. That is whythey put fruit and vegetables at the front of the store, and bake theirown bread. For many products, touch is as important as smell. ('If youdon't want the goods, don't muck 'em about', went the oldcostermongers' injunction, to restrain customers from manhandling theproduce).Paradoxically, it is in the area of sight that virtual reality is leastreal. If Bill Gates, the boss of Microsoft, believes that projectinghuge cyber-blowups of great masterpieces on to his walls will conveyeven a tad of their artistic merit, it is as well he never tried tomajor in aesthetics.But never mind great paintings. Would you even buy fresh meats or fish,or even fruits and vegetables, without seeing them in the flesh? Ifpeople didn't want to inspect the goods carefully and choose thefreshest, why would they shop at the deli counter? The newest Tescostores now have large old-fashioned butcher's sections. And if you wantto inspect groceries before you buy them, why not shop for the lot atone stop?Apart from groceries, the sector that has generated most chatter amongthe marketing classes - but again, little action so far - is cars. (Themarketing classes are not much interested in jewellery - not in sellingit, anyway).Automotive gurus constantly predict that the end of the showroom isnigh: motorists, it is said, will compare and contrast different modelson-screen before selecting their test-drive short-list. And one day,even the test-drive will be taken on-screen.The assumption is that video information is more appealing to motoriststhan printed or personal (showroom) information. Maybe. But feel,comfort, guidance - even smell - are important reasons for showroomvisits, and cannot be duplicated by 'virtual reality'.Which may explain why the only area in which home shopping seems to betaking off is one in which virtual reality is virtually non-existent -the marketing, not of goods, but of services, particularly financialservices.As financial products are, so to speak, invisible and intangible, theyare ideal for telephone selling. While financial service providersincreasingly use direct response television advertisingcost-effectively, their commercials could hardly be described asvirtual reality. Or indeed, in many cases, as reality of any sort.Not that home shopping is not going to grow. It will, but it will beslow and highly specialised. Delivery takes time and costs money. Manypeople, perhaps most, will never feel comfortable with computers.Forget those middle-class parental boasts of brilliantly sophisticatedcomputer-literate kids; think, instead, about all the underprivileged,computer-illiterate kids.Nor is home shopping quite as revolutionary as cyberbuffs believe.Almost exactly a century ago the Victorians were opening up their ownversion of the information superhighway (and with at least as muchhyperbole). The UK postal service, the railways, the telephone and thetelegram were bustin' out all over. Telegrams were described - as newmedia so frequently are described by their sponsors - as 'the boldestadvertisements in modern times.'By the turn of the century, all the great London department stores hadmail-order departments. Harrods, which pioneered home shopping bytelephone, rejoiced in the telephonic address EVERYTHING, LONDON.Whiteley's in Bayswater boasted they could supply anything 'from a pinto an elephant' door-to-door.And the Army and Navy store sped huge mail-order catalogues to itscustomers in every corner of the globe, carrying within their covers acornucopia of sumptuous and succulent merchandise. Moreover, deliverywas often a good deal faster and cheaper than it generally would betoday.Home shopping may yet be the bonanza of the future. But I wouldn't betmy Tesco shares on it.Winston Fletcher is chairman of the UK advertising agency DelaneyFletcher Bozell.[London Page 11]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MEDIA FUTURES: CYBER SIGHTINGS   By STEPHEN MCGOOKINKicking off this US presidential election year, the Doonesbury TownHall site (www. doonesbury. com/ main. html), based on Garry Trudeau'sconsistently brilliant strip cartoon, looks a fine way of keeping tabson the campaign as it unfolds. The site (slogan: 'Join the fightagainst cluelessness') has a daily news briefing and links to thePoliticsUSA resource, as well as a chat hall and a straw poll. Topnotch.As access increases to the former Soviet Union and eastern and centralEurope, the Prague-based Open Media Research Institute (www. omri. cz) -a successor to Radio Free Europe - offers useful resources including adaily digest of economic issues affecting the region.A new site from United Airlines (www. ual. com) is an example of how aprimarily corporate marketing site can be user-friendly andinformative. Very well done, nice graphics, not too much text per pageand easy to navigate around.The Taiwan Business Directory (http://business. com. tw) is a searchableguide to products and companies from Taiwan. It's indexed by companyname and, comprehensively, by product classification. There are eightcontact entries alone under the heading Food and using the sub-categorySoy Sauce.Empower (www. megalinx. net/empower) is 'Black America's Magazine fortheInformation Age', with a newswire, articles about the affirmativeaction debate, and a good business profile feature, focusing onAfrican-American achievers.steve@mcgook. demon. co. uk[London Page 11]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SPORT:GREEN TURNS DARK FOR THE STRUGGLING GOLF CLUB PRO   By KEITH WHEATLEYPeter Alliss recently observed that the average club golfer expects thelocal professional to play like Nick Faldo, teach like John Jacobs andbe as good a shopkeeper as Marks and Spencer.Very few club members realise how much of an endangered species thenon- tour golf professional is about to become, especially in Britain,the home of golf. Traditionally, the pro has received a small retainerfrom his club but earned the bulk of his living selling equipment andgiving lessons.Yet selling equipment to club members is becoming virtually impossibleas the tiniest of retailers strives to compete against specialist chainstores such as American Golf Discount and Nevada Bob's.'The members don't realise what a financial strain it is to carry thestock on a big overdraft and they can be such fickle customers,' saysHaydn Darrell, the pro at the small Devon club of Sidmouth. 'I'll seethem turn up to play with a new set of clubs and I won't even have hadthe chance to match the price they've paid from one of the big chainstores.'Darrell's experience is echoed nationally. A recent report from thespecialist Golf Research Group predicted that the 2,400 retail outletssupplying the UK golf equipment market will have shrunk to only 200 to300 shops within a year or two.'The traditional pro shop just cannot survive,' says Colin Hegarty,head of GRG. 'The average gross turnover is around Pounds 110,000 ayear and they cannot stock the shop and survive on that kind ofvolume.'His figures show that the bigger retail outlets are growing fast, witha matching shrinkage at the smaller end. Hegarty says the club pro hastwo options: 'Get out of the business quickly: it's better to take abig loss than stay and starve to death. Or become an Alan Walker.'Walker is a former club pro - 10 years at the coalface - who realisedhe was a doomed species in a thriving industry, so he now has ahigh-volume shop adjoining his Warren Park driving range in Essex, plusa management company looking after a nearby pay-and-play course.Walker says that club pros have lost their retail business'frighteningly quickly. Five years ago it was a Pounds 130,000 averageturnover with a 35 per cent margin. That's all over.'His own shop turns over slightly more than Pounds 1m a year, but abranch of American Golf Discount has just opened on Walker's doorstep.'We're being hurt,' he admits. 'Teaching alone isn't the answer toreplacing lost income. Firstly, statistics show that the British arethe worst golfers in the world in terms of readiness to takeinstruction. Secondly, it's too seasonal. Who's having a lesson today?'He looked out of his office window as an arctic snow shower blastedacross the 14th green. Few issues currently occupy the ProfessionalGolfer's Association as intensely as the livelihoods of its 3,500members. As a result, a PGA working party is radically re-thinking theraison d'etre of the pro.It doesn't help that while the public image of the golf professional isNick Faldo or Ernie Els, superstars like those are a light year awayfrom the everyday work of the pro at the local club.When the PGA wanted a leading figure for a publicity campaign, it foundFaldo's fee unaffordable, so ended up using Nigel Mansell, one of thegame's better-known amateurs.Alan Walker is a committee member at the PGA and is deeply involved inthe process of reviewing future direction. As one experienced insiderput it: 'We have to stop training people for futures they are nevergoing to have. They're not going to be Woosnam or Norman, and nowthey're not going to be a successful shopkeeper, either.'Walker acknowledges the problems. 'At the end of the day we're allfailed players,' he says. 'I went into the game thinking I could playand was going to spend my days on the course winning tournaments, andI've ended up an accountant.' Later this month the PGA opens an Pounds8m training academy at its headquarters, The Belfry, the hotel coursein the English Midlands that has hosted several Ryder Cups.Leisure management and course architecture are much more important nowthan learning how to spend several hours repairing a persimmon-headeddriver for a tiny fee.The qualifications dished out at The Belfry will be equivalent to adegree. 'We've always been reluctant retailers, and the tour is for atiny minority, of whom 75 per cent won't cover their costs,' saysWalker. 'The jobs we've got to aim for are those of actually managingthe facilities, which in the past have gone to food and beveragespecialists or greenkeepers.'In the future, if your local club pro can't drive a computer and workthe local media, forget admiring his short game around the green.'If the pro can re-engineer himself to survive, what of the shop? We maynot buy much, but which weekend golfer doesn't enjoy a mooch around hisclub shop's over-stocked shelves?'It's history,' says Colin Hegarty. 'Marks and Spencer are alreadymoving into clothing in a huge way and the big chains will be sellingall the clubs and equipment. A starter's hut where you can buy a gloveand a ball - if you've forgotten to bring them - is the most likelyoutcome.'1995 UK Equipment Survey: Golf Research Group, Pounds 495.Tel:  0181-987-9950. Fax: 0181-995-1573.[London Page 12]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARCHITECTURE:YEAR OF THE MILLENNIAL RE-THINK   By COLIN AMERYAt least 1995 ended on a note of pure wisdom. For once, the old Englishsystem of independent representative groups of well-informedindividuals appointed by the crown to guide our affairs workedbrilliantly, with the millennium commissioners proving themselves worththeir salt by refusing to allocate national lottery money for theproposed Cardiff Bay opera house.For too long Lord Crickhowell and his opera house trustees have beenled by the nose by London architectural groupies and admirers of thedesigns of Zaha Hadid, who won the competition to design the proposedopera house.The common sense of the minister, Virginia Bottomley, and hercommissioners will save Wales the embarrassment of a design that is notsupported by the people of Wales and is already dated.A Cardiff Bay opera house as a new home for the Welsh National Opera isa good idea, and no doubt a large theatre will be built there. Themistake was for the opera house trustees to believe they had to buildsomething approved by a narrow segment of the internationalarchitectural mafia.The jury for the competition was unrepresentative and innocent,seemingly prepared to let Miss Hadid's quaintly modern period piece goahead even though she had never built a serious building. Miss Hadid isreally a talented futurist painter - her work would have been avantgarde in turn of the century Russia. Today it is labelled'uncompromising' and 'exciting'. It is neither. The trendy Londonchatterers who influence people like Lord Crickhowell should be seenfor what they are: rearguard types trying to protect a brieflyfashionable designer. But Miss Hadid is no genius.The tragedy of the inevitable row about Cardiff Bay is that the failureof Miss Hadid's design will be seen as a triumph for the philistines.It is actually a dated, awkward design that only got this far throughendless lobbying. The millennium commissioners, who distribute part ofthe proceeds of the UK national lottery, have called the bluff of thetrendies.Sensible opera house trustees should look at the newest opera houses inthe world; meet their architects and managers; and choose someone withexperience. The trustees must start again with a good new architect.Life is tough, but Virginia Bottomley is tougher, and in this case sheand her commissioners are right.Last year, national lottery money gave a fillip to the UK'sarchitectural profession. The turnover of the British constructionindustry should benefit by some 5 per cent or so in the years to themillennium. It is large-scale projects that attract attention, but some90 per cent of lottery grants are for projects of less than Pounds 1m.Yet 1995 saw construction still in recession and architects onlybeginning to see green shoots of recovery fertilised by lottery cash.The secretary of state for the environment, John Gummer, belatedlyrecognised the value of towns. His new planning policy guidance notes,to be issued early this year, will stress the value of mixeddevelopments. That is an almost complete volte face for the entireplanning system. If he is serious, Gummer will presumably bere-educating the entire planning profession at the new University ofGreenwich.He will have to start with the Corporation of the City of London which,since the inspired but disastrous experiment of the Barbican, hasabandoned any pretence that the City is more than a Square Mile ofoffices. The recent announcement of two big office schemes in EC4, andthe decision to encourage Mitsubishi to go back to the drawing board onthe Paternoster site, means the City may be in danger of becoming ahorizontal version of Canary Wharf.The opportunity at Paternoster to build a mixed development, givingMitsubishi the chance to build as many offices as it likes on, say,London Wall, must not be missed. In turn, the chance to move the Museumof London to a marvellous site next to St Paul's should be grasped, andwhy not have hotels and residential accommodation overlooking Wren'swonder?Architects in 1996 need to learn to be different kinds of animals.Those like Miss Hadid and Sir Richard Rogers (imminent adviser to thenew Labour party) who are wedded to dogma, are now old fashioned.Architects like Sir Michael Hopkins, Sir Norman Foster and RichardMacCormac are the leaders of the profession, and also admired by thepublic.That is a breakthrough, and one that has come about because the publicare under-estimated by architects at their peril. The public - you andme - understands the difference between quality and a dead cow informaldehyde. Virginia Bottomley and her commissioners understand thedifference, too. In 1996, quality and common sense may replace dogmaand fashionable nonsense. I live in hope.[London Page 12]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS:MAN OF MUSIC WITH PERIOD APPEAL - ANDREW CLARK TALKS TO THE CONDUCTORWHO CHALLENGES OUR ASSUMPTIONS AND OPENS OUR EARS TO THE PAST   By ANDREW CLARKThis looks like Roger Norrington's year. He opens and closes it inSalzburg, conducting the Vienna Philharmonic there later this month andreturning in December to rehearse Mozart's Mitridate for the 1997festival. In between there will be Berlioz with the LondonPhilharmonic, Dvorak in Boston, Henze in Basle, Elgar in Washington,Beethoven in Chicago, Nicholas Maw at the Proms and Brahms in Vienna -not forgetting three European tours with his own period-instrumentorchestra, the London Classical Players.Did someone say Norrington was a period specialist? If so, the periodranges pretty wide - from 1600 to 2000. That distinguishes him frommost early music pioneers. And he uses the same forensic skills tounravel Vaughan Williams and Part as he does for Beethoven and Bruckner- which sets him apart from other high-profile conductors. No Britishmusician has done more to challenge our assumptions or open our ears tothe past. At 61, Roger Norrington fully deserves the internationallimelight.He clearly enjoys it. The early music revolution, he says, is not aboutperiod instruments or a particular type of repertoire. 'It's a habit ofmind. Even if I didn't know anything about early music, I would stillbe the conductor I am now. I just can't look at a piece of musicwithout taking it back into the garage and stripping it down, findingwhat the hell is going on and putting it back together again. Vroom]'Earthy enthusiasm has always been a Norrington hallmark. It inspiredhis singers and orchestra at Kent Opera, where his 13 years as musicdirector gave him a vast repertory and an intimate understanding of howa company works. Enthusiasm has also been the key to his 'Experience'weekends, where he and the LCP discuss, rehearse and perform acomposer's work to the amused enlightenment of all. And it continues topermeate his day-to-day contact with conventional orchestras.'You don't often come across that kind of enthusiasm for the way themusic is realised,' said a member of the Basle Symphony Orchestra afterNorrington's latest visit. 'His contact with the players is amazinglylively - the orchestra had a great time. He got a humming performance,the music really took off.'Longstanding colleagues say Norrington has mellowed over the years. Hehas had two operations for cancer and become a father again: his wife,the choreographer Kay Lawrence, and their two-year-old son often travelwith him. 'But when it comes to the music, he's just as strict anddemanding as ever,' says an LCP stalwart. 'He has an incontrovertibleidea of how it should be. His point is that this is real music writtenby real people, and he gets that 'immediate' element across. He wantsto get round the traditional interpretation, demythologise the music,remove the waffle and ballast.'That is one of the reasons why Norrington now enjoys such a highprofile outside the UK. Long popular in the US and Italy, he has onlyrecently begun to make his presence felt in the Austro-Germanheartland. He says CDs have had a proselytising influence - 'they'resinking into the subconscious. People there are getting used to theidea that there are things they need to know about. Despite my roughGerman, the orchestras have been very responsive.'Norrington has not forgotten the UK. A former choral scholar atCambridge, he lives in Berkshire, organises the LCP's schedule with acouple of helpers and conducts 10 programmes a year with the LondonPhilharmonic. He says he is perfectly happy to work with moderninstruments. 'If you're changing the score - because many of thepublished scores are inaccurate - and you change the seating, thetempo, the phrasing, the light and shade, the Weltanschauung, italready makes a huge difference. But once they get used to the style,they may hesitantly say 'We're doing everything else, shouldn't we dropthe vibrato?'. That happened with the LPO, and the result wasabsolutely marvellous. As they begin to trust you, they realise you'renot going to turn up in a gown and mortar board. They see you're a realmusician.'Norrington's interest in historically aware performance began in theearly 1960s, when he went round the churches of Europe performingSchutz with his own amateur choir. There was no Schutz style: he had toinvent his own. From there it was but a short step to Bach, Telemannand Handel - and on to Gluck and Haydn, Beethoven and Berlioz, Schubertand Schumann. The journey has now reached Wagner and Bruckner, and theresults astonish Norrington as much as they do his admirers.In his LCP recording of the Meistersinger overture, Norrington knockstwo to three minutes off the standard performance length. 'I keepthinking that with the next thing we do, there won't be quite the samethings to discover,' he says. 'A year ago, we didn't know how Wagnerwould sound on period instruments. I thought the tempo wouldn't be abig question, it would be a matter of just hearing the same music onthese instruments. Then I started my research. In Ueber das Dirigieren,Wagner writes that when he conducted the Meistersinger overture, itlasted a few seconds over eight minutes. I thought wow] What will itsound like if we do that?'It was a revelation - less pompous and more humorous than usual, with aspring-in-the-step in the climaxes. There were similar results inBruckner's Third Symphony, which Norrington conducted at the LinzBruckner festival last autumn. He opted for the first version - the oneBruckner never heard, with none of the 'improvements' carried out byhis pupils for later performing versions. And he delved into Bruckner'sown recorded comments, which include references to a polka in thefinale.'What do most conductors do? They play it like a dirge. But if Brucknersays it's a polka, it's a polka. So I take it at a steady polka speed,which makes it sound like a dance - and the chorale suddenly becomessingable. All I'm trying to do is put the record straight, to believein the past. You don't set out to prove people wrong - you start as aninnocent, asking questions, and you stumble across these glaringlyobvious things.'Norrington says he deals with every composer's music in the same way:'I feel it, I get as much information as I can about it, and then I doit. I want to obey both sides - the heart and the head, they're inconstant creative tension. You can have the best intentions to followwhat the composer wants, but after a couple of days in rehearsal youmay find you're doing it quite differently - and that's how it shouldbe. In the end, feeling is king. It has to be your own vision.'For the past two summers he has conducted at the Rossini festival inPesaro. Was there much for him to contribute there? 'The management waskeen I should continue de-cloying Rossini - no high notes at the end,cadenzas as written, decorations with taste, tempi not too slow. Hedoesn't need to be livened up, but there's more allure in the phrasingthan he's given credit for. He's usually hijacked into 19th-centurystyle. But Zelmira was written in 1822. He went to Vienna and metBeethoven. These are fully classical works, in the sense that Beethovenis fully classical.'Norrington's journey into the past is far from finished. He visitsPrague in May to give the first historically aware performances ofSmetana's Ma Vlast. Given the chance, he would also take the LCP to theFestspielhaus at Bayreuth - 'the right orchestra in the right hall'. Hewants to play Tchaikovsky in St Petersburg, to do an 'Experience'weekend on Berg, and to conduct Lulu, Les Troyens and Meistersinger inthe opera house. He dreams of reviving the Early Opera Project, withwhich he toured Monteverdi's Orfeo in Italy in the 1980s. 'Historicalstaging is in the same state as early music was in 1960. The materialis all there. It just needs a mad entrepreneur with the right theatre.'Norrington admits that much of what he does is guess-work: it is ahazard of the road he has chosen to take. He may go wildly wrong attimes - that is the result of his risk-taking - but none of hisperformances has ever been dull or routine. Long may it stay that way.                          *      *      *-----------------------------------------------------------------------                        THE NORRINGTON EXPERIENCE-----------------------------------------------------------------------1934    Born March 16 at Oxford.1954-7  Choral scholar at Cambridge.1962    Founded Schutz Choir.1969-82 Conducted more than 30 operas, from Monteverdi to Tippett, as        music director of Kent Opera.1978    Formed London Classical Players, followed in 1984 by Early        Opera Project.1985    Haydn Experience, first of exploratory composer-weekends.1986    EMI contract led to his recording all Beethoven's symphonies        and much else on period instruments. Debut with Royal Opera.1990    Appointed CBE.1996    Debut with Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra.-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS:TALES FROM ARABIA - THEATRE   By SIMON READEThere is no better place to tell a spell-binding story than in thetheatre, especially around Christmas, when we are at our mostchildlike. This is the motivation behind Battersea Arts Centre'sambitious current programme 'Telling Tales'. Alongside new Christianfables and fresh glosses on the European tales of the Brothers Grimm,it is refreshing to experience the contrasting oral tradition ofPersia: Alf Laylah Wa Laylah - Arabian Nights: The Tales ofSheherazade.The excitement starts when you enter the modest studio to find itre-formed. We sit cross-legged in-the-round, raised above the courtyardarcade beneath, peering into a shimmering arena which transforms fromking's bedroom to bustling bazaar, the banks of the Nile and the plainsbetween Cairo and Basra in the tiniest flicker of our mind's eye. 'Thishot land called Egypt' is conjured from nothing more than a fistful ofsand draining through a woman's fingers. Michael Gordon's direction andLiz Cooke's design create a compelling environment for their dedicatedcompany of ten focused performers. 'Listen,' they command: 'Listen.'It is the whim of King Shahrayar to execute his virgin brides afteronly one night, as a means of purging his kingdom of unfaithful Woman.He scapegoats them because of his own self-loathing: he murdered hisfirst queen in a fit of ill-founded jealousy. A strong-willed princess,the Sheherazade, is determined to end this needless sacrifice, andvolunteers to be his bride, but only after she has told her sister abedtime story - beautifully in Arabic - which intrigues the King. Soshe tells him more.The stories selected by the company are not of the Boys Own 'Ali Babaand the Forty Thieves' variety, but all craftily develop theproto-feminist theme. Each tale has jealous husbands wrongfullymurdering their wives for imagined infidelity, or women enduring sexand childbirth, and even broach pre-ordained marriage. Thisinterpretation of the exotic Arabic world of the Middle Ages as oneriddled with miscarriages of natural justice against women, pursues aclear agenda, but not one which is worn on the sumptuous sleeves of thewomen. The stories are elliptical, graceful and enchanting.There are stories within stories, tales chasing their own tales, richlyinterwoven like a magic carpet. The 75 minutes of storytelling does notonly reinvigorate a moribund king, but revivifies the wider audience.Suitable for older children, it could run for 1001 nights.At the BAC, London until January 7 (0171-223 2223).[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS): AMSTERDAMMstislav Rostropovich joins the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra on Fridayfor a series of six concerts as cellist and conductor. His programmesinclude symphonies by Tchaikovsky, Shostakovich, Schnittke and GalinaOestwolskaja, and a recital of Bach cello suites. He will alsoaccompany solo performances by three other Russian virtuosi - YuriBashmet, Natalia Gutman and Gidon Kremer.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS):GLASGOWA much-expanded Celtic Connections festival opens at the Royal ConcertHall on Thursday with a gala concert of jigs and jazz. The followingtwo weeks bring a lively mix of traditional music, folk songs, ceilidhsand other forms of Gaelic culture from Scotland and Ireland.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS):NEW YORKJanacek's 'The Makropoulos Case' will have its first performance at theMetropolitan Opera on Friday, in a new production starring JessyeNorman as the 300-year old Emilia Marty. Staged by Elijah Moshinsky andconducted by David Robertson, the opera will be sung in English with acast including Graham Clark, Hakan Hagegard and Donald McIntyre.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS):WASHINGTONHans Krasa's opera 'Betrothal in a Dream' had an acclaimed premiere inPrague under George Szell's baton in 1933, but along with other musicby Jewish composers, it was suppressed by the Nazis. Krasa was gassedin Auschwitz, and his opera lay forgotten until Israel Yinon unearthedthe score and conducted a staging in Prague two years ago. Yinonsupervises the US premiere on Saturday at the Kennedy Center'sEisenhower Theater.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS):LONDONCheek by Jowl brings its production of 'The Duchess of Malfi' toLondon, opening tonight at Wyndham's Theatre. Anastasia Hille plays thetitle role.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS (OPENINGS):LEEDS'Peter Pan', returns to the stage on Thursday, with David Bamber asCaptain Hook, at the West Yorkshire Playhouse. The director is MatthewWarchus, whose 1995 stagings included the National Theatre's 'Volpone'.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS:TODAY'S TELEVISION   By MARTIN HOYLELocal heroes (7.30pm BBC2) is a little hymn to English eccentricity,both in style and content. Adam Hart-Davies is a one-man store oftrivia (or general knowledge as it used to be called in less ruthlesslymercenary days) about inventions of the past including laughing-gas (Ialways thought invented by Humphry Davy out of sheer boredom withBristol; eminently likely) and a spanking-machine.For those who remember Richard Harris' play Outside Edge, first onstage then on television with the incomparable Maureen Lipman, thesitcom with the same name has been something of a disappointment. Itscharacters verge on the caricatured and lack that consistency that evensitcom creations should have. Still, a show that avoids aping Americancomedy and even takes cricket as its theme is worth a plaudatorychuckle (8.30pm ITV).Great Ormond Street continues its gripping survey of the greatchildren's hospital (8pm BBC1); and Wild Britain (8pm C4) is a repeatabout the bramble bush and its dependent wildlife.[London Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996AN ABSENCE OF INFLATION: THE FEELGOOD FACTOR IS SET TO REMAIN ELUSIVEIN 1996   By MARTIN WEALE and GARRY YOUNGBy most measures, 1995 was a good year for the UK economy. Inflationremained subdued, output grew by more than 2.5 per cent, unemploymentdeclined by more than 200,000 and government borrowing fell, albeit byless than was expected at the beginning of the year. In addition, MrKenneth Clarke, the chancellor, was able to take a penny off the basicrate of income tax and cut interest rates by a quarter of 1 percentagepoint.This very favourable mix of growth and inflation is rare by Britishhistorical standards and, while we think it likely to continue, thereare risks that the economy will not be as successful in 1996.The most striking aspect of the present economic situation is thevirtual absence of domestically generated inflation at a time ofrelatively fast growth and falling unemployment. This is partly areflection of the extent of disinflationary pressure in the UK labourmarket. Since the peak in unemployment in 1993, wage increases haveshown no sign of picking up and real wages have scarcely grown. Thismeans that the benefits of increased productivity have beenappropriated into profit margins. These have risen substantially:profits as a proportion of gross domestic product - at 36 per cent in1994 - are higher than in the early 1970s.One important question in present circumstances is whether thesurprising lack of growth in wage rates is evidence - as claimed by theTreasury - that the sustainable rate of unemployment has fallen. In the1980s and early 1990s it seemed that this figure was about 8 per centof the labour force. Certainly, when the unemployment rate fell to 5.5per cent by 1990, there was a sharp acceleration in inflation which wasonly squeezed out by the rise in unemployment during the lastrecession.Assuming productivity growth of 2 per cent a year, the rate of increasein wages could probably rise from its existing level of 3.25 per centto 4.5 per cent per annum and still be consistent with annual inflationof 2.5 per cent and very high profit margins. This suggests thatunemployment at 8 per cent is still above its sustainable rate.It would be premature, however, to assume from this that thesustainable rate of unemployment has indeed fallen. Unit labour costspicked up noticeably in 1995 and in manufacturing were growing inOctober at an annual rate of 4 per cent. This probably reflects thestagnation of productivity associated with the slowdown in output. Butit may be an early indication that unemployment is reaching itssustainable level.If the sustainable unemployment rate has fallen, it will be possiblefor output to grow for some time to come at more than its underlyingtrend rate without generating inflationary pressure. This does notguarantee that the chancellor's inflation target of 2.5 per cent by theend of the present parliament will be met - the weakness of domesticprices has been offset by increases in import prices arising fromsterling's depreciation of close to 7 per cent through 1995.We expect the underlying inflation rate by the end of 1996 to beslightly over 3 per cent. A better way of putting this is to say thatwe think there is only a 40 per cent chance of meeting the inflationtarget. There is also a risk that inflation will be substantiallyhigher if faster growth in import prices feeds through to domesticprices.This assessment depends on the outlook for demand, which appears tohave stalled in the second half of 1995, leading to fears that theoverall rate of growth in 1996 will be considerably slower. This timelast year the National Institute forecast growth of 2.7 per cent for1995, and this is likely to be very close to the eventual out-turn. For1996, we are predicting growth of 2.4 per cent, much lower than theTreasury's forecast of 3 per cent.Our forecast assumes that continued weakness in domestic demand will beoffset by higher export demand, helped by the fall in sterling in 1995.Individual monthly figures are erratic, but it was gratifying to seehigher exports in November as an early indication of this trend.We do not expect much of a feelgood factor to develop in 1996. This ispartly due to the very slow growth in wages.There is at present much discussion about whether the economy will belifted by a surge in consumer spending, with the suggestion thatspending is depressed by consumer gloom inspired by fears aboutemployment prospects. But the truth is that consumers are behavingperfectly normally. It looks as though they will have saved about 9 percent of their income in 1995 and we are expecting a similar figure for1996. This is lower than in any year since 1971, except during the boomperiod of 1986 to 1990 - and we doubt consumers are ready for a bingelike that of the late 1980s.In spite of the pause in growth, we expect a continuing fall inclaimant unemployment to about 1.9m, or just under 7 per cent of thelabour force. This is partly due to changes in the administration ofbenefits. While we expect some acceleration in wage growth, this willbe consistent with a downwards drift in the inflation rate as the rateof increase in import prices subsides. Profit margins will stop rising,but there will be no great pressure on them.The main risk of this forecast is that demand will be weaker thanexpected as a consequence of companies adjusting to an unintendedbuild-up of stocks, tight fiscal policy and possible weakness in demandfor British exports. In this event, inflationary pressure should weakenfurther and we would expect to see cuts in interest rates to maintainthe economy's momentum as the next general election approaches.In the longer term, we expect these favourable trends to continue. Theimproved picture in the labour market will be backed up by slightlyfaster productivity growth as the economy starts to benefit from therecent expansion of higher education and, we hope, the more stablemacroeconomic environment established since sterling left the Europeanexchange rate mechanism. We can see the growth rate accelerating to 2.8per cent and unemployment falling to 1.2m. This would not exactly be aneconomic miracle, but it would at least make a pleasant change from theyears of stop-go.Martin Weale is director of the National Institute of Economic andSocial Research, a UK research institute, and a member of theTreasury's panel of independent economic forecasters. Garry Young is aresearch fellow at the institute.[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NEITHER BOOM NOR BUST: CONDITIONS ARE NOT RIGHT FOR SHARPLY LOWER USINTEREST RATES   By STEPHEN S. ROACHThe financial markets always want more of a good thing. And that seemsto be the case in looking to 1996. It is fashionable to worry that theUS economy is soft and getting softer, and that inflation is headingdramatically lower. In such an environment, the Federal Reserve isexpected to reduce short-term interest rates aggressively. Moreover,with the budget deal of a lifetime finally thought to be at hand, mostforecasters expect a dramatic further rally in the bond market.Needless to say, such a scenario hardly poses a threat to the gloriousbull market of 1995.Our prognosis for the US economy in 1996 is at odds with many of thesepresumptions. I expect neither a boom nor a bust. Real gross domesticproduct is likely to expand in a 2.5 per cent to 3 per cent range -essentially in line with what I believe to be the US economy'sunderlying long-term growth potential. The case for upside growthsurprises is relatively straightforward. It is based on solid supportfrom three important macroeconomic forces: real income generation (atpresent running above trend at 3.7 per cent); interest rates (which arenear historic lows); and the currency (which is vastly undervalued).In such a constructive environment, I expect the US economy to showsurprisingly broad-based gains in 1996. With mortgage interest ratesdown about 200 basis points over the past year, the turnround in theresidential construction sector should continue well into the new year.And there should be no let-up in US business's record-setting boom incapital spending.This is a structural phenomenon - triggered mainly by spectacularproductivity breakthroughs - that should continue to be surprisinglyimmune to the whims of the business cycle.Upside surprises in the export sector can also be expected, reflectingthe combined effects of a supercompetitive US economy and more diversetrade flows. The strong impetus for export growth in 1995 - with unitvolume growth accelerating from 4.8 per cent in the first quarter to10.6 per cent in the third - stands in sharp contrast to widespreadfears that there will be an export collapse in a sluggish globaleconomy.The good news is that the US is less dependent on its traditionaltrading partners: sales to Europe and Japan have fallen to 34 per centof overall US exports, down sharply from 42 per cent at the end of1990.Finally, reports of the demise of the American consumer are vastlyexaggerated. With consumption well supported by income generation, I donot share the widespread conviction that households are being draggeddown by excess debts. The ratio of annual debt servicing expenses toincome stands at present at 16.8 per cent, well below the highs hit inthe latter half of the 1980s. While I do not expect a consumer buyingbinge, the forecast of 2.5 per cent growth in real consumption through1996 is sufficient to account for over 1.5 percentage points of realGDP growth.The inflation prognosis is particularly intriguing. While I continue tobelieve the cost-efficient, productivity-led US recovery remainsintact, I am now of the view that the inflation rate is slowly movingup from its cyclical lows. The consumer price index rose 2.9 per centin 1995, up 0.3 percentage points from the low of 1994, and a littlemore acceleration in 1996 is expected, to an annual rate of 3.2 percent.I do not share the view that price stability is now at hand. The bulkof the disinflation of the 1990s has been a by-product of anextraordinary compression of labour costs. With productivity andcorporate profitability surging, with the unemployment rate at 5.6 percent, and with real compensation virtually stagnant for over a decade,I do not accept the notion that a submissive workforce has no choicebut to capitulate further on wages.In spite of the supposed threat of the dollar-a-day Chinese worker,this strain of productivity enhancement has now gone far enough. Thedays of asking the labour force to keep sacrificing for the noble causeof disinflation appear to be largely over. The risk of a backlash fromworkers is a growing concern - one that might have an important impacton the sociology, politics and economics of the US for years to come.As for the Fed, it is hard to accept the widespread conviction than anaggressive monetary easing is now at hand.Given the outlook for the economy and inflation, the urgency for afurther dramatic easing just is not there. Granted, the central bankmay offer a token easing in the aftermath of a budget accord. But ifmarket expectations of sharply lower short-term interest rates wererealised, the Fed would have to throw its traditional caution to thewind. If it takes its commitment to price stability seriously, and Ibelieve it does, it is difficult to imagine the Fed turning away fromthe restrictive policy bias that worked so well in the 1980s.The budget is obviously the wild card. The problem is that it is stillbusiness as usual in Washington. The best we are likely to see is aplan based on back-loaded spending cuts, front-loaded tax cuts,immunity for social security and dubious economic assumptions (forexample, that the perfect path of trend growth, low inflation anddeclining interest rates continues forever). I have come to thereluctant conclusion that the same creative mathematicians who gave usGramm-Rudman I and II and the great budget accord of 1990 are hard atwork today. Credible deficit reduction remains a dream, not acertainty.Adding it all up, it is hard to be thrilled about US Treasury bonds.Everything good is just about priced into the market. On the chancethat a budget deal is struck - even if it is a classic smoke-and-mirrors compromise - a final bull run to bond yields of 5 1/2 per centis possible.But as reality sinks in, and the economy and inflation fail to conformto market hopes, I continue to believe that the next big move in bondsis back towards an equilibrium level of 7 per cent. I expect such acorrection to take place by mid-year, at the latest.The author is chief economist and director of global economic analysisat Morgan Stanley[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:WAYS TO VIEW SUPPORT FOR STEELMAKING PLANTSir, In the US we have been reading with interest the reports thatBritish Steel is seeking to close an Irish steel plant on account ofsubsidies that the Irish government is to provide.In the US British Steel is seeking one of the biggest subsidies fromthe taxpayer ever recorded in order to operate a steel plant inAlabama, which British Steel is proposing to build in partnership withan American and a Japanese company.Support worth Dollars 250m is being sought from - and granted by - thestate legislature of Alabama in order to persuade British Steel and itstwo partners to open the steel plant in the state. If built, the plantwill directly threaten the jobs of at least 3,500 steelworkers in otherparts of the country.Without entering into the merits of the Irish steel plant's case, wefind it puzzling that British Steel is so hostile to subsidies inEurope and so ravenous for them in the US.Transatlantic trade and co-operation can not be built on this kind oftilted playing field.George Becker,international president,United Steelworkers of America,Five Gateway Centre,Pittsburgh, PA 15222,US[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:CANADIAN PEOPLE CAUGHT IN THE TRAPPER'S SNARESir, Thank you for Bernard Simon's comprehensive article ('Hunting fora kinder kill', December 13). The trap research compound nearVegreville is a ploy that illustrates how far the Canadian governmentand the fur industry will go to preserve this barbaric industry.The fur industry professes to champion Canadian native people, but ithas been the most destructive force in their history. It has exploitedthem, their culture and their way of life. Native people do notprocess, sell or store furs but are at the bottom of the fur industrychain.Because of the sympathy people feel towards the plight of the Canadiannative people, the Canadian government and the fur industry arepromoting the myth that trapping is culturally and economically centralto the native people.Fewer than 50 per cent of native homes are fully serviced with sewerageand water, native infant mortality is 60 per cent higher than theaverage among other Canadians, and 70 per cent of natives have not hada high school education.Fur trapping has not and will not relieve these problems. It willperpetuate them.Carla Bennett,senior writer,People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals,PO Box 42516,Washington DC,US[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:BREWING UP CONTROVERSYSir, I feel that your front page article 'Che beer leaves Cubansfoaming' (December 22) is unfair. The project was created to help Cubaexport beer, modernise its brewing sector and draw attention to theUS's embargo of the island.Che beer's success is due to its distinctive taste and CCC's effectivemarketing campaign. Unfortunately, some people have chosen to undermineour efforts by stirring up controversy.Joe Grahame,Corporacion Cerveza (Europe),Bouverie House,154 Fleet Street,LondonEC4A 2DQ[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:DIAGNOSING MIDDLE-CLASS ANGSTSir, In his otherwise excellent article on middle-class insecurity('Bang go the great expectations', December 27), John Plender is surelyincorrect in claiming that an occupational pension is 'not an asset atall'.For the great majority of members of occupational pension schemes, thepension is tied to the salary earned during the years immediately priorto retirement and is unaffected by whether or not the company pays itsfull contribution in every year.It is certainly true that the benefits could be improved werepension-fund surpluses to be used for that purpose, but the basicpayment is secure and does indeed form a substantial asset for thepensioner.The whole point about personal pensions, which yield direct ownershiprights, is that whereas the benefits are not tied to salary, and may bemuch greater than under an occupational scheme, the risk element isalso much greater and hence the pensioner cannot rely upon the size ofthe asset.It is most unlikely that members of occupational pension schemes areoverly concerned about being 'disenfranchised', although they mostcertainly detest those 'bosses' who manipulate their own pensions forpersonal advantage.Insofar that 'frustrated expectations' are the cause of 'middle-classangst', it is not negative equity which is of direct concern since, asJohn Plender notes, this has affected relatively few middle-classhouseholds, but rather the possibility of falling house prices.This is a very new phenomenon, and often accompanied by greatdifficulty in achieving a sale, but it has no parallel in respect ofoccupational pensions since their value is unknown prior to retirement.Professor Peter Curwen,Policy Research Centre,Sheffield Business School,Hallam University,Sheffield Science Park,Howard Street,SheffieldS1 2LX[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LETTERS TO THE EDITOR:OBSTACLES FACING THE SPREAD OF DEMOCRACYSir, Martin Wolf's piece on whether democracies are growing in numberand influence, and to what extent democracies are less warlike thanautocracies ('Mightier than the sword', December 28) reminds me ofdiscussions 30 years ago on whether history moves inexorably in thedirection of communism, and to what extent communist governments woulddecrease international tensions.There are indeed powerful 'forces that are driving countries towardsrepresentative political institutions', but there are equally powerfulforces undermining democracies from within. Democracies have been votedout, and there is no evidence that the increasing gap between rich andpoor will not weaken many democracies.It is curious that Protestant societies were the first to nourishdemocratic institutions, and that no non-Protestant society hassustained democracy for longer than 70 years. There is nothingautomatic about progress, and nothing inexorable about the direction inwhich history will go: that will depend on the choices each of usmakes.Philippa Rann,Advance: Management Training,58 Ridgway Road,Farnham,SurreyGU9 8NS[London Page 14]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LEADING ARTICLE:WHEN POLITICS REPLACES POLICYBritain's general election campaign is under way in earnest. Thedefection from the Conservatives to the Liberal Democrats of Miss EmmaNicholson could not have been a more potent reminder of the fragilityof Mr John Major's government. The prime minister's parliamentarymajority is now down, in effect, to three. Further deaths or defectionscould soon eliminate it entirely.Mr Major appears determined to defer the election until the lastpossible date in the spring of 1997, relying if necessary on thesupport of the Ulster Unionists to sustain him in any vote ofconfidence. Privately, opposition leaders admit that he may wellsucceed in that objective. But, amid rumours of further defections,ministers equally are obliged to acknowledge they can no longer becertain of the parliamentary arithmetic. An autumn election is now areal possibility if not yet a probability.The prime minister would be wise to pay close attention to the messageof Miss Nicholson's defection. Since his leadership victory lastsummer, Mr Major has been too anxious to appease his opponents byspeaking the language of the Eurosceptic right of the Tory party.Whatever her personal motives for joining Mr Paddy Ashdown's LiberalDemocrats, Miss Nicholson's charge that the government has beendeserting the political centre ground finds a dangerous echo amongvoters.Rhetoric calculated to appeal to the more hardline Conservativeactivists will not recover for Mr Major the support of the lesscommitted voters who will decide the outcome of the election. Mr Blairhas learned one of the golden rules of British politics - elections arenot won from the extremes of left or right but from the centre.Gruelling businessEither way, the looming campaign promises to be a gruelling andunedifying business. Politics, it seems, leaves little room these daysfor policy. The normal business of government has been suspended. MrMajor's legislative programme is designed above all to minimisecontroversy within his own party and to highlight areas of differencewith Labour. Mr Tony Blair meanwhile concentrates on inflictingtactical defeats on the government at Westminster. Those expectingLabour to unfold a detailed blueprint for government are likely to bedisappointed.As they make their promises and level their charges in the scramble forvotes, however, Messrs Major, Blair and Ashdown should pause for amoment to reflect on a more worrying feature of British political life.Politicians of all parties have rarely been held in lower publicesteem. They have themselves, mostly, to blame.Wider developmentsIt is true that wider developments have contributed to a generalweakening of faith in the ability of politicians to 'solve' nationalproblems. Global markets have delineated more clearly the limits ofeconomic independence. The necessary sharing of sovereignty in Europehas robbed Westminster of other pretensions. But to acknowledge suchtrends is not to exonerate the politicians.The important gap is not that between the limits imposed by the harshrealities of modern life and the unreasonable demands of the voters.The real disillusion stems from the gulf between promises andperformance. If politicians more readily acknowledged the constraints,the voters would be more willing to adjust their expectations. Instead,the parties wittingly exaggerate their power, promising easy solutionsto complex problems.To take the most obvious example: the central debate about the rightlevels of public spending and taxation is conducted with shamelessmendacity. One side promises painless tax cuts, the other perfectpublic services. The reality is that modest rates of economic growthwill allow neither for the constant ratcheting down of income tax ratespromised by Mr Major nor the cost-free and comprehensive welfare statepledged by Mr Blair.It is perhaps too much to expect the politicians to mend their ways soclose to an election. But this erosion of trust and confidence inparliament is inimical to good government and dangerously corrosive ofdemocracy. Ultimately, the politicians as well as the voters will bethe losers.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LEADING ARTICLE:ITALY AND THE EU PRESIDENCYFor the fourth time in a row, the six months' presidency of theEuropean Union has fallen to a member state whose government isseverely distracted by domestic difficulties. It seems to be becoming abad habit. First there was Germany, with a general election inmid-presidency back in 1994. Then there was France, with presidentialelections last May. The Spanish government in the past six monthsmanaged to postpone its demise in order to complete its EUchairmanship, in spite of losing its parliamentary majority.Now Italy is supposed to take the chair, not even sure if it has agovernment. Mr Lamberto Dini offered his resignation on Saturday aftercompleting his limited mandate. President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro wantshim to stay on, but he is leaving it to the fractious Italianparliament to decide. It hardly makes for firm leadership and a clearagenda for Europe.Those four Euro-enthusiastic governments were supposed to co-ordinatetheir plans for the two-year period. They intended to lay thegroundwork for a clear-sighted and coherent inter-governmentalconference this year, which would mark another important step towardsthe goal of European political union. Instead, the EU is stumblingtowards that target in a familiar state of muddle.Spanish achievementsAdmittedly, Mr Felipe Gonzalez's government in Spain achieved rathermore in the past six months than one might have expected from itspolitical weakness at home. It completed preparations for the IGC,albeit with more modest ambitions than committed integrationists wouldlike. It persuaded the other 14 member states to agree a blueprint forthe launch of the single currency in 1999. It finalised a programme toreinforce the fragile relationship between the EU and US. And itorganised an impressive gathering of Mediterranean states to cementbetter co-operation between Europe, the middle east and north Africa.Not bad for a lame-duck administration.The challenge for Mr Dini, or any other head of an Italian government,is to keep that good work going. At least he does not appearover-ambitious. Italy has not tabled any heavy agenda of nationalpriorities, as other member states are sometimes tempted to do. Asuccessful launch to the IGC at the end of March is one priority;agreement on a reconstruction plan for Bosnia is another. The formershould be a formality, but the latter could be a very difficultnegotiation: the European Union must be generous if it wants the peaceinitiative in Bosnia to succeed, but every member state faces toughdomestic budget constraints, limiting the room for manoeuvre.Difficult issuesThere are always other difficult issues on the EU agenda which requireclear leadership from the presidency. In the next six months thoseinclude the plans to liberalise the EU energy market; reform of theTacis aid programme for countries of the former Soviet Union; andreform of the EU wine market. There is also strong German pressure foragreement on a stabilisation package to regulate the behaviour ofmember states after creation of economic and monetary union. These areall issues on which Italy has clear national interests, and on which aweak government in Rome may find it difficult to compromise, let alonenegotiate a deal.A strong Italian government is out of the question for the foreseeablefuture. At this moment, early elections would not solve the problem:under the present electoral laws, they are unlikely to produce a resultmuch different from the present stalemate. President Scalfaro is rightto urge the main political factions to stop bickering and agree on aprogramme of essential constitutional reforms. That could be enacted bya broad-based cross-party coalition, as Mr Silvio Berlusconi, theformer prime minister, appears to favour - though this seems somewhatunrealistic.Alternatively, Mr Dini could be asked to serve on for another sixmonths, dedicated to the EU presidency and to securing theconstitutional reforms. That would be an acceptable compromise, in theinterests of Italy and Europe.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EUROPE UNLOCKED FOR DEALERS: ON THE FIRST DAY OF TRADING UNDER NEWRULES BREAKING DOWN EU BORDERS, JOHN GAPPER AND RICHARD LAPPER ASSESSWHO THE WINNERS AND LOSERS WILL BE   By JOHN GAPPER and RICHARD LAPPERThis morning NatWest Securities will commence trading on the SwedishStock Exchange from its offices in the City of London. For the firsttime, the stockbroking arm of the British bank will buy and sell sharesin Swedish companies without having to do so through local brokers. 'Wecan sit in London with a screen on our desks, and trade as if we werein Stockholm,' says Mr Scott Dobbie, chairman of NatWest Securities.The ability to trade securities across borders in this way is a productof the European Union's Investment Services Directive (ISD), whichtakes effect today. The directive aims to give Europe's thousands ofbroking firms a 'passport' to trade anywhere in the Union, and isaccompanied by the Capital Adequacy Directive (CAD) which imposes freshcapital requirements.Progress in implementing the two directives is likely to be slow - byDecember 31, only seven of the 15 EU states had passed the necessarylegislation. But whatever the delays, the changes are happening fasterthan previous efforts to harmonise banking supervision. 'It is far morecomplex, and it is having to be accomplished in a much shorter time,'says Ms Jane Welch, head of legal advice at the UK Securities andInvestments Board.And the impact on Europe's stock exchanges and derivatives markets willbe far-reaching. The directives are likely to favour larger investmentbanks and stock exchanges, at the expense of smaller firms andexchanges.There are two key measures in the Investment Services Directive. Thefirst is that firms will be able to operate in any EU member state,provided they are regulated in one of them. When operating outsidetheir home countries, they will be subject to rules on the conduct ofbusiness devised by the local regulators for all banks and brokers.For the larger banks already operating in more than one EU country, the'passport' rule will reduce costs and ease the regulatory burden.However, the directive is unlikely to make a significant difference totheir operations. Although there have been instances of member statesimposing strict requirements on foreign banks, most of them have beenable to operate where they want. 'We have never felt constrained aboutcrossing national borders,' says Mr Wilco Jiskoot, senior executivevice-president for merchant banking at ABN Amro, the Dutch bank.But for smaller firms operating in countries with no regulation forsecurities traders, the directive will mean being regulated for thefirst time - together with the accompanying costs, even if they areoperating purely in their domestic markets. They are also likely tolose the share of commission and fees they make in carrying out localbusiness for large investment banks. From today smaller brokers willhave to find a substitute for such earnings if they are to survive.The second key measure of the directive is to allow stock exchanges andfutures and options markets to trade throughout the EU. With increasingvolumes of equity dealing, derivatives business and bond markettransactions carried out electronically, this should in effect allowbrokers to conduct business from offices located anywhere in Europe.The effect will be to increase competition between Europe's 32securities exchanges and 24 derivatives markets. Already, for example,the Deutsche Borse, which runs the German stock and derivativesmarkets, plans to extend its electronic network to several othercountries. Early this year it is opening an access point in London,which will reduce the telecommunications costs for London-basedDeutsche Bo rse members to transact their business directly withFrankfurt.It is widely expected that many smaller exchanges could fold as thesepressures intensify. Mr Gerard Pfauwadel, chairman of the Matif, theParis-based futures market, expects a wave of restructuring with somederivatives markets disappearing, either through merger or takeover.'It will mean some substantial modification in the landscape of futuresand options exchanges in Europe,' he says.Matif is planning to launch an ambitious joint electronic network withthe Deutsche Borse and two other French exchanges later this year whichwould allow traders to deal in French and German equities over the samescreens. It would also cover a range of futures and options products.'With the prospect of a single currency it all amounts to a new bigbang in Europe as far as the markets are concerned,' says Mr Pfauwadel.One target for European exchanges such as Paris and Frankfurt is likelyto be the London Stock Exchange's Seaq-I electronic bulletin board,which marketmakers use to advertise large blocks of European shares forpurchase and sale. Already, European bourses which have invested alarge amount on modernising their trading and settlement systems havewon back dealing business in local equities from Seaq-I.But many market participants argue that large exchanges - particularlyLondon - are likely to gain rather than lose from the directive.NatWest's strategy of trading increasingly on local exchanges ratherthan on Seaq-I does not lessen its commitment to its main base inLondon. Remote trading on overseas exchanges could help London's roleas the physical location from which traders operate by electronicmeans.Mr Giles Vardey, director of markets development at the London StockExchange, argues that remote trading is now 'commercially inevitable'.Mr Vardey accepts that competition from large exchanges will intensify,but says smaller exchanges could suffer. 'Trading power is likely tobecome concentrated in London, and the directive will hasten thisprocess,' he says.The most immediate effects of Capital Adequacy Directive are likely tobe felt by the investment banks. They will be required for the firsttime to allocate capital to cover risks of losses through adversemovements in the markets for shares, bonds or currencies. At themoment, banks have to allocate capital only to cover lending risksunder the 1988 Basle accord of international supervisors.The new rules also demand that banks and securities firms monitor theirrisks at all times keeping a permanent watch on large exposures. Forexample, trading exposures to a single customer will have to be limitedin most cases to less than 25 per cent of capital base - and can onlybe exceeded with the national regulator's permission. The larger banksare best placed to comply with such demands, having invested hugeamounts over the past few years in systems to allow them to monitortheir exposure.Smaller banks are less prepared. 'Developing the ability to spot largeexposures across the business is a significant headache for manyplayers,' says Mr Arun Aggarwal, partner in treasury and capitalmarkets at Price Waterhouse, the accountants. 'It imposes a level ofintegration that only the top few players have.'In theory, the Capital Adequacy Directive could lead to some bankshaving to set aside significantly more capital. But most banks believethat the directive's impact will be minimal. Mr Ian Linnell, bankinganalyst at Standard & Poor's, the credit rating agency, says for mostthe impact has been 'neutral to marginal', and believes that some bankswill be able to operate with less capital than before.However, there could be extra burdens for those banks which are heavilyinvolved in equities trading, for which Capital Adequacy Directiverules are stiffer in some cases. For example, BZW, the investmentbanking arm of Barclays, will have to put aside a little more capital,according to Mr David Band, chief executive.But the biggest impact so far has arisen from the need to invest inupgrading technology to comply with the directive's requirements tomonitor group operations globally. Some of the bigger banks have spentup to Pounds 5m on systems and software, and even the smaller firmsface minimum costs of Pounds 50,000 to pay for software. Mr Band saysthere has been a shortage of technicians in London able to work on banksystems. 'That has been a big problem for the market,' he says.As the directives come into action this morning, the immediatebeneficiaries look to be the large investors who increasingly tradeacross European borders and are likely to see a reduction in charges.In the longer term, the winners will be the large investment banks,many of which are now based in London. The losers will be the smaller,less efficient brokers and the smaller exchanges that cannot find arole as the EU's stock and derivatives markets become increasinglyintegrated.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER: NATWEST SEEKS TOP GUNWhat will the NatWest Group do with Dollars 3.6bn that it is raisingfrom the sale of its US retail banking business to Fleet Financial? Notso long ago NatWest was the biggest of the Big Four UK banks. Now it isthe smallest. So the money should come in handy helping fulfil itsambition to transform NatWest Markets into one of the top 10 globalinvestment banks.Although NatWest appears to have ruled out bidding for a well-knownWall Street name, like Lehman Brothers, it will have to buy something,or someone, if it wants to be a serious player in the big league. InOctober it paid a hefty Dollars 135m for Eric Gleacher's five-year-oldUS mergers and acquisition boutique. Gleacher, 55, made his namerunning Morgan Stanley's M&A department during some of the biggesthostile takeover battles in the 1980s. Now he has made his fortune byselling out to NatWest.As long as Gleacher hangs around, NatWest Markets has a chance of beingtaken seriously in the domestic US investment banking market. However,Gleacher is not an international player and NatWest Markets desperatelyneeds to beef up its global investment banking team if it wants tocompete with Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley etc.Hence the owners of some European corporate finance boutiques must behoping that NatWest will be as generous to them as it was to Gleacher.After all, when Morgan Grenfell was looking for a new chief executivein 1987, it had to pay Pounds 15m for John Craven's Phoenix Securitiesto secure Craven's services.The obvious UK candidate is Hambro Magan's George Magan who worked forMorgan Grenfell before starting his own boutique in 1988. He is a goodfive years younger than Gleacher and has an equally impressive recordin the UK M&A market. But would Magan join NatWest Markets for lessthan Gleacher?Surely not. Once again NatWest may have to make do with second best.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER:CAR MAINTENANCEWhat do you call a Trabant on top of a mountain pass? A miracle. Andwhat do you call a Yugo which looks like a submarine? A work of art.Motorists stuck with unloved and unwanted Yugos, products of the nowdefunct Yugoslavian motor industry, can take heart. Kevin O'Callaghan,a lecturer at the School of Visual Arts in New York City, has bought 39abandoned Yugos for his art class. After six weeks tinkering they go ondisplay at this week's Los Angeles Auto Show.The only thing that the exhibits have in common is that they can nolonger be driven. Apart from a submarine, the students have turned thecars into such items as a giant telephone complete with push-buttonnumbers and handset; an accordion; a confessional - complete withcrosses; a grand piano which actually plays, and even a portable loo.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER:COLLECT CALLWho says Serbia's president is above the law? The home phone ofSlobodan Milosevic was disconnected last month because the bill wentunpaid while he was in Dayton negotiating a peace settlement for formerYugoslavia.However, justice was done in the end. According to Nasa Borba, a localnewspaper, the telephone company employee was fined 10 per cent of hermonthly wage, because she had failed to notice that the phone was on a'protected list' registered in the name of the ruling Socialist party.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER:HONOUR GUARDAnother New Year's honour's list has come and gone and dear old AndrewBuxton, Barclays' chairman, has still not picked up his knighthood.There are lots of other good guys, such as the chief executives ofShell and SmithKline Beecham, who have not got their Ks. But Buxton isdifferent. He is a chairman of one of the top dozen companies in the UKand all his fellow chairman have titles. What has he done wrong?Whether Buxton deserves a knighthood after 33 years with Barclays isneither here nor there. But the latest honours list just goes to showhow little progress has been made in tidying up the present system ofhonours for business folk.Peter Wood, who created Direct Line, gets a CBE, whereas GrahamKirkham, a fellow entrepreneur, gets a knighthood. Alan Jackson, thedeparting chief executive of BTR, gets nothing. But Malcolm McIntosh, afellow Australian, gets his K for keeping down the cost of the Ministryof Defence's weapons bill.One can only hope that the leaders of big business who have not gottitles turned them down. But one suspects not.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER:CAR WARSSouth Africa has a problem. With one serious crime committed every 17seconds it is getting a reputation as the most dangerous country in theworld which is not at war. However, it is also starting to make a namefor itself as a testbed for new measures to combat crime.A group of insurance brokers has come up with a novel tip for motoristswhen attacked by armed hijackers at a traffic intersection. Ram the carin front. The hope is that the fuss will scare off the hijackers.Great idea. The snag is that South Africa's hijackers already use thesame tactic to tempt drivers out of their vehicles. So when a motoristreceives a bump up the rear, it is either bad news or very bad news.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER:SAFETY FIRSTHow do Eskimos cope with the snow?They grit their teeth.[London Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EU STATES SLOW TO ADOPT DIRECTIVE ON INVESTMENT: ONLY SEVEN COUNTRIESREADY FOR CROSS-BORDER REFORM   By ANDREW JACK, ANDREW FISHER, ANDREW HILL and EMMA TUCKER   PARIS, FRANKFURT, MILAN, BRUSSELSOnly seven of the European Union's 15 member states were ready toimplement the Investment Services Directive when it came into effectyesterday, the European federation of stock markets reported.The directive is designed to allow non-bank investment groups to carryout several activities more easily across borders.It aims to create a 'passport' system allowing an institution regulatedin one EU country to operate in all the others without having to complywith additional requirements.Stock market officials in some countries say they have restructured andare ready to meet the requirements of the directive but theirgovernments have not yet passed the necessary legislation. Othergovernments have expressed concern about accepting the 'passport'.Market officials say the seven which have to all intents and purposesmet the requirements of the directive on time are the UK, the Republicof Ireland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, Luxembourg and Belgium.In some of these, however, the legislation itself still needs to bepassed. Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark and France are expected tointroduce the legislation by the middle of this year. Germany, Greeceand Spain will not be prepared for full implementation until 1997.Some countries such as France and Italy have used the enablinglegislation for the directive to push through broader financialregulatory reforms, which has held up progress.There are already strong links between the Frankfurt and Parisderivatives markets which are expected to deepen in the coming months,but the directive should extend links throughout Europe.In Germany, this will create considerable new work for the FederalSupervisory office for Securities Trading (BAWe), which was set up onlya year ago to root out insider traders and enforce compliance withstricter disclosure requirements. Analysts believe the main effect ofthe directive may be less to encourage financial institutions to openoffices in other countries than to change the location of wheretransactions are carried out - reinforcing the position of thosemarkets which already have the greatest liquidity for any particularsecurity.Mr Giuseppe Zadra, director general of the Italian banking association,said he feared the focus of trading in Italian instruments could shiftto other markets if his country's institutions did not invest andmodernise. 'National markets don't have a future, and that's why theywill have to be changed and compete on a European scale,' he said.The new rules have also raised fears there will be new risks forinvestors because institutions receiving their passport in the countrywith the weakest regulatory requirements will be able to obtainrecognition elsewhere.'I have already heard anecdotally that some dubious firms from outsideEurope are looking for the best place to get initial authorisation,'said one stock market official. 'The strength of the whole will rely onthe standards imposed by the least experienced regulator.'Europe unlocked for dealers, Page 15[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THE LEX COLUMN:GOING FOR GROWTHIt is perfectly reasonable to feel sanguine about the prospects for theworld's main financial markets in 1996, but it is difficult to getexcited. Inflation is low and apparently under control; growth may haveslowed, but most economies will still expand this year; and the USeconomy's soft landing looks convincing enough.But after last year's bull run, there is much less to go for. In 1995,inflation fears proved overdone, allowing interest rates to be cut. Theresulting bond market rally, coupled with bid activity, fuelledadvances in stock prices.Even though there are more interest rate cuts to come, the pace isslowing and much of the benefit is already priced into both bonds andstocks. Furthermore, the US market, which led the way last year, looksrather overvalued. The stock market, having risen more than 30 per centlast year, faces a proliferation of earnings downgrades. Since earningsare not likely to fall off a cliff, a slowdown in economic growth doesnot necessarily mean stock prices will stall. But the market looksexpensive relative to trend earnings and bond yields. Dividend yieldsare low, even when share buy-back programmes are taken into account.The benign economic environment probably rules out a 1987- style crash,but a correction is not only likely, it would probably be beneficial.And there are several potential triggers: the US budget agreement, forexample, has still to be thrashed out.[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THE LEX COLUMN:EUROPEA correction in the US would hit the UK hardest, since it has benefitedmost from the bull run. Although strong earnings growth is likely tocontinue into 1997, the UK has other problems, including the growingpossibility of an early election, as the Conservative party's majoritydwindles. In fact, Prime Minister John Major is likely to hold on topower until 1997 even without a majority, but any weakening of hiscontrol over the election's timing will be viewed as a negative by thestock market.The UK also has more to fear from inflation than most other markets,given its relatively rapid economic growth and an expected rise inconsumer spending. This will benefit some sectors, such ashousebuilding and retailing, but the danger is that any further ratecuts in the first half of the year will have to be reversed in thesecond - or worse that the government may try to ignore overheating ofthe economy, since raising rates in the run-up to the election wouldhardly be politically expedient. With gilts currently yielding twice asmuch as equities, the balance looks about right. But inflation jitterscould cap gilt prices, halting further equity advances.Further bid activity, as in the US, will help underpin stock marketprices, but estimates that the FT-SE 100 index, whatever early gains itmakes, will end the year around 3,750, less than 100 points above itscurrent level, are probably sensible.In continental Europe, the problem is too little growth. This bodeswell for bonds. Even without further short-term rate cuts in Germany,there is room for bond yields to fall. More generally, any signs thatthe structural problems of high social spending and unwieldy budgetdeficits are being addressed should encourage investors. Bunds andother European bond markets may well outperform the US market in 1996 -the problem is the strongest outperformance is often on the way down,so it may be safer to bet on yield differentials than on absolute pricemovements.[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THE LEX COLUMN:JAPANTokyo's Nikkei-225 has ended the year roughly where it started, justbelow 20,000, inviting the question of whether US and European fundmanagers are right to increase their weighting in Japan. Few marketshave performed as well over the past six months. The index has gained37 per cent since its July low, though the yen's decline over thatperiod has eroded more than half that gain when measured in dollars.Currency risk will continue to bedevil foreign investors as economicrecovery sucks in more imports, further driving down the trade surplus.But the attraction of Japan in 1996 is that it is the only leadingmarket set to benefit both from the early stage of an economic revivaland a pick-up in corporate earnings. A rise in sales should kick in, ontop of the margin improvements achieved over the past year.On the surface, much of this recovery has already been discounted, withthe index standing at around 83 times prospective earnings - high evenby Japan's historical standards. However, a more useful guide to theNikkei's value is the ratio between equity and bond yields. Currently,Japanese government bonds yield 1.5 times as much as equities, wellbelow the long-term average. As a result, Japanese institutions, heavynet sellers of equities last year, may well favour equities over bondsin 1996. The top Japanese life insurers and brokers have shed recentpessimism and forecast a 1996 high for the Nikkei in the mid-20,000s.They may be right.[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THE LEX COLUMN:EMERGING MARKETSEmerging markets look cheap. On most valuation measures, a rebound isalready overdue. Last year's lacklustre performance partly reflects thecrisis of confidence following the collapse of the Mexican market atthe start of the year. In fact, international investors had littlereason to take the higher risks associated with emerging markets. USfund managers in particular were able to make impressive returns intheir own domestic market.But there are signs that US money is starting to move offshore again.As fund managers are forced to look for growth outside the domesticmarket, emerging markets are bound to get at least some of that money.Typically, US managers have looked south of the border. But there arestill good reasons for avoiding Latin America, not only because of thedire economic problems which continue to afflict some countries. Themain bond market is the dollar-denominated Brady bond market, whichwould suffer from a US market correction. Slow growth, particularly byemerging markets standards, makes stock markets relativelyunattractive, given the associated currency risk.Asian stock markets look a better bet. Not only does Asia enjoy strongeconomic growth and a cash surplus; the markets are likely to benefitfrom funds from Japan, as well as the US and UK.[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PENSION FUNDS RAISE RETURNS BUT MISS OUT ON BIG US GAINS   By GEORGE GRAHAMUK pension funds recovered from their poor performance in 1994 withinvestment returns averaging 19 per cent last year, according to asurvey by the WM Company.Pension funds benefited from a return of almost 24 per cent on UKequities, which make up more than half of their portfolios.But they missed out on the big gains in the US stock market, whichreturned 33.8 per cent last year. Only 4.3 per cent of the Pounds 380bnof funds measured by WM was invested in US equities.'Everybody thought the US was overpriced at the end of 1994 but itreally took off,' said Mr Peter Warrington, a director of WM, whichspecialises in performance measurement.He added that the longer-term performance of UK pension fundsdemonstrated consistently impressive results. Whether measured overfive years or 20 years, they showed the same average annual return of15.3 per cent, nearly twice the rate of inflation.'In the mid-1980s, people were saying that equities couldn't go onproducing these high returns. We had disappointing years in 1990 and1994, but over five years there is still a positive return of 16.7 percent on equities,' Mr Warrington said.Property has proved a more disappointing investment for pension funds.Although it was the best-performing sector in 1994, in 1995 propertyproduced a return of only 5.3 per cent, compared with a return for allother sectors of 20.1 per cent. Over five years, property returns haveaveraged 6.0 per cent, and property sank to 5.1 per cent of totalpension fund assets at the end of the year.WM's survey, which covers about 80 per cent of UK pension funds,reveals little change in the mix of assets held by managers, despitewidespread discussion of a tendency to 'rebalance' portfolios with morefixed-income investments and less equity.Some actuaries and investment managers have argued that pension fundsare maturing, with fewer members now actively contributing and morereceiving benefits. That should mean funds will increase bond holdingsto provide a more guaranteed stream of income.But the funds measured by WM held 77.5 per cent of their portfolios inequities last year compared with 76.6 per cent at the end of 1994.Holdings of UK and overseas bonds, other than index-linked, alsoincreased, but only to 9.9 per cent.'All the talk we have heard about funds maturing and moving into bondshasn't materialised,' said Mr Warrington.[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CHANGES SOUGHT IN TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY   By RALPH ATKINS, Insurance CorrespondentReform of the government-backed terrorist insurance scheme, which wasintroduced after the 1992 IRA attack on the City, is being urged amidfears that some companies may be inadequately covered.The Association of Insurance and Risk Managers is worried thatbusinesses are having to pay excessively high premium rates, which areforcing them to make a difficult choice between buying cover or riskhaving to bear the cost of a terrorist incident.Insurance industry estimates suggest that less than half of thosebusinesses which buy commercial property insurance purchase fullterrorism cover, although many have their own 'captive' insurancecompanies providing dedicated insurance cover. Others could cover thecost of an incident from other resources.However, Ms Ina Barker, executive director of the association, said:'The danger is that a lot of big businesses do not have enoughterrorism cover and are therefore putting business at risk.' Such fearscould intensify if the IRA ceasefire broke down.Airmic hopes to hold talks with the Department of Trade and Industryabout possible reform to Pool Re, the state-backed mutual reinsurancecompany. This was set up in 1993 to ensure that conventional insurancecompanies could provide terrorism cover to commercial clients.Pool Re members - which include most of the main UK-based commercialinsurance providers - have to supply terrorism insurance on fixedterms and rates. Premiums collected by insurers are pooled and used topay any claims. If Pool Re ran out of money, the government would makeup the shortfall.Since the IRA ceasefire was announced last year, premium rates havefallen. But buyers and brokers say the system remains inflexible andexpensive.Airmic is proposing a scheme in which all commercial property policieswould include a flat contribution towards the costs of Pool Re,allowing a return to the automatic provision of cover against terroristattack.Policy attacked, Page 7[London Page 16]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK):CHRISTMAS BRINGS CHEER TO TRADING STATEMENTS - UK RETAILERS   By NEIL BUCKLEYExpect to hear news of another strong Christmas as large retailers maketheir January trading statements, writes Neil Buckley. Christmasaccounts for a large part of many retailers' annual profits. Reports ofa buoyant December and good start to the post-Christmas sales havebreathed life back into a sector depressed by gloomy results in theautumn.Three retailers thought to have had the liveliest festive seasons -Argos, Dixons and Next - report next week. Argos should unveil a totalsales increase in double digits for the third Christmas running, whileNext is expected to have at least maintained the 10 per cent increasereported in September. Dixons is forecast to report a 10 per centincrease in like-for-like sales, which exclude new store openings, overChristmas.Also reporting the same week are Boots and Sears. In the former, strongperformances from Boots the Chemists and Halfords will be tarnishedslightly by sales declines in Do It All, and the Fads/Homestyle homedecorating business. For Sears, total sales are expected to be slightlyup, but like-for-like sales down.The following week, Body Shop, Storehouse and Marks and Spencer areforecast to report sales increases of at least 5 per cent. At House ofFraser a like-for-like increase of perhaps 3 per cent is expected.One year after the poor trading statement that sparked the departure offour directors, Kingfisher is expected to reveal recoveries inWoolworths and Comet, but falling sales in Darty, the French electricalchain.WH Smith is forecast to report a Christmas sales increase of up to 7per cent in its interim results on January 24, while Burton, at itsannual meeting the following day, is expected to announce a continuingimprovement in sales and gross margins.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NEW LOOK RETAILER SOLD TO INSTITUTIONS FOR POUNDS 170M   By TIM BURTNew Look, the privately-owned fashion retailer founded by entrepreneurMr Tom Singh was yesterday sold to a venture capital buy-out group forabout Pounds 170m.Mr Singh, who started the company in 1969 with a Pounds 5,000 loan, hasagreed to sell the 323-store chain to institutional purchasers led byBZW Private Equity and jointly underwritten by Prudential VentureManagers.The sale follows New Look's abortive attempt to come to the market inOctober 1994, which it abandoned the day before its scheduled flotationamid fears it would not raise the estimated Pounds 150m it was seeking.Under the terms of yesterday's deal, New Look's shareholders -dominated by Mr Singh and his family trusts - will initially receiveabout Pounds 105m in cash and shares worth about Pounds 50m in Vallsar,an investment vehicle set up for the transaction.That will leave the Singhs with 25 per cent of Vallsar, which is to berenamed New Look. BZW Private Equity has also offered a further Pounds15m payment contingent on New Look's performance in the three years toMarch 1998.Mr Gavin Aldred, New Look's director in charge of corporate strategy,said proceeds from the disposal would fund expansion: 'In the 12 monthsto March this year, we will have opened 76 stores in the UK and 10 inFrance, and we aim to continue growing at about 50 outlets a year.' Heclaimed New Look - advised by J. Henry Schroder - was Britain's mostprofitable specialist women's wear retailer. In the year to March lastyear, pre-tax profits more than doubled from Pounds 6.01m to Pounds 15mon sales of Pounds 141m (Pounds 83.4m).Its rival Etam, by comparison, reported first-half losses of Pounds3.85m in the autumn, against pre-tax profits of Pounds 4.74m.Mr Graeme White, a director of BZW Private Equity, praised New Look'soperating performance and said the existing management would remain.Mr White has joined an enlarged board of New Look as a non-executivedirector, as has Mr Martin Clarke of Prudential Venture Managers. Hesaid the two backers had no timetable for an exit, but did not rule outa fresh flotation attempt.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK): GREENBURY GUIDELINES WILL BE PUT TO THE TEST- OTHER COMPANIES   By WILLIAM LEWISThe Greenbury committee's report on executive paywill move into the spotlight in January and February, with thepublication of a consultation document and several companies' annualmeetings held under Greenbury rules for the first time, writes WilliamLewis.Next Monday, a consultation document on possible methods for disclosingthe true value of directors' pensions will be launched. The Faculty ofActuaries and the Institute of Actuaries, together with the StockExchange and the Department of Trade and Industry, are to send thepaper to public companies and are seeking their views by February 9.The Greenbury committee's report, published in July, recommended thatpension costs be disclosed to shareholders to reflect the value to theindividual as well as the true cost to the company.The Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries put forward apreferred method but there were calls for wider consultation.Many companies feared that directors' remuneration could appear toincrease by startling amounts under the new code. The consultationdocument will include a number of options - including allowing for the'smoothing' out of the effects of Greenbury.Other Greenbury recommendations have already been put in place by somecompanies and are due to be tested at annual meetings in the next fewweeks.Bass and Burton, in their annual reports sent to shareholders lastmonth, were the first companies to give a separate remunerationcommittee report on executive pay. Both companies' remunerationcommittee chairmen will be answering shareholder questions on pay atthe meetings on February 8 and January 25 respectively.Greenbury also recommended that companies seek shareholder approval fornew long-term incentive schemes. Burton and Capital Radio on January 17will ask shareholders to vote through new schemes for executives.Following the rule changes announced in the November budget regardingthe taxation of executive share options, Euromoney and Berisford areasking shareholders to approve changes to their executive share optionschemes. Berisford's meeting is on January 22 and Euromoney's is onJanuary 18.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK):CABLE AND WIRELESS- OTHER COMPANIESAt an extraordinary general meeting on January 15, shareholders in theUK-based telecommunications group will have the opportunity to questionthe board on the abrupt departures of the chairman, Lord Young ofGraffham, and Mr James Ross, chief executive.The purpose of the EGM, however, will be to change the company'sarticles to allow a non-British citizen to hold one of these top jobs.This would allow the New Zealand-born finance director, Mr Rod Olsen,to act as chief executive until a replacement is found.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK):US COMPANIES- OTHER COMPANIESUS investors are looking forward to some good news this month as mostcompanies start reporting their 1995 earnings figures. Throughout theyear, the quarterly numbers have produced pleasant surprises, withresults often beating analysts' estimates.Analysts prefer to look at the 'operating earnings', excluding one-offcharges. Forecasters expect the S&P 500 companies to announce earningsper share totalling about Dollars 38 per share compared with Dollars 32in 1994, a rise of nearly 20 per cent.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK):BANCO SANTANDER- OTHER COMPANIESMr Emilio Botn, chairman of Spain's largest banking institution,announces the group's 1995 consolidated results later this month.Santander raised its attributable profits after minorities by 5.9 percent to Pta63.3bn (Pounds 334m) in the first nine months of 1995, aheadof market expectations, and said it had absorbed the impact of thetroubled Banco Espanol de Credito (Banesto), which it acquired in 1994.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS WEEK):FOKKER- OTHER COMPANIESNegotiations on a capital injection for the loss-making Dutch aircraftmaker are due to resume early in the new year, but there is noindication when the rescue plan may be agreed. Daimler-Benz Aerospaceof Germany, the controlling shareholder, and the Dutch government, abig minority shareholder, failed to agree the package, believed to beworth more than Fl 2bn (Pounds 808m), before the end of 1995.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FORTE TO EXPAND THROUGH MERIDIEN   By DAVID BLACKWELLForte, the UK's biggest hotels group, is planning a further 26 Meridienhotels in a push to expand internationally.The move is expected to be announced in today's final defence documentagainst the Pounds 3.3bn hostile bid from Granada Group, thetelevision, catering and leisure group.Forte is also likely to promise a special dividend or share buy-back ifthe Pounds 1.05bn sale of its roadside businesses to Whitbread goesthrough. Last week, the group agreed to sell its Little Chef and HappyEater roadside restaurants, Welcome Break motorway service areas andTravelodge budget hotels to the UK brewing and leisure group. The dealis conditional on the failure of Granada's bid.The document is expected to include a promise to increase annualdividends, which were cut from 9.91p to 7.5p for the year to January 311993 and were last raised five years ago.The document will show that Christie & Co, the property surveyor, hasrevalued the hotels upwards by Pounds 355m to Pounds 3.35bn, just over10 per cent above the last estimate in January 1994 and representingnet asset value per share of 325p. This excludes the stake in the SavoyGroup, which Forte plans to sell.The revaluation was dismissed by Granada, which said if the increasehad been added to assets on July 31 last year, the return on assetswould have fallen from 7.4 to 6.5 per cent. 'Frankly, this looks like abit of an own goal by Forte,' said Mr Gerry Robinson, Granada chiefexecutive.Forte paid Pounds 280m to acquire the Meridien chain of 58 hotels fromAir France just over a year ago in order to give it a biggerinternational presence. Of the 26 new projects under consideration, oneis in Manchester and all the others abroad, including Beirut andBangkok.Most will be management contracts, although equity stakes have not beenruled out. Expansion in the US remains a priority.Sir Rocco Forte, chairman, said the main thrust for Meridien would beoverseas. The first year had been spent in integrating the business,and Pounds 14m had been taken from head office costs.'We have only just started,' he said. 'Now we will be much morepro-active.'Today's document will concentrate almost entirely on the hotels, givingdetails of performance. Meridien is expected to have contributed 20 percent to group operating profits.Operating profits from Forte's Exclusive hotels - including theGeorges V in Paris and the Grosvenor House in London - are expected toaccount for 10 per cent of hotel profits, with other London hotelsaccounting for 25 per cent. The Posthouse (including Crest) andHeritage traditional hotels are likely to show contributions of 25 percent and 20 per cent respectively.[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LONDON BRACES ITSELF FOR A REPO REVOLUTION: AN OPEN MARKET IN SALE ANDREPURCHASE AGREEMENTS FOR UK GOVERNMENT BONDS STARTS TODAY   By RICHARD LAPPER and PHILIP GAWITHDealers in UK government bonds are today braced for one of the biggestchanges in the City since Big Bang 10 years ago.The introduction of an open market in gilt repos, agreements to selland then repurchase government bonds, will allow all participants inthe market to borrow and lend stock, removing the monopoly over suchactivity that a select number of firms have long enjoyed and bringingthe UK market into line with practices in the US and France.The Treasury and Bank of England hope the changes will make it easierfor investors to trade gilts, increasing their attractions to overseasinvestors and ultimately reducing the cost of funding government debt.But in the longer term, the development of repos could also lead tobroader changes in the structure of the UK's short-term money marketsand in the way that the Bank of England manages liquidity.'I'm not saying that repo is going to take off overnight but it is thebrave new world,' says Ms Una van Dorssen, director of repo marketingat NatWest Markets.In simple terms, a repo is an agreement to sell a security and thenrepurchase it at an agreed future price and date.One party to the deal 'borrows' money, using the security as acollateral. The other party 'lends' the money and 'borrows' the bond,in much the same way as a pawnbroker would take temporary possession ofvaluables in return for a personal loan. But although the repo lookslike a loan, in reality it encompasses a disposal and a subsequentacquisition, reducing credit risk in the event of default by eitherparty.And in the international bond markets, repos play a more complexeconomic function. Dealers frequently borrow money through repos tofund the purchases of the same bonds, which are then committed ascollateral. Securities firms usually rely on this means to financetheir operations as they do not have access to the interbank marketswhere banks lend to each other.At the same time, dealers 'lend' money through repo agreements, in asimilar way to how they might place money on deposit with a bank,although in this case they have the additional security of holding abond as collateral. At the same time, the 'borrowed' bonds can be usedto meet short-term trading needs. In the bond markets, dealersfrequently take short positions (sell bonds they do not own), when theyfeel prices are likely to fall.In the UK, the ability to carry out repos or to borrow or lendgovernment stock through stock lending agreements has been restrictedby law to stock exchange money brokers - effectively middlemen. Inaddition, only gilt-edged market-makers, a group of more than 20securities firms licensed by the Bank of England, have been allowed to'short' the market.The new, more liberal rules will make it possible for a much widerrange of traders and investors to operate in the UK gilts market. 'Thefact that it is now seen as a clear and open market will make itattractive. It will encourage people into the marketplace. They nolonger see it as an esoteric market with rules of its own,' says MrDavid Brayshaw, managing director LM Money Brokers.Ms van Dorssen at NatWest Markets says that with a deep and liquidunderlying market and a robust futures market in place, repo'sdevelopment will increase the range of strategies open to traders.The impact of repo on the UK's money markets should also besignificant. 'It will be beneficial for the money market and shouldhelp to restore liquidity,' says Mr Brayshaw. 'There has been a lack ofshort-dated government paper that can be traded. Also, the overnightmarket, which determines funding costs, has come to be dominated by asmall group of players.'Ms Van Dorssen says cash managers will be able to place larger amountsof money on 'a repo line' than on an 'unsecured deposit line'.And in the short term, at least until liquidity in the market picks up,dealers expect repo rates to be close to the London interbank rates,offering investors the double advantage of security and extra yield.Nevertheless, traditional market participants may take time to adapt tothe new environment.Some UK institutions, which currently earn a fee by lending stock ontheir books to money brokers, may have to modify their systems andlearn new skills. Specialists in managing medium and long-terminvestments, they may be less prepared for the demands of short-termmoney market management necessary in the repo market. And dealers mayprefer to obtain finance through existing relationships with moneybrokers.In the long term, however, dealing directly with other dealers andinvestors through repos should become cheaper and more attractive. MrSimon Briscoe, chief UK economist at Nikko Europe, says money marketoperators will respond to repo in a similar way to how Britishmotorists responded to the opening of the motorways in the early 1960s.'It wasn't an immediate transition. Even though motorways allowed formore traffic and bigger lorries people still use the A roads.'Step away from tradition, Page 22[London Page 17]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:DISNEY AIMS TO PUMP UP THE VOLUME   By ALICE RAWSTHORNWalt Disney, the US entertainment group which recently bid Dollars 19bn(Pounds 12.2bn) for the Capital Cities/ABC television company, plans tostrengthen its presence in the music business.It is believed to have joined forces in the autumn with PolyGram, theworld's largest record company, in an attempt to sign up Janet Jackson,the US singer. Mr Michael Eisner, group chairman, wanted to sign her inthe hope that a high-profile star would raise Disney's stature in themusic market and attract other acts.Under the terms of Disney's agreement with PolyGram, Ms Jackson wouldhave split her recording contract between the two groups. She wouldhave signed to Disney in North America and to A&M, the PolyGramsubsidiary which was her original record label, for the rest of theworld.It now looks as though Janet Jackson will sign a new contract withVirgin Music, the record label to which she has been contracted since1991 when her A&M deal ended. Virgin, owned by Thorn EMI, the UKleisure group, is thought to have out-bid Disney and PolyGram justbefore Christmas, although it has not yet signed a contract with MsJackson.Mr Eisner is still keen for Disney to expand in the music market, whichis one of the fastest growing and most profitable areas of theentertainment industry. Until now the focus of the group's musicinterests has been its Hollywood Records subsidiary founded six yearsago.Hollywood's performance has been erratic. It has released a number ofhighly successful soundtrack albums under the Walt Disney record label.The Lion King, the soundtrack to the 1994 animated hit, has sold morethan 9m copies in the US. But it has failed to become a force in themarketplace.One option for Disney would be to continue to try to attracthigh-profile stars. This could be slow and expensive as there is fiercecompetition among rival labels for best-selling acts. An alternativewould be to bid for EMI Music, the Thorn EMI division that owns Virgin,which is expected to be demerged from the rest of the Thorn EMI groupnext autumn. But Disney could face fierce competition from other NorthAmerican companies.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:DANA PETROLEUM PLANS LISTING AND SEEKS POUNDS 16MDana Petroleum, the independent oil production company, plans to seek aLondon listing and raise approximately Pounds 16m from a placing, openoffer and intermediaries offer. The company, which produces oil inwestern Siberia in partnership with some of Russia's largest energycompanies, plans to use the proceeds to develop production at the SouthVat-Yoganskoye field.Under the placing and open offer, Guiness Mahon has placed 145m newordinary shares at 7p, while 57.5m new shares are being offered toshareholders on a 3-for-10 basis. A further 28.6m are being offered tointermediaries, also at 7p.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:MEDIOBANCA TO GIVE FERFIN OFFER TERMS   By ROBERT GRAHAM   ROMEMediobanca, the powerful Milan merchant bank, is expected to revealshortly the terms of its public offer to buy 158m shares of FerruzziFinanziaria (Ferfin), the holding company that controls the Montedisonindustrial group.The move has been forced upon Mediobanca after it lost two judicialappeals against a public offer for an amount of shares equal to thoseacquired in an October raid to gain control of Ferfin. The completionof the offer will mean Mediobanca will hold 15.26 per cent of Ferfin,with an estimated disbursement of L582bn (Dollars 367m).Mediobanca finally accepted the ruling of Consob, the stock exchangewatch dog, late last Friday. It had initially lodged an appeal with theregional administrative court of Lazio, and when that failed with thehigher court of the state council.Pricing of the offer presents several problems. Principal among thesehas been the L953bn Ferfin rights issue in mid-December. This came wellafter Consob's first ruling that Mediobanca must make a public offer.Before the rights issue, analysts suggested L1,580 per sharerepresented the average price paid by Mediobanca in its October raid onFerfin.But just before the rights issue they were suspended at L1,056; andConsob announced only shareholders on the register before the issuecould be the subject of Mediobanca's public buy offer. This point isapparently being questioned by Mediobanca's lawyers.Analysts also pointed out that by being obliged to acquire 15 per centof Ferfin, the outlay represented over 10 per cent of Mediobanca'sassets, a large exposure.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:HEALTH GROUPS ABANDON MERGER   By RICHARD WATERS   NEW YORKAfter a busy year of consolidation, the US healthcare industry ended1995 on a sour note with the formal dissolution of a Dollars 1.6bnmerger that would have created the country's largest managed careorganisation.WellPoint and Health Systems International, two Californian healthcaregroups, abandoned a merger agreement reached last April. Friday'sdevelopment came two weeks after the two organisations announced theywere in discussions to break off merger talks, and follows indicationsthat executives from each side were unable to reach agreement on how toshare power in the new company.The merger would have created a West Coast giant with the financialmuscle to acquire other managed care groups around the country. The twohad listed the ability to grow beyond their Californian base as a keyreason for the combination.Under the terms of the all-stock deal, shareholders in Health Systemswould have received 45 per cent of the shares in the combined group.However, the two sides are believed to have been unable to agree onwhat role the smaller company's managers should play after a merger.The deal would have provided the springboard for a far more widely-heldpublic company than either is at present.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:VICTORS AND VICTIMS OF BOARDROOM UPHEAVAL - TIM BURT LOOKS AT THE HIGHNUMBER OF COMPANIES STARTING THE YEAR WITH A CHANGE OF LEADERSHIP   By TIM BURTAn unprecedented number of Britain's leading companies are beginning1996 with newly-installed chairmen and chief executives following ayear of boardroom upheaval.Groups such as BAT Industries and Inchcape have new chairmen, whileBritish Telecommunications, BTR, BOC, WH Smith, and electroniccomponents manufacturer Bowthorpe are among those to bring in new chiefexecutives.Their arrival - mostly part of a smooth succession - comes after a yearin which other high-profile directors became boardroom casualties,including Lord Young and Mr James Ross, chairman and chief executiverespectively of Cable & Wireless.Mr Tiny Rowland left Lonrho after losing his long-running battle withMr Dieter Bock, the trading group's chief executive. Other departuresincluded Mr Mick Newmarch, chief executive of Prudential; Mr RichardReynolds, a director of GEC; Mr Howard Robinson, chief executive atCalor Group; and Sir Brian Wolfson, chairman of Wembley.Russell Reynolds, the UK's largest headhunter in revenue terms, saidthe number of arrivals and departures reflected the growing influenceof institutional shareholders and non-executive directors in bringingin new management.'We're seeing a trend that when companies are having a very difficulttime the executives are being brought to account,' said Mr DavidShellard, managing director.He cited the Cadbury committee on corporate governance as one factorbehind the increased turnover among company directors, while addingthat the Greenbury committee on executive remuneration had focusedshareholder attention on performance-related pay.Heidrick & Struggles International, the London-based executiverecruitment agency, said the rash of outside appointments alsosignalled a growing skills shortage at board level. Mr John Viney,chairman, said: 'There are simply too few people to go round. So we'reseeing the best, such as Sir Colin Marshall, taking on two or threeroles.'Sir Colin, chairman of British Airways, yesterday became non-executivechairman of Inchcape, the international marketing and services group.'Inchcape has not been in the best of health,' Mr Viney added. 'Theyknow it's much better to have a top-class person - even if only for oneday a week - than someone less effective,'Among the other new arrivals this month, Lord Cairns, who last yearresigned as chief executive of SG Warburg, the investment bank, becomeschairman of BAT Industries.Mr Ian Strachan succeeds Mr Alan Jackson as chief executive of BTR. SirPeter Bonfield, knighted in the New Year honours, moves from computergroup ICL to be chief executive of BT. Mr Bill Cockburn has becomechief executive at WH Smith.Mr Tim Parker is taking over as chief executive at CJ Clark, theshoemakers. Mr Nicholas Brookes is the new chief executive atBowthorpe. And BOC, the industrial gases group, will mark its annualmeeting later this month with the appointment of Mr David John and MrDanny Rosenkranz as new chairman and chief executive respectively.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:NATIONWIDE LOOKS TO LIFE OPERATION   By ALISON SMITH, Investment CorrespondentNationwide, the UK's second largest building society, is looking to itsnew life assurance and unit trust subsidiaries, which open today, toenable it to reduce its dependence on mortgage-related financialservices.The new operations replace the relationship in life assurance thatNationwide has had with Guardian since the beginning of 1990s.Mr Tom Boardman, managing director of the two new subsidiaries, saidthat whereas in selling Guardian's financial services about four-fifthsof Nationwide's business was mortgage-related, he hoped that within acouple of years this could be reduced to about half.This strategy seems to acknowledge that endowment mortgages arebecoming less popular and that any recovery in the housing market overthe next couple of years is unlikely to match the pace of the 1980s.Nationwide has also set itself the target of winning 70,000 financialservices customers in the first year - about 1 per cent of its total 7mcustomer base.This is more ambitious than the 40,000-plus financial servicescustomers it is thought to have gained each year during the six-yeartie with Guardian.The new life company will sell term assurance, a mortgage endowmentpolicy, a guaranteed equity bond and a personal pension plan. The unittrust operation will sell two unit trusts - a UK growth fund and abalanced fund which includes an element of overseas exposure.Apart from the policies it designs itself, Nationwide Life will alsosell a permanent health insurance policy bought in from PPP, thehealthcare company.This is a smaller and simpler range than the Guardian policies whichNationwide has been offering, but Mr Boardman said the straightforwardnature of the products should help to keep costs down. He believed therange was still broad enough to meet most customers' needs.For Nationwide, as for other mortgage lenders which have set up theirown financial services businesses, a key element will be to marketthese products to the entire customer base - savers as well asborrowers.Initially, Nationwide's salaried financial services sales force will bemade up of about 340 agents and will grow to 380 by the end ofFebruary. Just over half of these will be branch-based, with theremainder available to visit customers.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:FRENCH BANK SEEKS SHORT-TERM FINANCE   By ANDREW JACK   PARISCredit Foncier de France, the specialist French property bank, isconsidering obtaining a substantial short-term bridging loan while itundertakes a wide-ranging restructuring plan.Bank executives are believed to be discussing the idea of seeking aloan from a commercial bank, secured on its assets, which would lastabout three years.Separately, they are holding talks with the government about short-termways to stave off the growing financial crisis triggered by thewithdrawal of its monopoly rights over certain state-backed housingloan schemes.The idea is to provide the bank with time to introduce a restructuringprogramme which could reduce costs by 30 to 40 per cent in as little asthe next two years, including job cuts and the possible sale of some ofits central Paris offices.However, executives want to reduce staffing without any redundancies sothey are likely to extend the length of their programme to at leastthree years.They are also discussing refocusing the bank, possibly by withdrawingfrom activities such as loans to property developers and localauthorities, and concentrating on core activities of loans to low andmiddle-income housing projects.Credit Foncier's ability to raise funds on the capital markets has beentightly restricted recently because its share price has dropped sharplyand its credit rating has fallen.It was dealt a severe blow during December when the French stock marketregulators recommended against it proceeding with a proposed mergerwith its 55 per cent-owned subsidiary, Societe des Immeubles de France.The deal would have provided a much-needed FFr1bn (Dollars 204m) boostto its balance sheet. It is now looking at other ways of achieving arecapitalisation.The bank is also likely to discuss with the French government, in themedium-term, a change to its legal statutes to make it more like itsprivate sector competitors.Although it is a quoted company without any state shareholding, thegovernment appoints its chairman or 'governor'.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:HYUNDAI TO ACCELERATE DECENTRALISATION - SOUTH KOREA'S BIGGESTFAMILY-RUN 'CHAEBOL' IS MOVING WITH THE TIMES   By JOHN BURTONMr Chung Mong-koo, Hyundai's new chairman, is likely to preside overthe gradual break-up of the giant family-owned South Korean industrialgroup his father established in 1947.That, however, is the way Mr Chung Ju-yung, the Hyundai founder, wantsit. In an attempt to avoid a family fight over the Hyundai empire afterhis death, Mr Chung decided several years ago to divide it amongseveral of his sons and nephews by transferring his stock in most ofHyundai's 45 companies to them.The result has been the creation of smaller and decentralised groupswithin Hyundai that amount to a confederation of allied companies.The process is expected to accelerate with the recent formal transferof management control from the elder Mr Chung and his brother ChungSe-yung, who succeeded him as chairman in 1987, to their sons.Hyundai's restructuring, which is expected to benefit the group, couldserve as an example to Korea's other conglomerates, or chaebol. Thechaebol have been widely criticised for being too big and inefficientwhile fierce competition, for example, has led to duplication ofactivity.Government officials have long urged them to abandon many of theirmarginal businesses and concentrate on a few specialised industrialsectors to improve their global competitiveness.Splitting Hyundai into smaller groups is expected to help achieve thesegoals. Each mini-Hyundai group focuses on only a few industries, andthese units are less able to support unprofitable activities than theywere within the old monolithic structure.Under a reorganisation plan announced a year ago, Hyundai was dividedinto six main groups, with almost all now controlled by one of MrChung's sons and nephews.The most ambitious of the new sub-groups is the one controlled by MrChung Mong-koo, the new Hyundai chairman and eldest surviving son ofthe Hyundai founder.In 1977, he established Hyundai Precision & Industry as a cargocontainer company, which became the world's largest. Hyundai Precisionnow produces railway engines and carriages, sports and utilityvehicles, and military equipment. It also plans to enter the aerospacesector, assembling aircraft and satellites.Mong-koo also controls Hyundai's small steel operations, which he wantsto expand by building a large mill that would supply steel to Hyundai'scar and shipbuilding operations.Mr Chung Mong-hun, his brother and the new Hyundai vice-chairman, hasdeveloped Hyundai Electronics into one of the world's biggest producersof computer memory chips in less than a decade. Another brother, MrChung Mong-jun, controls Hyundai's shipbuilding operations, the biggestin Korea.Hyundai Motors, Korea's largest car company and considered the group'scrown jewel, is being taken over by the family of Mr Chung Se-yung, thebrother of the Hyundai founder. His only son, Mong-kyu, has beenappointed as the car company's new chairman at the age of 33.Mr Chung Mong-hyuk, another nephew of the Hyundai founder, has beennamed new president of Hyundai's petrochemical and oil refiningcompanies, another growth area.Other main Hyundai companies, including its trading house andconstruction company, remain under the control of the group founder.A formal break-up of Hyundai is likely to take some time since thegroup is held together by a complex web of cross-holdings. These ties,however, should weaken as the government imposes limits oncross-holding arrangements in attempt to reduce the economic dominanceof the chaebol.Family solidarity is also expected to prevent an early break-up ofHyundai. The Hyundai companies are likely to operate on the same basisthat Mr Chung Ju-yung has established with several of his brothers, whohave created their own small industrial groups that partly depend onHyundai for business.Hyundai Motors, for example, is the biggest customer for the motorvehicle parts company of the Halla group, founded by Mr Chung In-yung.Nonetheless, internal conflict may also increase as rivalry growsbetween the Hyundai companies. Hyundai Precision, for example, ischallenging Hyundai Motors by producing four-wheel drive vehicles andmini-vans.A looser organisational structure may also make it more difficult topush through large projects that were once easily tackled under theautocratic management style of the Hyundai founder.Analysts will also be watching closely to see whether the new Hyundaichairman can gain group support for his projected Dollars 10bn steelmill, which has been criticised by some Hyundai subsidiaries asunnecessary.                          *       *      *Companies affiliated with relatives of Chung Ju-yungChung Mong-koo, eldest son, chairman of Hyundai group.  HyundaiPrecision & Industry, Inchon Iron & Steel, Hyundai Pipe, HyundaiHousing & Industrial Development, Hyundai Motor Service and HyundaiConstruction Equipment.Chung Mong-kun, son, Keumkang Development.Chung Mong-hun, son and Hyundai vice-chairman, Hyundai Electronics,Hyundai Merchant Marine and Hyundai Elevator.Chung Mong-jun, son, Hyundai Heavy Industries.Chung Mong-yun, son, Hyundai Marine and Fire Insurance.Chung Mong-Il, son, Hyundai International Merchant Bank.Chung Mong-hyuck, nephew, Hyundai Petrochemical and Hyundai OilRefining.Chung Mong-kyu, nephew, Hyundai Motor.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:NETSCAPE LEADS THE FASHION FOR US NEW ISSUES - FT WRITERS LOOK AT THEBEST PERFORMING SHARES AROUND THE WORLD IN 1995 / BEST AND WORST SECTORS   By Our New York staff and ANDREW FISHER   FRANKFURTNew issues - if you could lay your hands on them - were the hottestperforming stocks in the US last year, with Netscape Communications,the Internet company, racing to the fore, writes our New York staff.The market for initial public offerings was more active than it hadever been, but the few sceptics that remained claimed this was a sureindication the US market was way out in front of most traditionalvaluations measures.Netscape, which produces a browser for the Internet, was floated inAugust at Dollars 28 a share, and by year-end it was trading at Dollars139, having reached a peak in early December of Dollars 174.Other strongly performing new issues included Pixar, which handled theanimation for Disney's latest hit film Toy Story. It floated at Dollars22 just after the film's opening at Thanksgiving, and quickly reached ahigh of Dollars 49 1/2, although by year-end it had fallen back toaround Dollars 28 7/8.Many of the new issues were in the technology sector, which had led themarket higher for much of the year, although towards the end of theyear many of these stocks faltered as growth in semiconductor salesslowed.The technology sector's performance should not obscure notable gains inother sectors. Lower interest rates and hopes for productivity gainsmade bank and insurance company shares among the best performers.Banks, deep into a round of mergers, recorded gains of more than 50 percent.Steel companies, most of which crawled back into profit only in 1994,managed the dubious distinction of forming the worst-performing stockmarket sector.Another poor performer was the retail sector, which ended anotherdifficult year with a disappointing Christmas.CONSTRUCTION FALLSBuilding sites abound in German cities and cranes cover the Frankfurtskyline, but construction shares headed remorselessly downwards in1995, writes Andrew Fisher in Frankfurt. The sector's share performanceslumped by 33 per cent and 1996 is not expected to show much, if any,improvement.By contrast, the electrical and electronics sector had a strong year,adding 34 per cent. Apart from Siemens, reaping the benefits of itsaggressively profit-oriented restructuring, the sector contains SAP,the fast-growing producer of business software. SAP's share performancehas been meteoric in the past two years, though it has slowed recently.Commerzbank, whose own new headquarters is taking shape in Frankfurt,estimates that profits of quoted construction companies will rise amere 2 per cent in 1996 after 6 per cent in 1995. The German commercialand homes building boom is now over, with public sector constructionalso held back by budget constraints.Mr Ingo Mainert, a Commerzbank analyst, says stocks likely to performin line with or better than the overall market this year includemotors, steel, electricals and electronics, and insurance.The bank foresees the DAX index rising to 2,500 or even 2,600 pointsafter it closed on Friday at 2,254, a rise of 7 per cent on the year. Ayear ago, the bank had hoped for 2,400 but the weak dollar and higherthan expected pay rises threw out its calculations.For electrical and electronics companies, Commerzbank expects anoverall profits rise of 21 per cent this year after 22 per cent in1995. Earnings in the steel, engineering, motor and metal industriesshould show steeper rises, it says.Further markets will be coveredover the following days.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL COMPANY NEWS:THOMAS LOCKER'S BID FOR PENTRE ATTACKED   By TIM BURTThe largest shareholder in Thomas Locker yesterday claimed theengineering group was seeking a reverse takeover with its proposedPounds 7.5m bid for Pentre, the industrial drums manufacturer.Mr John Carr, who holds 22.6 per cent of Thomas Locker's ordinaryshares, said the purchase price overvalued Pentre: 'The shareholders ofThomas Locker not only get no premium for the very significant valueinherent in the company they own, they are being asked to approve ascheme that will lose them control.'Mr Carr, who acquired his stake in the company last May, urgedshareholders to reject the acquisition, which is being funded by theissue of 8.62m new and 25.9m A ordinary shares. He also condemned asinadequate a proposed 3-for-10 scrip issue of additional ordinaryshares, designed to compensate ordinary shareholders for the loss ofvoting rights.The dissident shareholder, advised by KPMG, said there was no logic forThomas Locker in acquiring Pentre, which he claimed was burdened withPounds 6.9m borrowings.Neither company was available for comment.[London Page 18]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:ANXIOUS EYES FOCUS ON COPPER - COMMODITIES   By RICHARD MOONEYLondon Metal Exchange dealers returning from their festive break todaywill be anxious to ascertain the new year mood of the copper market,which is likely to set the tone for other base metals contracts aswell.Last week's lightly-traded inter-holiday period ended with the coppermarket close to its 1995 low as stocks soared towards the excessivelevel at which they ended 1994. At 296,425 tonnes they were more thandouble the July low.With further rises in stocks expected, analysts and traders werepredicting further falls this week. '(Stop loss selling orders) weretriggered below Dollars 2,665 earlier today,' one trader told theReuters news agency on Friday afternoon, 'and more are likely to belurking below Dollars 2,650. . . copper is back on shaky ground.'Several analysts forecast that copper would drop to Dollars 2,500 inthe medium term as new production capacity came on stream and stockscontinued to accumulate.The steady increase in stocks over recent weeks has been encouraged bybig premiums available for immediate delivery at the LME. As the stockshave risen these premiums - known as 'backwardations' - have narrowed.'If stocks keep rising, and we do expect they will, then the spreadsshould come in even more,' Adam Rowley of Macquarie Equities toldReuters.'At some stage in the first quarter of 1996 we are looking for quite asharp fall in copper prices,' he added.'With February/March at Dollars 80 to Dollars 90 backwardation it looksas if this period will stay tight,' said Wolfgang Becker of IceniCommodities Brokerage. 'Obviously at some stage the whole thing will bereversed, but this sort of stock rise may be a bear trap.'Options traders told Reuters prices could overshoot downside targets ifhedging against large put (selling) positions below the market gatheredpace. 'We are just waiting for copper's resilience to end and when itdoes the market could collapse,' one said.[London Page 19]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:ASSESSING THE POWER OF MULTINATIONALS - GLOBAL INVESTOR   By TONY JACKSON   NEW YORKA noisy debate has broken out in that quiet retreat for the weekendreader, the book review section of the New York Times. It revives anissue which some might have thought buried: the power of themultinationals. It is also a useful reminder that the triumph of freetrade - an idea implicit in most investment strategies today - cannotbe taken for granted.The opening salvo came in a review by the political theorist Mr FrancisFukuyama of a book called Opposing The System. The book, by a veteranleftist Mr Charles Reich, reportedly argues that the current socialmalaise - poverty, unemployment and so forth - has been engineered bylarge corporations for their own benefit. Therefore, it says, thepowers of government should be increased to control them.Mr Fukuyama regarded this as 1960s claptrap. The remedies proposed byMr Reich, he argued, had got us into this mess in the first place.Poverty and crime were caused not by big companies, but by biggovernment.Enter stage left another 1960s veteran, the consumers' champion MrRalph Nader. Big corporations, he wrote in reply, erode democracy,export jobs, and weaken the legal safeguards for workers, consumers andthe environment. 'Until Mr Fukuyama understands that a society rotsfrom the head down and that corporate power needs analysis, he willnever understand Mr Reich's thesis,' he concluded.So far, so familiar. But the role of the multinationals is becomingpart of a wider issue: that of free trade. If you believe that freetrade is destroying jobs and damaging society, you are bound to blamethe multinationals as its agents.As another book recently put it, global free trade 'will impoverish anddestabilise the industrialised world, while at the same time cruellyravaging the third world.' The author is no 1960s leftist, but theerstwhile corporate raider Sir James Goldsmith.As a blend of right-wing populist and born-again environmentalist, SirJames forms an unlikely bridge between the two wings of protectionism.On the right, he is joined by the US presidential candidate Mr PatBuchanan and by the fellow-billionaire Mr Ross Perot.On the left, he links with those who argue that free trade enables badenvironmental practice to drive out good: that through the agency -again - of the multinationals, production will gravitate to countriesfree from costly environmental controls.Those who feel paranoid about the unholy alliance of free-tradegovernments and big business can point to one central fact. As thechart reminds us, world trade has indeed been growing rapidly inrelation to the world economy since the late 1980s, having previouslygrown in line.But are corporations growing in proportion? The evidence is mixed. Lastyear, the three biggest US companies by revenues, as listed by Fortunemagazine, were General Motors, Ford and Exxon. Their combined sales ofDollars 384bn (Pounds 249.3bn) were equal to 5.7 per cent of US GDP.The figure for the same trio 20 years before was 6.7 per cent.But if US multinationals are not bigger, they may still be morepowerful. Arguably, modern communications and the lowering of tradebarriers give them much more opportunity to arbitrage labour andcapital around the world. Hence the solution of such as Mr Buchanan:put the barriers up again.It might be thought that the impulse to free trade is politicallyunstoppable: and indeed, that in the coming world of the Internet thegenie cannot be put back in the bottle anyway.Not everyone in the investment community agrees. The highly successfulinvestor Mr George Soros, for instance, argues that electronic trade isnot intrinsically different from the old kind, just faster. It would beperfectly feasible to re-impose exchange controls, he says. Singlecountries could not do it, but groups of countries could.Mr Soros is gloomily convinced that the present world order, which heregards as a golden age of capitalism, will ultimately break down. Thelast comparable period, he says, was the end of the 19th century. Inthose days, 'the British Empire was at the heart of the system, and hadan interest in maintaining security. When there was trouble, it sent agunboat. Now there is no chief beneficiary (from stability): certainlynot the US.'Should the average investor worry about all this? Not for the timebeing, perhaps. Both of the likely protagonists in next year's USpresidential elections, Mr Clinton and Mr Robert Dole, are professedfree traders: although both will bear watching for signs of concessionsto their respective outer wings.The point is rather that the case for a prolonged global bull marketcontains an internal contradiction. On the one hand, we are told thatmultinational corporations are enjoying a one-off shift to greaterproductivity and cheaper labour, based largely on the globalisation ofmarkets. On the other, we are told the globalising process does notentail empoverishing one set of workers to the benefit of another. Freetrade means faster growth, so the pie gets bigger.This worked very well for small countries like Taiwan and Korea, whichwere able to develop and open up at their own pace. It is anothermatter, to paraphrase Sir James Goldsmith, when political upheaval,modern communications and the liberalisation of capital movements hurl4bn workers into the world economy in the space of a few years.Hence the internal contradiction. Proponents of the bull market arguethat the shift in power between capital and labour is profound enoughto last for a generation. The question is what that generation willmake of it. If it feels disposed to rebel, global free trade could bethe first casualty.-----------------------------------------------------------------------               TOTAL RETURN IN LOCAL CURRENCY TO 28/12/95-----------------------------------------------------------------------                               % change over period                     US   Japan   Germany   France   Italy     UK-----------------------------------------------------------------------Cash-----------------------------------------------------------------------Week               0.11    0.01     0.08     0.10     0.20   0.12Month              0.48    0.04     0.33     0.46     0.88   0.57Year               7.50    2.63     5.81     6.94    10.44   7.75-----------------------------------------------------------------------Bonds 3-5 year-----------------------------------------------------------------------Week               0.12   -0.44    -0.12     0.01     0.59  -0.26Month              0.97   -0.23     1.31     1.15     2.26   1.49Year              15.02   12.67    15.28    14.48    16.80  14.31-----------------------------------------------------------------------Bonds 7-10 year-----------------------------------------------------------------------Week               0.05   -0.47    -0.25    -0.04     1.06  -0.79Month              1.54    0.53     2.08     1.93     3.88   1.89Year              21.12   16.50    17.84    17.69    19.19  15.78-----------------------------------------------------------------------Equities-----------------------------------------------------------------------Week                0.7     0.5      0.8      2.4      3.3    1.2Month               1.0     6.7      2.8      0.1      6.7    1.2Year               36.4     3.1      8.5      2.1     -1.8   22.7-----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: Cash & Bonds - Lehman Brothers.-----------------------------------------------------------------------Equities - NatWest Securities.  The FT-Actuaries World Indices arejointly owned by The Financial Times Limited, Goldman Sachs & Co., andNatWest Securities Limited.-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 19]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:TIME TO REWRITE INFLATION TARGET - ECONOMICS NOTEBOOK   By ROBERT CHOTEOver the last five years many countries have adopted formal targets forinflation as the centrepiece of their economic policies. But turning avaguely expressed enthusiasm for low inflation into a precise numericalobjective is not as straightforward as it sounds.For one thing, policymakers face a trade-off between the need toestablish credibility and to demonstrate humility. Any target has to bedemanding enough to persuade people that the authorities are seriousabout achieving low inflation; but it cannot be too demanding becausecredibility will then be lost again when the target proves impossibleto hit.In 1992 Britain adopted a formal inflation target comprising threeobjectives: underlying inflation between 1 and 4 per cent until spring1997; between 1 and 2.5 per cent in spring 1997; and below 2 per centin the long term. The most demanding element soon slipped from publicconsciousness, but the first two stayed in place. By last summer,however, the remaining target had to be updated. Interest rate changestake about two years to affect prices, so it was becoming too late todo much about inflation within the target period.Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced therefore in his MansionHouse speech that he would aim for underlying inflation of 2.5 per centor less beyond spring 1997. He predicted this would keep inflationbetween 1 and 4 per cent most of the time, recognising that unexpectedevents might push inflation higher when it was too late forpolicymakers to react.This formulation has caused confusion ever since and influential voiceshave argued that it needs rewriting again. Sir Terry Burns, thepermanent secretary to the Treasury, said shortly before Christmas thatthe government should move away from targeting a range for inflation,concentrating instead on a single figure. Some senior officials at theBank of England agree.The Mansion House speech left many questions unanswered in the minds ofCity and academic economists. Was the new target looser or tighter thanits predecessor? Was the inflation objective 1 to 2.5 per cent, 1 to 4per cent or 2.5 per cent and below?The conduct of interest rate policy in subsequent months only deepenedthe mystery. Mr Eddie George had told the chancellor in May thatinflation was set to exceed 2.5 per cent in two years' time and that heshould therefore raise rates. The chancellor refused because he thoughtinflation would be lower. Economists were unnerved by the disagreement,but at least both sides appeared to agree on the definition of thetarget - 2.5 per cent or below.But in September the Bank muddied the waters. It continued to predictthat inflation would exceed 2.5 per cent in two years' time, butdropped its demand for a rate rise. Shortly afterwards, Mr Mervyn King,its chief economist, argued that the target would be satisfied ifinflation averaged 2.5 per cent or less over a long period. Toobservers who had thought the authorities were supposed to be erring onthe side of caution - keeping inflation below 2.5 per cent except inunavoidable circumstances - this looked like a loosening of policy.But in a sense it was simply a recognition of the inevitablelimitations of inflation targeting. These limitations were demonstratedby Andrew Haldane and Christopher Salmon, from the Bank, in a studypublished last month*. They constructed a model of British inflationsince 1960 and reran history as though the authorities had pursued a2.5 per cent inflation target by setting interest rates on the basis ofa forward-looking forecast.The study suggested inflation would have been lower and less variablehad the authorities followed this policy, as the graphic illustrates.But Haldane and Salmon also used the model to assess the possibleoutcomes for inflation had the economy been buffeted by the whole rangeof unforecastable outside disturbances which was typical of the period.They concluded that even if monetary policy had always been welldirected, the authorities would have had only a one-in-four chance ofhitting a 1 to 4 per cent inflation target: 'Other things equal, theseresults would argue for an inflation target band width at least as wideas that operating in the UK - and possibly much wider.'This study provides further evidence that it may be counter-productiveto express the inflation target as a range at all - be it 1 to 4 percent or 2.5 per cent and below. If the range were wide enough for evena well-intentioned policymaker to be confident of hitting the target,it would have to be so wide as to provide little gain in credibility.Finland has recognised this problem and aims simply for inflation of 2per cent. The Bank of Finland concedes that it would be impossible tohit the target precisely in any given month, except by chance. But itargues nonetheless that a single figure provides a better anchor forprivate-sector expectations than a target range.Mr King's comments and the Bank of England's advice this autumn suggestthat the authorities in the UK may be behaving as though they have apoint target for inflation slightly below 2.5 per cent - even thoughthat is not what the formal statement of the target says. If so, thechancellor would do well to rewrite his target again so that itreflects reality in a rather clearer way.Targeting Inflation, Bank of England, 1995[London Page 19]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS: THAILAND - NEWS ROUND-UPThe average daily turnover on the Bangkok stock exchange in 1995 fellby 27.5 per cent from Bt8.6bn to Bt6.25bbn.Foreign trading on the SET over that period was Bt804.36bn, accountingfor 26.35 per cent of total trade.Foreign buying was worth Bt425.3bn in the period, while sellingaccounted for Bt379.03bn.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS: HONG KONG - NEWS ROUND-UPThe Hong Kong stock exchange will review regulations on options tradingin the first quarter of 1996 and does not expect to launch new optionsduring the review period.The review would cover the proposal that market makers should be exemptfrom stamp duty when they conducted arbitrage with the spot market tospread risks.The exchange will also study changes to rules governing opening bidsand how to increase the number of market participants, including marketmakersThe exchange began listing individual stock options in September andcurrently trades options on nine stocks.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS: INDONESIA - NEWS ROUND-UPFurther state asset sales, an updated legal framework and automationcould mean a bright start to the year for the Jakarta stock exchange,brokers and analysts believe.The exchange switched to a fully automated trading system from manualoperations in May, after long delays. This coincided with a move to newpremises in the central business district, and the extension of tradingby 90 minutes each session.Brokers and analysts said the automated system had helped raiseefficiency and transparency and add liquidity. The fully automatedtrading system would also provide a springboard for a planned move tofully scripless trading, expected in the next few years.The government is expected to list many of the more than 200 statecompanies in the next few years.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS: PHILIPPINES - NEWS ROUND-UPThe Manila equities market, which languished for much of last year, isexpected to rebound strongly during 1996 as more companies are listed.The authorities expect the creation of a central depository, the startof scripless trading and tighter rules to prevent insider trading toboost sentiment.Some brokers said they expected up to 30 companies to list.However, inflationary pressures in the first quarter could be broughtabout by an impending increase in domestic oil prices.At present, about 200 companies are listed.A central depository would begin operations for treasury bills andgovernment bonds in March before expanding to shares by the thirdquarter of 1996.Further coverage of emerging markets appears daily on the World StockMarkets page.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS:TRADERS PIN HOPES ON DOLLAR - CURRENCY MARKETS   By PHILIP GAWITHIf foreign exchange traders have their wishes granted, 1996 will be ayear of volatile markets. Last year was much better than the dismalspectacle of 1994, but the last few months were characterised by the USdollar trading in a very narrow range.There is a fair amount of bullishness among currency forecasters aboutthe outlook for the dollar, though in recent years it has managed toconfound the best intended explanations for why it should rally.Analysts at Lehman Brothers think that the dollar stands to benefit inthe coming months from: perceptions that inflation has becomestructurally lower, a modest improvement in the current account deficitas a proportion of GDP, and resolution of the budget negotiations.They caution, though, that any rally could run into the buffers in thesecond half of the year, which may be dominated by a turn-round inGerman interest rate expectations.Analysts at Goldman Sachs are also bullish about the dollar,forecasting levels of DM1.55 and Y112 in the next six months. Againstthe yen, their thinking is based upon trends in the trade and currentaccount data of both the US and Japan, which suggest that the bigbilateral balances between the countries are turning in the dollar'sfavour.Against the D-Mark, their thinking departs from the premise that theGerman economy is suffering from the mis-alignment of the D-Mark inEurope, and this will require the Bundesbank to ease monetary policy inorder to curb D-Mark strength.Politics will be a key variable. US presidential elections will affectthe dollar, while the progress towards monetary union in Europe willalso be an important determinant of D-Mark and Swiss franc performance.The proximity of elections in the UK, and a possible Labour government,could make life difficult for sterling.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS:LOOKING AHEAD TO BRIGHTER PROSPECTS - THE EMERGING INVESTOR   By JOHN PITTThe year just ended has not been one that investors in the world'semerging equity markets will care to remember. Far better to look aheadto the brighter prospects that many strategists believe beckon in 1996.But there were some winners during 1995 - a year in which what havebecome known as the 'pre-emerging' markets came into their own.Take Jordan, for example, capitalised at less than Dollars 5bn (comparethis with Mexico's market capitalisation of about Dollars 90bn), and anannual turnover estimated at less than Dollars 1bn. (Mexico has anaverage daily turnover of at least Dollars 100m.)A far sighted investor who took a position in the country's fledglingstock market at the start of last year would have seendollar-denominated assets appreciate by 23 per cent. Compare this witha loss of 35 per cent in both India and Hungary, or 40 per cent in SriLanka.Certainly one of the prominent themes of 1995 has been the growinginterest in these pre-emerging markets: countries which are justbeginning to organise their financial structures, but are endeavouringto do so as quickly as possible.As the main emerging markets of Mexico, South Korea, Taiwan and Turkey,for example, retreated in the face of a flow of funds back into thedeveloped world, so interest turned to lesser known regions. Inparticular, a race began among a number of US and European investmentbanks and brokerages to establish contacts and trading positions inAfrica. It became clear that in this 'new scramble for Africa' returnson investments could, in many cases, far exceed those in the moremature markets. But the risk would also be much greater.This did not deter the launch of a number of African funds during 1995,although most were naturally skewed towards the largest market on thecontinent - South Africa. With an estimated market capitalisation ofDollars 274bn Johannesburg is the world's seventh largest stockexchange.Russia was another growth area and some commentators believe that 1996will see this market come of age, especially after the presidentialelection is out of the way. ING Barings global strategy unit led byMichael Howell, for instance, believes that both eastern Europe andRussia show attractive valuation levels, and thinks fund managers areready to significantly increase their exposure.'Of the Dollars 50bn expected to flow towards emerging equity marketsin 1996, I expect some Dollars 5bn to head towards eastern Europe andRussia,' says Mr Howell. 'This is equivalent to more than 10 per centof existing market capitalisation, and, perhaps, as much as 25 per centof the existing free-float.'Other factors likely to lift investor sentiment in Russia include animprovement in custodial operations, with expectations that anindependent central depository will finally be created.Mr Mark Mobius, president of the Dollars 7bn Templeton Emerging MarketsFund, is another enthusiast for Russia, although he is aware that thecountry's turbulent political climate is likely to get worse before itgets any better.Nevertheless, he is confident that potential for investment is bright,given that the country has embarked on what he calls a 'revolutionary'approach to financial market reforms.But what of the core emerging markets?Mr Arnab Banerji, chief investment officer of Foreign & ColonialEmerging Markets based in London, believes that in spite of adisappointing return on investments in 1995 the outlook remainspositive. He picks South Korea, India, Brazil and Taiwan, among others,as having strong prospects.India, for example, continues to have good compound earnings growth, hesays.He is also among a number of strategists who favour Brazil among LatinAmerican markets.Garantia, a leading Brazilian investment bank, warns that slowereconomic growth during the first half of the year will put a brake onthe stock market's momentum; while for the year as a whole it will bevery much a matter of selecting specific sectors. Garantia favours thefood, beverage, packaging and retail sectors, on the basis that therecent decline in inflation means that many people now have adisposable income for the first time in years.At UBS the emerging markets team is keen on Chile, South Korea andTurkey, all for different reasons. Chile will continue to see animprovement in the economic picture and political problems are forecastto dissipate; South Korea is expected to benefit from an easing inmonetary policy; and Turkey should be able to move forward once againnow that the parliamentary elections are out of the way.Chile will also benefit from the increased weighting - from 1.9 percent to 7.3 per cent - which the equity market will attract in theIFC's investable index which starts this month. Mr Nigel Rendell atJames Capel, who classifies Chile as 'an Asian tiger living in LatinAmerica', forecasts that despite the recent rise in interest rates,corporate earnings will rise by 25 per cent in nominal terms, valuingthe market on a prospective p/e of 16 times.Whether or not this year will see a pick-up in activity among theworld's emerging markets depends on a host of factors, not least themovement in US interest rates. Further easing in US monetary policy,many analysts believe, could trigger a fresh wave of institutionalmoney out of the US and Europe, and into Latin America and the FarEast.[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EMERGING MARKETS: ING BARING SECURITIES EMERGING MARKETS INDICES-----------------------------------------------------------------------                                         Week on week movementIndex                     29/12/95         Actual     Percent-----------------------------------------------------------------------World (301)                 147.56          -0.47      -0.32Latin AmericaArgentina (20)               92.78          -0.14      -0.15Brazil (21)                 186.09          +2.03      +1.10Chile (12)                  195.67          -3.52      -1.77Mexico (25)                  73.59          -2.31      -3.04Peru (17)                  1068.95         +27.09      +2.60Latin America (95)          123.14          -0.65      -0.52EuropeGreece (16)                  97.97          +1.89      +1.97Portugal (18)               116.46          +0.55      +0.47Turkey (21)                  82.80          -7.41      -8.22Europe (55)                 121.53          -0.85      -0.70AsiaIndonesia (26)              138.64          -1.53      -1.09Korea (23)                  136.90          -1.12      -0.81Malaysia (23)               227.37          -0.26      -0.12Pakistan (11)                73.59          +1.54      +2.14Phillippines (11)           259.16          +4.54      +1.78Thailand (25)               251.89          -2.19      -0.86Taiwan (32)                 130.82          +2.14      +1.66Asia (151)                  203.04          +0.12      +0.06-----------------------------------------------------------------------                    Month on month movement    Year to date movementIndex                 Actual      Percent        Actual      Percent-----------------------------------------------------------------------World (301)           +7.78        +5.57         -10.47       -6.63Latin AmericaArgentina (20)       +11.73       +14.47          +6.67       +7.74Brazil (21)          +10.86        +6.20         -23.28      -11.12Chile (12)           +16.82        +9.41         -15.90       -7.52Mexico (25)           +1.79        +2.49         -24.03      -24.62Peru (17)            +65.34        +6.51        +220.28      +25.96Latin America (95)    +7.87        +6.83         -15.63      -11.26EuropeGreece (16)           +4.20        +4.48         +10.98      +12.62Portugal (18)         +1.30        +1.13          +0.18       +0.15Turkey (21)           -1.31        -1.56          +6.69       +8.79Europe (55)           +5.14        +4.42         +23.84      +24.40AsiaIndonesia (26)        +5.10        +3.82          +4.96       +3.71Korea (23)            -7.79        -5.38          -2.98       -2.13Malaysia (23)        +10.63        +4.90         +16.51       +7.83Pakistan (11)        +10.10       +15.90         -32.61      -30.70Phillippines (11)    +17.63        +7.30         -22.96       -8.14Thailand (25)        +16.41        +6.97          +0.24       +0.10Taiwan (32)          +12.00       +10.10         -53.33      -28.96Asia (151)            +9.38        +4.84          -7.57       -3.60-----------------------------------------------------------------------All indices in Dollars terms, January 7th 1992=100.-----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: ING Baring Securities-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 20]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS:INVESTORS FACE A DEARTH OF ECONOMIC DATA - NEW YORK   By RICHARD WATERSThanks to the latest Federal government shutdown, US stock marketinvestors start the new year facing a dearth of official economic dataagainst which to judge the economy's performance.The only significant new information this week will be the NationalAssociation of Purchasing Management report for December, due today.The headline NAPM index for the month is expected by most economists tobe around 47.5 - higher than November's 46.5 but still below the50-mark which would point to expectations of manufacturing growth. Thatwould provide a firm backdrop for the bond market, whose recent gainshave underpinned share prices.While keeping one eye on bonds, the stock market will begin to fix itsattention on the corporate earnings season starting later this month.Three months ago, a generally strong set of quarterly results helpedset the stage for the stock market's fourth-quarter rise. This timearound, the figures will be pored over for signs of how the US'seconomic slowdown is affecting earnings growth.Most market followers expect earnings growth to taper off during 1996.But corporate cost-cutting and share repurchases have left plenty ofroom for earnings to come in ahead of expectations. And with USinvestors still buying mutual funds, there seems to be plenty of casharound to chase share prices higher.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS: STRATEGY - OTHER MARKETSThe start of the new year has brought the usual crop of recommendationsfrom brokers. Spain and Sweden feature among the lists as potentiallygood performers in 1996 while the time may now be ripe to take profitson Switzerland after its strong run last year.Views on Italy are divided, with some analysts thinking the time isright to give the market another chance but others finding thepolitical outlook still unappealing.JP Morgan expects equity markets to remain volatile, with positiveresponses to interest rate cuts probably offset in part by continuingbad news on earnings.Morgan reiterates its underweighting of Paris, saying France isexpected to experience one of the slowest growth rates in Europe nextyear. It is taking profits on a previous upgrade of the Swiss marketand switching the money into Italy, which it believes is discountingthe bad news and could react positively to a relaxation of monetarypolicy.Morgan says the low valuation on its forecasts and scope for interestrate cuts makes the Swedish market look attractive after its recentunderperformance.Lehman Brothers still recommends being overweight in the Spanish,French, Swedish and Dutch markets. It says the first two are cheap,relative to debt, while slower French growth has been more thandiscounted by the market.Sweden looks attractive on a prospective dividend basis, while theDutch market is the cheapest among the core European economies.The UK, Swiss and Italian markets remained relatively expensive.Liquidity flows had helped the first two, but value would come through.In spite of its underperformance, Lehman saw little value in Italy.ABN-Amro Hoare Govett, meanwhile, continues to prefer Germany and theNetherlands in core Europe while Spain is its peripheral market ofchoice. And while Italy's valuations have improved, ABN still does nottrust the politics.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS: TOKYO - OTHER MARKETS   By EMIKO TERAZONOWith the Year of the Pig ending on a note of slight recovery, somemarket participants are hoping that the Year of the Rat will be a goodone for the Japanese shares, writes Emiko Terazono. Past Years of theRat have seen the market rise by an average of 54.6 per cent, and theanimal is regarded by believers of traditional omens as a favourablesign for investments.Stocks may need all the help they can get since banks and lifeinsurance companies are expected to sell their share holdings ahead ofthe March book-closing. Analysts point out that there has been heavytrading around 21,500 and regard that figure as a strong resistancelevel.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS: HONG KONG - OTHER MARKETSFurther gains are expected among equities this week after Friday'syear-end window dressing and solid gains in the futures market, whichtook the Hang Seng index to intra-day and closing highs for 1995.Analysts are concerned, however, that the near-term outlook forrecently active newspaper stocks remains cloudy in view of their weakearnings prospects. They add that the decision to relax conditionsgoverning the pre-sale of uncompleted flats will benefit developers,although it will not have much stimulative effect on the local propertymarket.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS: FRANKFURT - OTHER MARKETSThe Bundesbank meets on Thursday, but having cut key rates at its lastmeeting, no action can be expected on the discount or Lombard ratesthis week.James Capel says the Bundesbank Council will wish to assess the impactof the monetary easing on M3 and the real economy over some weeks.The most interesting feature of the meeting was likely to be what thecouncil said about the repo rate.'We would expect a fairly prompt return to a variable repo rate, whichis likely to drift lower over the coming weeks,' says Capel.On the corporate front, analysts are expecting a let-up in the numberof new bourse listings in 1996 after last year's flood, althoughNovember will bring the flotation of Telekom, Germany's telephonemonopoly, which is expected to raise DM15bn.Companies raised a record DM8.5bn in new funds in 1995 from 20 IPOs,including the listing of Merck, the drugs group, that was Germany'slargest post second world war stock offering, which raised DM2.4bn, andthe Adidas placement, which raised DM2.1bn.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS: DUBLIN - OTHER MARKETSEven after last year's performance, which saw the Irish equity marketclimb by 20 per cent to end among the best performing markets in Europefor the third successive year, Dublin retains its enthusiasts.Mr Robbie Kelleher at Davy Stockbrokers in Dublin says the market hasmore than doubled since the trough of October 1992 but still expectsthe ISEQ to be among the top performing indices in 1996.'Valuations remain low, both by historic and international standards,the Irish economy is likely to be the fastest growing economy in inEurope again in 1996 and the strength of corporate cash flows andbalance sheets is likely to restrict the supply of new equity to aminimum,' he says.How this better relative performance translates into absoluteperformance depends on developments in other markets.Mr Kelleher believes the international equity market rally can besustained in the early part of 1996, on the back of continuing supportfrom low interest rates, low inflation and rising bond prices.Compiled by Michael Morgan[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS:YEAR EXPECTED TO OPEN ON POSITIVE NOTE - LONDON   By PHILIP COGGANThe UK market starts what could be a general election year in a healthyspirit. A base rate cut in December, accompanied by reductions inEuropean and US interest rates, creates a positive background forequities.With most observers expecting base rates to fall further in the earlymonths of 1996, shares could yet set some more all-time highs. Whilethe FT-SE 100 index did well in 1995, it still lagged well behind WallStreet's phenomenal performance.The first test of the year will be the spring results season, not somuch for the figures themselves, but for chairmen's statements abouttrading conditions in early 1996. The market shrugged off some profitswarnings in late 1995, mainly on the hope that UK economic growth waspausing for breath, rather than grinding to a halt.As the year moves on, thoughts will inevitably turn to the date of anelection, and the chances of a Labour government.Concern will probably focus, not on macro-economic policies, but onmicro-economic matters such as the minimum wage or dividend taxation.If Labour maintains its strong lead in the opinion polls, shares maystart to come under pressure.Much went right for the UK stock market in 1995 - takeover activity, astrong Wall Street, falling bond yields and worldwide interest rates.It will be a surprise if all those factors are still as positive in1996.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS:CVRD MANDATE SUGGESTS END OF THE GOLDEN 3% FEE - INTERNATIONAL OFFERINGS   By ANTONIA SHARPEThe debate about fees which investment banks charge for arranginginternational equity offerings is set to be a lively one in 1996,judging from the aggressive bids which emerged in the recentcompetition to win Brazil's Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD) mandate.Shortly before Christmas, the Brazilian government said it had chosen aconsortium including Merrill Lynch, NM Rothschild, KPMG and fourBrazilian partners to handle the sale of its 51 per cent stake in CVRD,one of the world's largest exporters of iron ore.The winning consortium is charging a fee of 1.9 per cent to arrangewhat is expected to be one of the most significant international equityofferings of 1996. According to market valuations, the government'sstake is worth about Dollars 5bn but the sale is likely to be spreadover at least two offerings.If the winners' fee looked low, it was by no means the lowest. Bankersinvolved in the bidding said a consortium led by Lehman Brothers hadoffered to do the business for a fee of 1.75 per cent and anotherincluding CS First Boston for 1.9 per cent.It is also believed the fee bid by the consortium including MorganStanley and SBC Warburg (disqualified because the first part of its feeestimate was too far below the average) was in this region.By contrast, Goldman Sachs, which had come top in the technical part ofthe bidding contest, had bid a fee of 3.125 per cent, bankers said.Bankers involved in the consortium which won the CVRD mandate say thelevel of the fee was justified because the sale will be a secondaryoffering and not an initial public offering, which usually commands ahigher fee.Half of the CVRD stock is already traded, making CVRD the mostwidely-held stock after Telebras and Petrobras. As a result, it alreadyhas a wide following among foreign analysts and investors.They also point out that there is a history of low fees in Brazil,where past international equity offerings have been done for fees ofjust over 2 per cent. But the two most important reasons bankers giveto justify the fee are: first, the size of the offering; and second,the importance of being involved in the first of many privatisations inBrazil.Although bankers do not expect the government to sell its CVRD holdingin one go, the arranging banks stand to earn close to Dollars 100m fromthe whole process.On the second point, the bidding highlighted the willingness amonginternational banks to drop their fees in order to be at the forefrontof Brazil's privatisation programme.The government wants CVRD to pave the way for further sell-offs in thecountry's electricity and telecommunications sectors over the next fewyears.The fact that three leading investment banks were willing to arrangethe CVRD sale for a fee of less than 2 per cent, despite the risksassociated with an emerging market such as Brazil, is also a reflectionof the increasingly intense competition in the international equitymarket.Once one of the most lucrative sectors of investment banking, fees forarranging deals, particularly privatisations, have been erodingsteadily over the past two years.This has come about as governments seek to maximise the proceeds ofselling off state assets and new players try to break into the market.The downward pressure on fees has been mainly on privatisations, wherethere is likely to be follow-on business for the banks, and less so oncorporate IPOs or secondary offerings. However, there are signs thatcorporate fees are also coming under pressure.In view of the ever-greater number of privatisations in Europe andelsewhere in the world and the growing number of investment bankswanting a slice of the action, it is inevitable that fee levels havebecome one of the main bargaining tools.With competition set to stiffen further, many bankers now believe thegolden 3 per cent level, once the norm for European privatisations, hasgone for good.-----------------------------------------------------------------------                TOP INTERNATIONAL EQUITY BOOK RUNNERS-----------------------------------------------------------------------                               1995                        1994-----------------------------------------------------------------------                     Dol-                       Dol-                     lars                       larsManager               bn   Rank    %    Issues   bn   Rank     % Issues-----------------------------------------------------------------------Goldman Sachs        5.83    1   13.44    52    6.32    1   11.32   44Morgan Stanley       4.33    2   10.00    37    3.17    3    5.68   44Merrill Lynch        3.17    3    7.30    38    5.43    2    9.72   57SBC Warburg          3.00    4    6.92    27    3.05    4    5.46   20CSFB/Credit Suisse   2.51    5    5.79    18    2.64    7    4.73   31Dresdner-Kleinwort   2.47    6    5.70    12    1.76   10    3.15    8UBS                  1.75    7    4.03    11    0.45   29    0.81    4ABN-Amro HG          1.66    8    3.83     7    1.53   12    2.75    8BZW                  1.65    9    3.81     8    1.60   11    2.86   18Lehman Brothers      1.44   10    3.33    21    2.79    5    4.99   33Industry totals     43.36          100   342   55.88          100  449-----------------------------------------------------------------------Excluding funds and block trades.-----------------------------------------------------------------------Source: Euromoney Bondware-----------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996EQUITY MARKETS:GOLDMAN SACHS REMAINS AT THE TOP   By ANTONIA SHARPEGoldman Sachs maintained its position as the leading global co-ordinatorof international equity issues in 1995, according to data from EuromoneyBondware, Antonia Sharpe writes.Goldman's involvement in Germany'sprivatisation of Deutsche Telekom, scheduled for November, should ensureit retains the top slot in 1996. However, winning the CVRD mandate inBrazil, which is also set to emerge in the second half of the year, hasincreased Merrill Lynch's chances of taking the lead.Although MorganStanley, Merrill Lynch, SBC Warburg, CS First Boston, DresdnerBank-Kleinwort Benson and Lehman Brothers remain among the top 10 globalco-ordinators for 1995, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Paribas and BNP havebeen displaced by UBS, ABN-Amro and BZW.[London Page 21]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:TOKYO   By EMIKO TERAZONOWhile the country's financial institutions' woes are likely to promptthe Bank of Japan to maintain an accommodating stance in its moneymarket operations, it is expected to push up interest rates on the longend.Banks are expected to step up their profit-taking on bonds and stocksahead of the March book-closing in order to cover losses stemming fromthe write-offs of bad loans.Many of the leading banks have pledged to clear their balance sheets ofbad loans related to jusen, or housing loan companies, and some haveannounced that they may fall into the red for this business year toMarch.Life insurance companies may also want to take profits on their bondholdings due to the decline in insurance premiums. While the leadinginsurers posted healthy rises in their recurring profits for the firsthalf to September, this was largely due profit-taking on theirinvestments.The seasonal repatriation of funds from the US ahead of the Marchbook-closing may briefly put upward pressure on the yen on the foreignexchanges, but this is unlikely to have a lasting impact on bondprices.Lehman Brothers in Tokyo estimates yields on the 10-year governmentbond, which closed the last year at 2.9 per cent, to end at 3.4 percent at the end of the first quarter of this year.[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:A STEP AWAY FROM CITY TRADITION - OPEN GILT REPO TRADING   By PHILIP GAWITH and RICHARD LAPPERThe launch today of the open gilt repo market may be something lessthan a 'second Big Bang', but it does represent a further step awayfrom a City where custom and tradition have played an important role,towards one governed by the more homogenised standards of a globalfinancial services industry.The privileges and arcane idiosyncracies associated with such core Cityinstitutions as gilt edge market makers (GEMMs) and stock exchangemoney brokers (SEMBs) are ebbing away.Already there is evidence of some of the more marginal GEMMs throwingin the towel, while SEMBs will have to cope with the fact that an openrepo market comes in tandem with an open stock-lending market.Ironically, the advent of the gilt repo market is beingenthusiastically welcomed by that other supposed City anachronism - thediscount house. These institutions have, for as long as anyone canremember, served as the intermediaries through which the Bank ofEngland channels liquidity to the commercial banks.Often the butt of ridicule for their quaint practice of havingemployees don top hats every morning in order to do the rounds of theCity's main banks, they have also become increasingly marginalised inrecent years as the clearing banks have gained ascendancy in the moneymarkets.More than 80 per cent of the eligible bills - those which the Bank isprepared to discount in its daily money market operations - are held bythe clearers.As a result, the role of discount houses over the past 10 years hasbeen little more than to serve as brokers on behalf of the clearingbanks.There is a widespread belief, however, that the Bank of England willstart to use the repo as its daily medium of intervention in the moneymarkets (at the moment it conducts repo operations every two weeks, butthe bulk of its daily operations are done through the bill market).This will not be immediate - the Bank will first want to see a depth ofliquidity in the repo market, both in terms of the number ofcounterparties, and the volume going through - but is believed to beinevitable.For its part, the Bank is playing a very straight bat. It said thisweek that 'it did not have plans to change the form of its money marketoperations', but that the development of gilt repo trading 'could makeit sensible to contemplate change later'.The Bank has to tread very carefully, because, in the words of oneobserver, 'any change is a sea change'.A hint that the Bank plans to start using repo alongside eligible billsin its daily operations is sure to be taken as a signal that a move tosole reliance on repo is likely.Some observers believe the Bank will try to run repo and billoperations in tandem.There are two main reasons why such a move is considered likely. First,there is widespread belief that intervening via the repo will be a moreeffective method of managing short-dated interest rates than thecurrent practice of intervening, often three times a day, via the billmarket.Second, it seems most likely to be the modus operandi of a futuresingle European central bank and the UK is unlikely to want to doanything which is at odds with what it might have to do in Europe, ifit participates in monetary union.A study last year by Mr Norbert Schnadt for the London Business Schoolfound that the money market operations of the Banque de France,Bundesbank and Federal Reserve differed from those of the Bank ofEngland in that they were conducted less frequently, utilised onlyrepurchase transactions, and were spread over a very wide range offinancial institutions.It also found that even though the Bank intervened more frequently inthe money markets than the other central banks, sterling rates weremuch more volatile than elsewhere.Recently, however, UK overnight rates have been steadier. Interventionvia repo is also unlikely, in itself, to be sufficient to makeovernight rates more stable.Any shift towards daily use of repo will be welcomed by the discounthouses, because by so doing the Bank will increase the number of activeparticipants in the money markets, diminishing the dominant role of theclearers.The introduction of an open repo market also creates a new tradinginstrument which puts more emphasis on the idea of secured money - ahigh priority in the aftermath of the Barings episode.At the moment, most secured lending and borrowing is done either to thediscount market, or via SEMBs, and through them to GEMMs.Discount houses see an opportunity in this because of their expertisein secured lending.Mr George Blunden, chief executive of Union plc, says: 'Discount houseshave a head start because our job has been secured money markets sincethe beginning of time.' As much as 95 per cent of the discount marketis secured.Mr Ross Jones, chief executive at Gerrard and National plc, adds: 'Thisis the biggest opportunity we have had for years. We see it as apotential new lease of life for the secured sterling money market.'A group like Gerrards has the added advantage of having a SEMB withinthe group, which will be merged with the discount house operations.While the pivotal role of SEMBs will be diminished, stock borrowing andlending will continue, alongside repo, so the relationships they havewill still count.A number of the largest holders of gilts - pension funds andinstitutions - have dealt exclusively with SEMBs, and early indicationsare that they will be happy to continue doing business this way.As new entrants garner market share, institutions will have to widentheir counterparties beyond the small set of SEMBs they havetraditionally dealt with, but loyalty to old relationships looks likelyto be the watchword initially.Discount houses are also confident that if the Bank of England startsto use the repo as an intervention mechanism, it will want a manageableset of counterparties, dedicated to making markets in all conditions.They believe that their chances of playing this role are good.Another development which will encourage the development of the repomarket is the introduction of the European-wide Capital AdequacyDirective, which also takes effect today. CAD encourages a securedmoney market, because the capital requirements for repos are much lowerthan for unsecured ones.[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:FRANKFURT   By ANDREW FISHERThe German bond market market ended the year quietly but positively,with bund futures generally expected to remain firm.Inflation, now below 2 per cent, is clearly under control and economicgrowth is modest at best. Thus the Bundesbank can sit tight after itspre-Christmas interest rate cuts.With the discount rate now down to 3 per cent, the chances of a furtherreduction are rated as no more than slight by most economists.It has only once fallen below 3 per cent in the last three decades -just after the 1987 stock market crash, when it stayed at 2.5 per centfor six months.Mr Holger Fahrinkrug, an economist at Union Bank of Switzerland, saidthe discount rate was not likely to fall so low in this cycle.'However,' he added, 'this does not mean that monetary easing is over.'The securities repurchase (repo) rate should fall below the current3.75 per cent. Also, the 5 per cent Lombard rate could also be lowered,since the bottom of previous cycles has seen it at 4 or 4.5 per cent.If the money supply remains weak, the Bundesbank could cut interestrates further, said Mr Bill Smyth of BHF Trust. But the 1987 discountcut to 2.5 per cent did not produce a powerful bond rally, he noted.[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:LONDON   By CONNER MIDDELMANNAll eyes in the UK government bond market this week will be on giltsale and repurchase agreements, or repos, which starts today.'A whole new world of leverage trades, reverse repos, term stock loans,buy/sells, matched books and, hopefully, very little mayhem willtransform the gilt market,' say analysts at HSBC Greenwell.'We are entering a new evolutionary phase in the market. Repos willimpact on pricing, liquidity management, swaps, curve plays andultimately, we suspect, on official intervention in the money market.'But in the near term, trading is unlikely to be heavily affected byrepos and after trading in a narrow range last week, gilts will have tolook elsewhere for life to be breathed back into the market.The data front offers slim pickings, with M0 figures and the purchasingmanagers' report for December scheduled as the only releases this week.'M0 will be viewed with interest for what it reveals about consumerdemand in December - a month which accounts for over one-quarter oftotal annual retail sales,' notes Mr Nigel Richardson of YamaichiInternational. 'The weekly notes in circulation data suggest that therewas a seasonally adjusted increase in M0 of almost 1 per cent on themonth - this would appear to confirm retailers' reports of strong salesin December.'[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:INVESTORS ASSESS THEIR STRATEGY FOR 1996 - GOVERNMENT BONDS   By RICHARD LAPPERThe scale of the rally in international government bonds over the lastsix months surprised the markets and left many investors scrambling toincrease their exposures.In assessing their strategy for this year, investors must weigh up theextent to which benign economic fundamentals, especially for the US andEuropean markets, are already reflected in valuations.At the same time, the markets could be affected by a number ofpolitical uncertainties linked to the US presidential elections and thecreation of European Monetary Union.European bonds provided investors with some of the best returns in 1995- with returns (in local currency terms) to December 15 ranging fromaround 15.3 per cent in France and 15.5 per cent in Germany to 19.3 percent in Sweden.Over the last few weeks there has been a wealth of evidence that thegrowth of core economies such as Germany and France is grinding to ahalt and that inflationary pressures are continuing to ease.Furthermore, at their Madrid summit last month European leaders andfinance ministers reaffirmed their commitment to monetary union,suggesting the reduction of fiscal deficits will remain a priority forgovernments across the continent.'Europe is shaping up for a common currency and that suggestsgovernments will wrestle to bring public finances under control. Theseare developments bond investors will be pleased to see,' says Mr CraigShute, bond analyst at Bear Stearns International in London.Similar 'bond-positive' forces are visible in the US, where Treasuriesprovided investors with total returns of more than 17 per cent in 1995.And the current market rally has very different characteristics to thatof 1993, which gave way to a sell-off early in 1994.During 1993, the markets were expecting further monetary tightening -now by contrast, further cuts in interest rates are expected. Theinflation rate is falling - it was rising in 1993 - and some analystsargue that investors have yet to fully adjust their expectations to theextent of the downward trend in inflation.Mr Nigel Richardson, international bond strategist at YamaichiInternational, says US inflation - as measured by the consumer priceindex - has not been as low as its current level of 2.6 per cent since1972. The present situation 'holds out the possibility that there maybe a permanent return to 1960s-style price increases,' suggests MrRichardson.Yet according to the a survey of economic forecasts by ConsensusEconomics Inc, investors expect US inflation to rise to 3.1 per cent inthe longer term.'They are responding fully to the current inflation background on thegrounds that they appear to doubt it will be maintained. In essence,therefore, the bond market has 1980s style yields against a backgroundof 1960s style inflation,' says Mr Richardson.However, there are also good reasons to be cautious. For a start, thescale of the surge in bond prices in 1995 means much of the good newsis already reflected in valuations.Yields on 30-year Treasury bonds fell by nearly two percentage pointsin 1995, touching 6 per cent by the year end, while in Germany yieldson 10-year bonds had dropped to 6.07 per cent by December 27, a fall ofmore than 1.5 per cent.'With the US and European central banks virtually moving as one to cutinterest rates before year-end, most of the good news for the bondmarkets has been delivered,' says Mr Graham McDevitt, internationalbond strategist at Paribas Capital Markets.Mr McDevitt predicts an increase in volatility, arguing that there is ahigh risk of a correction in the first quarter with bond yields risingby 25 to 50 basis points. Economic slowdown could also createdifficulties by undermining fiscal deficit and debt reduction schemes,in turn putting at risk the achievement of Maastricht criteria formonetary union in some countries.The impact of the slowdown will be most clearly apparent in France,where a fall in tax revenues could impair the government's efforts toreduce its fiscal deficit from the current level of more than 5 percent.The industrial action by French railway workers last month is expectedto have reduced growth in the final quarter of 1995 to 0.1 per cent.Finally, while leverage has been an element of the current bull market,it is not thought to represent as serious a threat to the markets'stability as in 1994, when highly geared trades built up in 1993 weresuddenly unwound, aggravating the extent of the sell-off.A popular geared play last year, according to analysts at BZWSecurities, was to finance purchases of US assets with yen borrowingson the grounds that the 'perceived potential for currency loss is smallrelative to the yield pick-up.'BZW says the leveraging has been concentrated on US more than Europeanbond markets and may well be limited to the short end of the Treasurycurve, though 'the impact will still have percolated along the curve.'[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS:NEW YORK   By RICHARD TOMKINSUS Treasuries passed a milestone last week. On Wednesday, the yield onthe benchmark 30-year long bond ended the day below the psychologicallysignificant 6 per cent level for the first time in two years. OnThursday and Friday, it edged down further still, closing the week -and the year - at 5.94 per cent, in marked contrast to the 7.92 percent at which it started the year.The question now is whether yields will fall further still, and WallStreet analysts believe they will. Most indicators point to a weakeningof economic growth in the coming year, further diminishing inflationarypressures.With recession an increasing possibility, analysts confidently expectthe Federal Reserve to continue to reduce the Fed funds rate, with thenext downward movement pencilled in for the Federal Open MarketCommittee meeting of January 30-31.This week, however, could be a quiet one in the bond market, for anyagreement between the president and Congress over a balanced budgetwill almost certainly come too late to allow the flow of governmentdata to resume before the weekend.Most attention is likely to focus on today's publication of theNational Association of Purchasing Managers index for December. This isexpected to show a slight increase from November's 46.5.[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS: INTEREST RATES AT A GLANCE------------------------------------------------------------------------                USA     Japan   Germany   France    Italy      UK------------------------------------------------------------------------Discount       5.25      0.50     3.00     6.10*     9.00     6.50**Overnight      5.94      0.38     3.88     4.62     10.43     6.50Three month    4.98      0.50     3.70     4.81     10.12     6.56One year       5.14      0.56     3.60     4.87     10.03     6.25Five year      5.38      1.67     4.78     5.85     10.51     6.96Ten year       5.59      3.06     6.02     6.66     10.84     7.43------------------------------------------------------------------------(*) France-Repo rate.(**) UK-Base rate.------------------------------------------------------------------------Source: Reuters.------------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD BOND MARKETS: US TREASURY BOND FUTURES------------------------------------------------------------------------                        US TREASURY BOND FUTURES                  (CBT) Dollars 100,000 32nds of 100%------------------------------------------------------------------------      Open  Sett price  Change   High     Low   Est. vol.  Open int.------------------------------------------------------------------------Mar  121-05   121-15    +0-11   121-20  121-01   70,751    368,447Jun  120-22   121-02    +0-11   121-06  120-22    2,982     17,276Sep  120-14   120-18    +0-11   120-20  120-14    1,310      5,474------------------------------------------------------------------------[London Page 22]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ECONOMIC DIARY:OTHER ECONOMIC NEWSTuesday: The annual rate of growth of UK's M0 money supply is expectedto have risen slightly last month. The US purchasing managers' index isexpected to show a further contraction in manufacturing, although lessthan last month.Wednesday: The UK's purchasing managers' index is expected to record aslowdown in activity in the UK. Most economists think US new home saleswere fewer in November than in October.Thursday: The Bundesbank council holds its first meeting of the newyear. The Danish unemployment rate is expected to have fallen inNovember. US factory orders are expected to have recovered in Novemberafter falling in the previous month.Friday: Italian consumer price inflation is forecast to have fallenback last month. Figures on Italian gross domestic product are expectedto show a rise in the third quarter. US non-farm payroll data shouldshow a smaller rise last month than in November. A raft of Germaneconomic figures are released this week. They should show anacceleration in M3 money supply growth and no change in industrialproduction.[London Page 32]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FT GUIDE TO THE WEEKUK gilt repo market opensAn open market begins in gilt repos, agreements to sell and thenrepurchase government bonds. All players in the gilt market will beallowed to borrow and lend stock, rather than only a select group ofdealers. The reform should provide greater liquidity, make the marketmore attractive to foreign investors and reduce government fundingcosts.Cash for Marcos victimsAbout Dollars 50m (Pounds 32.4m) of money from Swiss bank accountsbelonging to the late Ferdinand Marcos, the former president of thePhilippines, is to be transferred to Hawaii. The move is part of aDollars 100m deal in settlement of a Dollars 2bn claim by about 10,000victims - or their relatives - who were tortured, raped or murderedunder the Marcos regime. The Filipinos filed a lawsuit against Marcos,who died in exile in Hawaii in 1989, after a popular revolt ousted himfrom power in 1986.AT&T targets BritainUK phone-users can expect to find themselves the target of aggressivecampaigns by AT&T, the largest US telecoms operator. AT&T says it willnot compete on price but on quality of service and innovation. BritishTelecom, which has so far brushed off challenges from its 150 or so UKrivals, may have more to fear from the US giant.CricketSouth Africa meet England in the fifth Test in Cape Town (to Jan 6).HolidaysArmenia, Botswana, Canada, Japan, Korea, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Taiwan, Yugoslavia.WEDNESDAY 3Perry in SarajevoWilliam Perry, US defence secretary, arrives in Sarajevo afterinspecting US bases in Italy and Hungary. Mr Perry is touring USmilitary operations to implement the Bosnia peace accord. It is thefirst visit by a high-level US official since the deployment of 20,000American troops began on December 16.On Thursday, Mr Perry travels to Ukraine, where he and his Ukrainianand Russian counterparts will participate in the destruction of anintercontinental ballistic missile silo in accordance with theStrategic Arms Reduction Treaty.Summing up in Maxwell trialThe Maxwell fraud trial resumes following a Christmas break demanded bythe jury. The judge, Lord Justice Phillips, will start his summing up.This is expected to last almost a week, after which the jury will besent out to consider its verdict. Kevin Maxwell, Ian Maxwell and LarryTrachtenberg deny conspiring to defraud the Maxwell pension funds.HolidaysJapan, Taiwan.THURSDAY 4UK's first war crimes trialCommittal hearings start in Dorking, near London, for what could beBritain's first war crimes trial. The accused is 84-year-old SzymonSerafinowicz, a former Nazi paramilitary allegedly involved inatrocities during the second world war.Japan's stock markets openThe Tokyo Stock Exchange and the country's other stock exchanges openthe year's trading session.HolidaysBurma, Zaire.FRIDAY 5Britain's Blair in Far EastTony Blair, leader of the UK's opposition Labour party, makes a two-dayvisit to Japan on the first leg of a Far East tour (to Jan 8) to raisehis party's international profile and persuade foreign investors of thesoundness of Labour economic and financial policies. He will addressthe Keidanren, the main business federation, and meet governmentministers and UK businesses in Japan. He travels on to Singapore.German rail fares riseFares on Deutsche Bahn, Germany's federal railway system, rise anaverage 2.8 per cent in western Germany. Train tickets in easternGermany, which used to be 20 per cent cheaper than in western Germany,will now only be 10 per cent cheaper. The Schones Wochenende ticket,which enables five people to travel unlimited mileage on local trainsfor an entire weekend, will now cost DM35 (Dollars 25), up from DM30.Mastering ManagementThe FT's 20-part series resumes in the UK edition with part nine,following a two-week break. Non-UK readers can take out a subscription.Contact: PO Box 384, Sutton, Surrey, SM1 4XE, UK. Tel: +44 181 7709772, Fax: +44 181 643 7330.HolidaysSri Lanka.SATURDAY 6Rifkind visits Hong KongMalcom Rifkind, UK foreign secretary, arrives in Hong Kong for athree-day visit, his first to the colony as foreign secretary. He willmeet local business and political leaders and receive a briefing fromthe governor, Chris Patten, on the state of Anglo-Chinese relations asthey affect the June 1997 hand-over of the colony. Mr Rifkind travelson to Beijing.SailingThe Cape to Rio yacht race starts from Cape Town, South Africa.Although the event is sponsored by Rothmans cigarettes, one of thefavourites is the Swedish yacht Nicorette - which is named after aproduct that helps smokers give up. Nicorette won the 1995 Fastnetrace.SUNDAY 7Portillo in JapanMichael Portillo, UK defence secretary, in Japan to January 9, willdiscuss co-operation in United Nations peace-keeping operations. Japanis to send troops for monitoring duties in the Golan Heights at the endof this month. An accord is expected on UK-Japan military exercises andexchanges of officers for training.UK rail fares increaseBritish Rail and London Underground fares rise by varying amounts,according to the route and service provider.Rugby unionCardiff meet Toulouse in the final of the European club rugbycompetition in Cardiff. Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Simon Strong.Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.                           *      *      *MEASURES THAT CAME INTO EFFECT ON JANUARY 1 1996Public procurement dealPublic sector procurement contracts worth several hundred billiondollars a year were opened to international competition when a newWorld Trade Organisation accord came into force. The 24 signatoriesinclude the 15 members of the European Union, the US, Canada, Japan andSouth Korea.US bill on lobbyingA ban on gifts for politicians in Congress came into force. Senatorscan only accept gifts worth less than Dollars 50, with exemptions forhome-state products and foodstuffs. House of Representatives membersare allowed nothing, although there are 23 exemptions includinghome-state products, T-shirts and baseball caps. Lobbyists mustdisclose full details of their activities.Italy holds EU presidencyItaly assumed the six-month rotating presidency of the European Union,with the prime task of inaugurating the Inter-Governmental Conferences(IGCs) on the future of the EU. The presidency risks being overshadowedby Italy's political instability and a general election.Lamberto Dini, prime minister, has argued strongly that he shouldremain in office to ensure the government is able to concentrate on thepresidency.Britain takes over WEUThe UK took over the presidency of the Western European Union, a10-nation defence club. Britain has pledged to take a pragmaticapproach to upgrading the WEU, with some improvements in its capacityto anticipate and handle crises but with no question of itscompromising Nato's role as Europe's main security institution.EU-Turkey customs unionA customs union between the European Union and Turkey came into effectwith the removal of remaining trade barriers. This followed a vote inthe European parliament in December, in which the move was approved by343 to 149, with 36 abstentions. There had been concern about Turkey'shuman rights record.EU finance directivesThe EU Investment Services Directive, and the accompanying capitaladequacy directive, were both implemented. The directives aim to giveEU investment firms a 'passport' to trade in all member states if theyare authorised in one.The CAD also introduces European Union-wide rules for banks andsecurities firms to set aside capital to cover risks in securitiestrading. These are in addition to international rules covering lendingrisks run by banks.Telecoms competitionCable TV, utility, rail and other 'alternative' networks throughout theEU were allowed to use their infrastructure to offer telecom services.Mobile operators were permitted to build their own networks anddirectly connect to other mobile operators.French income tax riseAn additional 0.5 per cent tax charge was introduced on all revenues inan attempt to correct the country's accumulated social securitydeficit.German tax changesTax cuts and other changes took effect which should leave Germansnearly DM20bn (Dollars 13.8bn) better off this year. Tax-freeallowances were brought into line with poverty-level incomes, more thandoubling the level of income permitted before tax to just over DM12,000a year.Consumers will also benefit from the elimination of the 'coal pfennig',which was previously added to electricity bills to help pay for the useof German coal in power stations. However, these savings - amounting toabout DM27bn this year - will be offset partly by DM7.5bn highercontributions to pensions and insurance funds.Deutsche Telekom tariffsGermany's state-owned telephone company, due for partial privatisationlater this year, introduced changes to bring its tariffs more in linewith market demands. Long-distance calls will become cheaper and localcalls, which have been kept artificially cheap for decades, moreexpensive. Business clients can also choose from three differentdiscounts of up to 24 per cent.British alcohol tax cutThe tax on fortified wine, such as sherry and port, was reduced by 12pfor a typical 75cl bottle.UK copyright extendedCopyright on music and literature was extended from 50 to 70 years,implementing an EU directive of October 1993. Although virtually allmember (and non-member) states adhered to the 50-year rule, the EUfollowed Germany, where royalty payments last 70 years. Britain willnow be out of step with other English-speaking countries, which will beable to produce cheap editions 20 years earlier.The change is retrospective, bringing back into copyright works byartists who died between 1925 and 1945, including the composers EdwardElgar and Gustav Holst, and writers Arthur Conan Doyle, creator ofSherlock Holmes, Kenneth Grahame, author of Wind in the Willows, ThomasHardy, Rudyard Kipling, DH Lawrence, and Beatrix Potter.Income tax back in CubaCuba, which abolished personal taxes as a 'capitalist evil' after the1959 revolution, reintroduced income tax on hard currency earnings. Thegovernment also introduced a tax on boats - whatever their size - androad tolls on two highways leading to tourist centres.[London Page 32]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: MEXICAN BUS CRASH KILLS 25Two buses were involved in a head-on collision in northern Mexico,killing 25 people.[International Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:MOSCOW REVELLERS FREEZE TO DEATHTwo new year revellers froze to death in Moscow after they collapsed inthe streets following heavy drinking sessions. Health officials said 25people had been taken to hospital with frostbite as temperatures droppedto almost minus 20 deg.[International Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SOCCER CLUBS IN EGYPT WINOVER TV FEES: GOVERNMENT PITCHES IN TO BOOSTROYALTIES   By JAMES WHITTINGTONIt was not quite the kind of negotiations Rupert Murdoch or KerryPacker might be used to, but for Egypt's football clubs earlier thismonth it was quite something to score against the state televisionmonopoly.Cairo's two most popular soccer teams last month banned statetelevision from broadcasting their matches after a row over royalties,forcing the government to intervene in their favour.The Egyptian government has long been ultra-cautious about allowingmarket forces to unsettle the country's protected state sector. Butwhen it came to football, two senior ministers readily made thenecessary concessions.In the Egyptian football calendar, the highlights of the season are thematches between Cairo rivals Ahli and Zamalek.These succeed in emptying the city's streets and push TV ratings waypast the most gripping soap operas.Facing financial difficulties, the two teams astonished many Egyptiansby putting aside their rivalry on the pitch to take on the powerfulRadio and Television Union which for years has benefited from itsmonopoly on domestic broadcasts by refusing to negotiate fees fortelevising matches.The clubs' financial problems began after the 1990 World Cup in Italy,when the football federation urged clubs to turn professional and signcontracts with players.This led to fierce competition to sign the best footballers whichpushed up transfer fees and forced club directors to look more closelyat their finances.In August, it became obvious that something had to give when Zamalekpaid a record EPounds 600,000 (Dollars 177,000) for Egypt's highestgoal scorer, Ahmed el-Kas.'Faced with this kind of costs, to keep a first class team we had tostart thinking seriously about our finances,' explained Mr Adlyel-Kee'i, manager of Ahli.'Before we just worried about winning our matches but suddenly we hadto think about our performance in terms of profits and losses. Weneeded more income and the television rights seemed an obviouscandidate for change.'At the start of the season in September negotiations between the soccerclubs and the RTU on broadcasting fees were not going well.The clubs complained that the fees, which are always paid to the homeside, were not only too low but also depressed gate earnings becausefans would stay at home to watch the matches live on television.Demands for a better arrangement, however, were given short shrift.'The (Radio and Television Union) is not a bank,' Mr Amin Bassiouni,president of the RTU, was reported as saying. 'We are not responsiblefor the soccer clubs' financial problems.'On November 5, to break the deadlock, Ahli, the national champions,took the unprecedented step of banning TV cameras from its matches.Attendances rose three-fold, and the club said it earned more from gatereceipts than the previous television fee structure.With the first goal scored, Zamalek quickly followed suit.Caught offside and facing the wrath of Egypt's football fans, thestate-run broadcasters quickly called on the government to act asreferee.The deputy prime minister, Mr Kamal el-Ganzouri, and the informationminister, Mr Safwat el-Sherif, were put on the case.As the weeks went by and Ahli and Zamalek stayed off the screens,football fans became more and more restless, with the local pressfirmly in favour of the clubs.With the pressure on, the RTU backed down, and the government steppedin to provide the extra money.A three-year contract which came into force on Saturday, will doublethe clubs' earnings - EPounds 200,000 for matches between Ahli andZamalek and EPounds 150,000 for other matches.'We're very, very happy, it shows we were right to stand up and fight,'said Mr Ali Osman, chairman of Zamalek.[International Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996JAMAICA PONDERS AN ECONOMIC VICTORY OF SORTS   By CANUTE JAMESThe custodians of Jamaica's truculent economy are celebrating avictory, of sorts.After 18 years of mainly acrimonious relations with the InternationalMonetary Fund, the island has ceased to be a borrowing member. Withforeign reserves covering three months of imports, government officialsare claiming that the new status with the IMF is a victory for theadministration's management of the economy.Others are not so sure. The victory for Jamaica is pyrrhic, and the IMFcan claim a win in getting Jamaica to implement its structuraladjustment policies, say the government's critics. They point tocontinuing currency instability and to billowing inflation. Businessmencomplain that high interest rates - a government tool for dampingdemand and reducing pressure on the exchange rate - are driving themout of business.'After 18 years and being in a relationship with the IMF it mustreflect that we have managed effectively the macro economy,' said MrPercival Patterson, Jamaica's prime minister. 'I am not concernedwhether the IMF will claim some credit. My greater satisfaction is thatthe economic situation is such that we do not need to borrow from themand that we can take our own economic choices in accordance with oursovereign judgments.'There are no victors in this, said Mr Delroy Lindsay, president of thePrivate Sector Organisation of Jamaica. 'This appears to be a draw.Jamaica has made progress in structurally adjusting the economy, but itstill has a far way to go. Inflation is too high, interest rates aretoo high and there is little growth.'Jamaica's relations with the IMF is a litany of repeated and protractednegotiations, agreements reluctantly implemented by successivegovernments because they were politically unpopular. IMF agreementsbecame synonymous with the deterioration of the economy as governmentsfulminated against the Fund's conditions for the structural adjustmentof the economy.But the end to Jamaica's borrowing from the Fund has not coincided withany indication that the persistently wayward economy is settling down.After 18 months of relative stability, the currency has depreciated by16.5 per cent since July after a decline in foreign currency flows tobanks. The central bank was forced to intervene by selling from itsreserves. Economic expansion has been sluggish at just under one percent in 1994. Mr Omar Davies, the finance minister, says 1995 is likelyto have resulted in more of the same. 'Growth will not be spectacular,but it will be positive,' he said.Mr Davies rejects suggestions that the economy is stagnant. 'We arehaving lower levels of growth than we expected,' he said. 'This is notstagnation but low growth.' The finance minister has done theunthinkable in Jamaican politics by publicly admitting to making errorswhich contributed to the current uncertainty in the business climate.The prospects for Jamaica are limited and clear, economists andbusiness leaders concur. A reversal of the deregulation would bedamaging. 'The government has done well in the macro-economic policies,but its management of some aspects has been inadequate,' said MrLindsay. 'Interest rates must come down, the currency allowed to findits own level, inflation will be lower and all other things will fallinto place.'[International Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MURDER HUNT CONTINUINGEnglish police have reported an encouraging response in their searchfor the murderer of French teenager Celine Figard, whose body wasidentified at the weekend after being found by the roadside. She hadbeen missing for almost two weeks. After an emotional appeal by MsFigard's father, more than a thousand people called the police to offerinformation.Interpol and police in southern England have been co-operating to finda truck driver who offered the 19-year-old girl a lift at a servicestation near Newbury in Berkshire, west of London.[International Page 6]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OBSERVER: FOOD FOR THOUGHTHush. Egon Ronay, the Hungarian-born restaurant critic, has beentouring the eateries of Europe's four major international airports andis not impressed. The great man, who penned The Unforgettable Dishes ofMy Life, has collected more than enough material for a sequel.Amsterdam's Schiphol comes bottom in Ronay's airport league table,getting just one out of 10 for its catering quality. 'Anybody who eatsat Amsterdam airport needs to have his head and palate examined. It isbelow criticism,' says Ronay. Paris's Charles de Gaulle is not muchbetter, scoring two out of 10. Frankfurt gets four out of 10, but Ronaywas still far from impressed.Britain's Heathrow airport comes out tops, with the quality of itschips and coffee getting a special mention. However, one word ofcaution about the survey. Ronay was hired by the British AirportsAuthority to undertake the exercise.What's that they say about the customer always being right?[International Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996100 YEARS AGO: AMERICAN FINANCEAll the cables from New York reflect the feeling of relief which haspervaded financial and commercial circles on the reported successfulnegotiations for placing further Government bonds. Nothing could bemore significant than this of the low ebb to which the credit of theUnited States has fallen. That it was a little better than had beenanticipated in some quarters after the publication of PresidentCleveland's Message is not saying much. A workman who falls from ascaffold may congratulate himself upon the fact that he has broken onlyone leg instead of two, but the blessing is of the comparative order,and the case of the United States is somewhat analogous to this.[International Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 199650 YEARS AGO: MOTOR EXPORTSThe typical British car has limited passenger room, but is highlysuitable for British conditions, which are an amalgam of slow speeds,short distances and smooth surfaces. But it is not, in itself, welladapted for the vast spaces of continental travelling and theroughnesses of colonial roads. Meanwhile, the mass-produced Americancar meets colonial and continental conditions admirably.[International Page 13]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS MONTH): OCE-VAN DER GRINTEN - OTHER COMPANIESMr Harry Pennings, executive chairman of the Dutch photocopiermanufacturer, is scheduled on Friday to give provisional figures forthe year ended November 30. Growth in net profits is expected to be inline with the 16 per cent increase posted in the first nine months. Thecompany, the first in the Netherlands to report results, will publishdefinitive figures on February 27.[International Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMPANY NEWS (THIS MONTH): PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH TO LEAD TO STRONGEARNINGS - US RESULTS   By MAGGIE URRYUS investors are looking forward to some good news this month as mostcompanies start reporting their 1995 earnings figures. Throughout theyear, the quarterly numbers have produced pleasant surprises, withresults often beating analysts' estimates, writes Maggie Urry.Corporate America has gone through rapid productivity growth in recentyears, which has meant that even in 1995, with profits rising sharply,companies were still laying off workers and taking large restructuringcharges.Analysts prefer to look at the 'operating earnings', excluding one-offcharges. Forecasters expect the S&P 500 companies to announce earningsper share totalling about Dollars 38 per share compared with Dollars 32in 1994, a rise of nearly 20 per cent.Particularly strong earnings gains are expected from cyclical sectorssuch as aluminium, paper and pulp, and chemicals. Also well ahead willbe technology groups. However, some of these, such as semiconductormakers, issued warnings on profits for the final quarter as salesgrowth weakened and prices came under pressure.Weaker figures are expected from some of the consumer non-durablesgroups, such as the tobacco and restaurants sectors. In February, poorresults are due from retailers.[International Page 15]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF: PRISON MOVE FOR MAFIOSOSicilian Mafia 'boss of bosses' Toto Riina and 14 other Mafia leaderswere switched from Palermo jail to northern Italy following the murderof a prison officer.[International Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WORLD NEWS IN BRIEF:GROZNY DEATH BLASTAt least one person was killed and about a dozen injured in a powerfulbomb blast in the Chechen capital Grozny which was apparently aimed at alocal police chief, according to Interfax news agency.[International Page 1]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARGENTINE CONGRESS URGED TO SPEED LAWS   By MATTHEW DOMAN   BUENOS AIRESThe Argentine government is stepping up pressure on the nation'sCongress to approve key economic legislation early in the new year.Legislators failed to vote on two important measures in extraordinarysessions held this week.Debate on the measures - a presidential request for additional taxingand budget-trimming powers and a bill to advance reform offederal-provincial government relations - was again suspended late onThursday evening after opposition members of the lower house ofCongress withdrew from the chamber. Their walk-out denied the chamber aquorum and pushed consideration of the bills into January.The government is now insisting that extraordinary congressionalsessions be extended as far as February to win approval of the measuresit argues are critical to repairing the nation's finances in 1996.Argentina's Congress normally takes a long southern summer recess overthe months of December, January and February.The measure considered to be the most important is President CarlosMenem's request for extraordinary powers to cut expenditure and raisetaxes without congressional approval. The government argues that theproposed 'superpowers' are necessary to ensure that the 1996 budget isbalanced and International Monetary Fund fiscal targets are met.The second major measure, the ambitiously titled Reform of the Statelegislation, aims to streamline financial relations between thenational government in Buenos Aires and the country's 23 provinces.The federal government argues that elimination of duplication ofservices in the two tiers of government could save up to Dollars 1.5bna year but is reluctant to confirm that efficiency measures may see theloss of up to 20,000 state sector jobs.The congressional backlog was cleared somewhat earlier this week whenthe upper house of Congress, the Senate, approved the 1996 budget lawand a hotly debated measure to increase taxes on tobacco products.Argentine financial markets have maintained a firm tone in thinholiday-season trade this week, and investors appear content to giveCongress some additional leeway to approve the government-sponsoredmeasures.Economist Raul Buonuome of ING Barings said the markets were willing toaccept that the Senate might not sign-off on the measures until Marchbut had expected lower house approval this week.[International Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ISRAEL HAILS 'CONSTRUCTIVE' ATTITUDE FROM SYRIANS   By PATTI WALDMEIR   WASHINGTONIsrael and Syria yesterday extended negotiations into the weekend asthe two sides took cautious steps towards peace in informal talks at asecluded venue where they were able to start to form the sort ofpersonal relationships essential to any peace deal.Each side sent three negotiators to the talks, held in the elegantambiance of the Aspen Institute's Wye Plantation conference centreoutside Washington.Mr Uri Savir, director-general of the Israeli foreign ministry and acrucial negotiator of the Israel-Palestinian peace accord, headed theIsraeli team. The Syrian chief negotiator is Mr Walid Moualem,ambassador to Washington and a confidant of Syrian president Hafezal-Assad. They were joined by four representatives of the USgovernment, whose presence is viewed by both sides as crucial tomediate a deal. That team is headed by Mr Dennis Ross, state departmentMiddle East co-ordinator.Convinced secrecy is essential to progress, all parties imposed a newsblackout. But an Israeli embassy spokesman in Washington stressed the'positive atmosphere' of the talks.'Very good personal contacts' were made, with negotiators from bothsides holding 'a lot of small talks' in the corridors and when theydined together.Given the intense distrust which exists between Israel and Syria anyimprovement in the atmosphere must be progress. And Israeli sourcesnoted a new, more constructive attitude from the Syrians.Analysts point out that the intentions of President Assad arenotoriously difficult to decipher, as he seldom travels to the west andruns a closed and secretive government.But they believe he may have concluded that the time is now ripe forpeace.The assassination of Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin hashighlighted the strength of the anti-peace movement in Israel, whichmay persuade Mr Assad that his best interests lie in making a deal withthe current Israeli government rather than having to deal with afuture, potentially more hostile one.Mr Assad is also keen to remove Syria from the list of countries deniedcertain economic benefits from the US because of their alleged supportfor terrorism.[International Page 3]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SUBSIDY WILL HAVE TO EXCEED DOLLARS 300M: NUCLEAR PRIVATISATION:DECOMMISSIONING MAY LAST MORE THAN 100 YEARS   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources EditorThe government is likely to have to provide several hundred millionpounds for a special fund to pay for cleaning up nuclear power stationsites after next year's privatisation of the industry. The fund willalso have to be given tax-exempt status.Advisers in the City of London are working on the structure of thesegregated fund which was announced earlier this month by Mr Tim Eggar,the energy minister. The fund would be managed by an independent trustto ensure money was available to decommission power stations over aperiod that could last more than 100 years. The fund will have to beendowed with an initial cash amount of between Pounds 200m (Dollars312m) and Pounds 300m. This sum would be increased using earnings fromBritish Energy, the privatised company, to meet decommissioningliabilities. However, contributions would come out of the company'staxed income. So the trust itself would have to be exempt from tax toavoid double taxation.The size of the trust's liabilities is still being calculated. The fundwould be responsible only for long-term decommissioning - monitoringsites while disused reactors 'cooled down' and eventually dismantlingthem after 135 years. The larger costs of the first stage ofdecommissioning a power station, including removal of spent fuel andcontaminated components, would be paid for by British Energy, whichwould also bear the risk of a power station being shut down beforeadequate provisions had been built up.British Energy will also be directly responsible for disposing of spentfuel, which represents the largest part of its total liabilities,estimated at Pounds 6bn.The initial finance for the fund could either be provided by thegovernment or raised through a loan from the private sector. But thegovernment has been told that it should provide the finance itselfbecause a loan would only reduce the potential sale price of BritishEnergy.Another important decision will be the discount rate used to calculatethe size of provisions made by British Energy to meet its liabilities.Present estimates have been based on the 6 per cent rate used by theTreasury. The nuclear industry uses 2 per cent, which means that largerprovisions have to be made to reach the target.The government's Department of Trade and Industry is expected soon topublish details of the capital structure of British Energy.[International Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SHOPPERS STABBEDA store worker ran amok with three knives yesterday and stabbed 10people. The man marched through the aisles at the Netto store inBordesley Green in the English Midlands city of Birmingham, attackingshoppers and staff. Two men and a woman were later stable in hospital.Seven other people including a 13-year-old boy suffered less seriouswounds. A man was arrested outside the store by unarmed police.[International Page 4]Back to Headline List CopyrightFINANCIAL TIMES FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK COMPANY NEWS: RESULTS----------------------------------------------------------------------                                        Turnover       Pre-tax profit                                        (Pounds)          (Pounds)----------------------------------------------------------------------Creston Land & Est    Yr to June 30  7.578   (6.461)  5.561L*  (0.157)Rossmont          Yr to June 30****  1.98      (2.8)  0.209L   (0.185)Union Square   6 mths to Sept 30***  0.558   (1.341)  0.453  (1.651:v)----------------------------------------------------------------------                                        Turnover        AttributableInvestment Trusts                       (Pounds)       Earnings (Pds)----------------------------------------------------------------------China             6 mths to Sept 30  105.4   (139.9)  0.293    (0.191)----------------------------------------------------------------------                                                        Current                                                       dividend                                         EPS (p)      payment (p)----------------------------------------------------------------------Creston Land & Est    Yr to June 30  8.2L     (0.3L)     nilRossmont          Yr to June 30****  1.13L**  (0.91)     0.2Union Square   6 mths to Sept 30***  0.36**   (0.86)     nil----------------------------------------------------------------------Investment Trusts----------------------------------------------------------------------China             6 mths to Sept 30  1.85      (1.2)     0.5----------------------------------------------------------------------                                     ----------- Dividends -----------                                               Corres-  Total    Total                                     Date of   ponding  for       last                                     payment  dividend  year      year----------------------------------------------------------------------Creston Land & Est    Yr to June 30  -             nil  -          nilRossmont          Yr to June 30****  -             0.2  0.4        0.4Union Square   6 mths to Sept 30***  -             nil  -          nilInvestment TrustsChina             6 mths to Sept 30  Feb 13        nil  -          0.3----------------------------------------------------------------------Earnings shown basic. Dividends shown net. Figures in brackets are forcorresponding period. *After exceptional charge. **On increasedcapital. ***Comparatives restated. ****Comparatives for 15 months.----------------------------------------------------------------------[International Page 5]Back to Headline List WT02-B40-4IA074-000493-B044-210http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ft01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012722 text/html 373031HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:24:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:01 GMTContent-length: 372843Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ft01.html Sample Issue Copyright TODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FINANCE: THE CHART SHOWS (59 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: AILING KING FAHD HANDS OVER POWER TO SAUDI PRINCE: MOVE ENDS SPECULATION OVER SUCCESSION BUT FUELS DOUBT ON RULER'S HEALTH (487 words) UK NEWS: TORIES BRACED FOR MINORITY GOVERNMENT: SENIOR MINISTERS ADMIT MAJOR MAY LOSE COMMONS MAJORITY BEFORE END OF 1996 (577 words) UK NEWS: TAX SELF-ASSESSMENT WILL HIT SMALL BUSINESS, SAYS LABOUR (343 words) SHORTS: THOUSANDS HIT BY WATER SHORTAGES AFTER SUDDEN THAW (634 words) UK NEWS: WALDEGRAVE GETS TOUGH ON SPENDING TO FINANCE TAX CUTS (545 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: CHIRAC CONCEDES DIALOGUE NEEDED ON REFORMS (407 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: BEACON FOR EMERGING DEMOCRACY (893 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: SCALFARO SEEKS CLARITY ON POLLS (467 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: PARTIES WEIGH UP RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY (984 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: SAMPAIO LEADS AS PORTUGAL NEARS VOTE (424 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: RUSSIA PLEDGES TOUGH LINE ON ECONOMY (355 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: PACT TO OPEN UP STATE CONTRACTS: INTERNATIONAL NEWS DIGEST (742 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: ZEROUAL PICKS LITTLE-KNOWN DIPLOMAT AS PM (416 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: JAPAN PUBLIC PRESSED ON LOAN BAILOUT (596 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: CONSERVATIVE ABDULLAH TAKES REINS OF POWER (774 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: INDONESIA'S CONGLOMERATES LOOK TO MARKET FORCES (311 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: TALKS TO RESUME ON US BUDGET IMPASSE (384 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: RHODES' HEIRS RETURN TO ZAMBIA'S COPPER MINES: AFTER 25 YEARS OF NATIONALISATION, BOARDROOMS IN JOHANNESBURG AND LONDON COULD AGAIN DETERMINE THE DEVELOPMENT OF ITS LEADING INDUSTRY, REPORTS TONY HAWKINS (909 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: SRI LANKA'S WAR EUPHORIA FADES (545 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: ZEDILLO RESHUFFLES CABINET (396 words) UK NEWS: POOREST DEPEND ON BENEFITS 'FOR 70% OF INCOME' (412 words) UK NEWS: GLOOMIER PROSPECTS PREDICTED FOR THE ECONOMY (439 words) UK NEWS: WALDEGRAVE RESOLVES TO START EARLY: NEW YEAR AIMS INCLUDE PUSHING THE PFI AND TACKLING FRAUD (741 words) UK NEWS: TORIES WARN OVER NICHOLSON ATTACKS (508 words) UK NEWS: SALES SUCCESS LESS SWEET AS CHEWERS AVOID SUGAR (362 words) UK NEWS: FIAT STEPS UP DRIVE FOR IMPORT POSITION (590 words) UK NEWS: CRITICS TURN ON TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY: AS THE IRA CEASEFIRE HAS LITTLE EFFECT ON PREMIUMS, BUSINESSES QUESTION THE EXISTENCE OF REINSURER POOL RE (794 words) UK NEWS: FISHING PATROL MOVES INTO DISPUTED AREA (419 words) UK NEWS: BIG THAW LEADS TO WATER CUTS: UK NEWS DIGEST (592 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: NERVES BEGIN TO FRAY OVER BUDGET IMPASSE (824 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: WHAT, EXACTLY, IS THIS MILLENNIUM COMMISSION? (934 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: MASTER OF RECOVERY EXPECTS SCRUTINY: A CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO DEBT DOES NOT RULE OUT A NEW PHASE OF GROWTH, WRITES ROBERT CORZINE (874 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: FILMS FOR 1996 (310 words) MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES: BIG IDEAS, BIG BOOKS: SEVEN WISE MEN GIVE THEIR OPINIONS ON THE CHALLENGES COMPANIES ARE LIKELY TO FACE IN 1996 (1107 words) MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES: A PRODUCT OF POETRY: RUPERT MORRIS WONDERS HOW FAMOUS VERSE COULD BE USED IN ADVERTISING (738 words) MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES: LIQUID THERAPY FOR THE NEW YEAR (889 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: HOTELIER'S STARCK CHOICE: IAN SCHRAGER'S HOTELS ARE FOR THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD CHINTZ BUT WANT SOMETHING DIFFERENT, SAYS ALICE RAWSTHORN (1125 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: BANGKOK GETS TOUGH ON MOTORISTS (378 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: POBOX AND THE MAGIC COOKIE (955 words) MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES: HOME SHOPPING TAKES A TUMBLE FROM ITS TROLLEY: ENTHUSIASTIC PREDICTIONS OF A COUCH-POTATO FUTURE WERE PREMATURE, WRITES WINSTON FLETCHER (1407 words) MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES: KICKING OFF THIS US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION YEAR (243 words) ARTS & LEISURE: GREEN TURNS DARK FOR THE STRUGGLING GOLF CLUB PRO (938 words) ARTS & LEISURE: YEAR OF THE MILLENNIAL RE-THINK (813 words) FINANCE: UK COMPANIES (70 words) ARTS & LEISURE: MAN OF MUSIC WITH PERIOD APPEAL: ANDREW CLARK TALKS TO THE CONDUCTOR WHO CHALLENGES OUR ASSUMPTIONS AND OPENS OUR EARS TO THE PAST (1433 words) ARTS & LEISURE: TELEVISION (166 words) ARTS & LEISURE: TALES FROM ARABIA: THEATRE (419 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: AN ABSENCE OF INFLATION: THE FEELGOOD FACTOR IS SET TO REMAIN ELUSIVE IN 1996, SAY MARTIN WEALE AND GARRY YOUNG (1133 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: NEITHER BOOM NOR BUST: CONDITIONS ARE NOT RIGHT FOR SHARPLY LOWER US INTEREST RATES, SAYS STEPHEN S. ROACH (1075 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: WAYS TO VIEW SUPPORT FOR STEELMAKING PLANT (206 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: CANADIAN PEOPLE CAUGHT IN THE TRAPPER'S SNARE (212 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: BREWING UP CONTROVERSY (88 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: DIAGNOSING MIDDLE-CLASS ANGST (296 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: OBSTACLES FACING THE SPREAD OF DEMOCRACY (176 words) UK NEWS: WHEN POLITICS REPLACES POLICY (671 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: ITALY AND THE EU PRESIDENCY (669 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: EUROPE UNLOCKED FOR DEALERS: ON THE FIRST DAY OF TRADING UNDER NEW RULES BREAKING DOWN EU BORDERS, JOHN GAPPER AND RICHARD LAPPER ASSESS WHO THE WINNERS AND LOSERS WILL BE (1410 words) FINANCE: NATWEST SEEKS TOP GUN (928 words) OVERSEAS NEWS: EU STATES SLOW TO ADOPT DIRECTIVE ON INVESTMENT: ONLY SEVEN COUNTRIES READY FOR CROSS-BORDER REFORM (497 words) UK NEWS: CHANGES SOUGHT IN TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY (325 words) UK NEWS: PENSION FUNDS RAISE RETURNS BUT MISS OUT ON BIG US GAINS (420 words) FINANCE: GOING FOR GROWTH: THE LEX COLUMN (1054 words) FINANCE: CHRISTMAS BRINGS CHEER TO TRADING STATEMENTS: UK RETAILERS (300 words) FINANCE: GREENBURY GUIDELINES WILL BE PUT TO THE TEST: OTHER COMPANIES (667 words) FINANCE: FORTE TO EXPAND THROUGH MERIDIEN (473 words) FINANCE: NEW LOOK RETAILER SOLD TO INSTITUTIONS FOR POUNDS 170M (373 words) FINANCE: LONDON BRACES ITSELF FOR A REPO REVOLUTION: AN OPEN MARKET IN SALE AND REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS FOR UK GOVERNMENT BONDS STARTS TODAY (887 words) FINANCE: DISNEY AIMS TO PUMP UP THE VOLUME (375 words) FINANCE: DANA PETROLEUM PLANS LISTING AND SEEKS POUNDS 16M (98 words) FINANCE: MEDIOBANCA TO GIVE FERFIN OFFER TERMS: NEWS DIGEST (661 words) FINANCE: VICTORS AND VICTIMS OF BOARDROOM UPHEAVAL: TIM BURT LOOKS AT THE HIGH NUMBER OF COMPANIES STARTING THE YEAR WITH A CHANGE OF LEADERSHIP (479 words) FINANCE: NATIONWIDE LOOKS TO LIFE OPERATION (386 words) FINANCE: FRENCH BANK SEEKS SHORT-TERM FINANCE (340 words) FINANCE: HYUNDAI TO ACCELERATE DECENTRALISATION: SOUTH KOREA'S BIGGEST FAMILY-RUN 'CHAEBOL' IS MOVING WITH THE TIMES, SAYS JOHN BURTON (736 words) FINANCE: NETSCAPE LEADS THE FASHION FOR US NEW ISSUES: FT WRITERS LOOK AT THE BEST PERFORMING SHARES AROUND THE WORLD IN 1995 (581 words) FINANCE: THOMAS LOCKER'S BID FOR PENTRE ATTACKED (178 words) MARKETS: ANXIOUS EYES FOCUS ON COPPER (330 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: ASSESSING THE POWER OF MULTINATIONALS: GLOBAL INVESTOR / TONY JACKSON IN NEW YORK (963 words) FEATURES & OPTIONS: TIME TO REWRITE INFLATION TARGET: ECONOMICS NOTEBOOK / ROBERT CHOTE (920 words) MARKETS: ZAMBIA'S STOCK MARKET (529 words) MARKETS: TRADERS PIN HOPES ON DOLLAR (306 words) MARKETS: LOOKING AHEAD TO BRIGHTER PROSPECTS: THE EMERGING INVESTOR / JOHN PITT (916 words) MARKETS: INVESTORS FACE A DEARTH OF ECONOMIC DATA (221 words) MARKETS: STRATEGY (887 words) MARKETS: YEAR EXPECTED TO OPEN ON POSITIVE NOTE (238 words) FINANCE: CVRD MANDATE SUGGESTS END OF THE GOLDEN 3% FEE: INTERNATIONAL OFFERINGS (804 words) MARKETS: WHILE THE COUNTRY'S FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (228 words) MARKETS: A STEP AWAY FROM CITY TRADITION: OPEN GILT REPO TRADING (1117 words) MARKETS: THE GERMAN BOND MARKET (227 words) MARKETS: ALL EYES IN THE UK GOVERNMENT (223 words) MARKETS: INVESTORS ASSESS THEIR STRATEGY FOR 1996: GOVERNMENT BONDS (852 words) MARKETS: US TREASURIES PASSED A MILESTONE (217 words) FINANCE: OTHER ECONOMIC NEWS (181 words) SHORTS: PUBLIC PROCUREMENT DEAL (797 words) FINANCE: UK GILT REPO MARKET OPENS (920 words) CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:THE CHART SHOWSThe chart shows the member currencies of the exchange rate mechanismmeasured against the weakest currency in the system. Most of thecurrencies are permitted to fluctuate within 15 per cent of agreedcentral rates against the other members of the mechanism. Theexceptions are the D-Mark and the guilder which move in a 2.25 per centband.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:AILING KING FAHD HANDS OVER POWER TO SAUDI PRINCE: MOVE ENDSSPECULATION OVER SUCCESSION BUT FUELS DOUBT ON RULER'S HEALTH   By ROULA KHALAF, Middle East CorrespondentSaudi Arabia's King Fahd handed over the running of the governmentyesterday to his half-brother, Crown Prince Abdullah, in a developmentlikely to raise further doubts about the king's health but endspeculation about succession in the kingdom.A royal order carried by the official Saudi Press Agency said the73-year-old monarch, who is believed to have suffered a minor strokelast November, was handing over 'management of government affairs' tothe crown prince while he recuperates.Prince Abdullah, who is two years younger than the king, is deputyprime minister and head of the powerful 57,000-man National Guard. Heis seen as more conservative and less internationally minded than theking, though diplomats said he was unlikely to change the kingdom'sforeign and economic policies.Saudi Arabia is the world's largest oil exporter, and a close ally ofthe US. The decree said the prince would take over while the kingenjoyed 'rest and recuperation'.The decision makes official a role the prince has played since the kingfell ill.Although he will officially now chair cabinet meetings and representthe king on official visits, the move may prove temporary if the king'shealth improves, diplomats said yesterday.'It sounds more like a technical move, a kind of regency,' said onediplomat in the kingdom. 'The king is still king. What we don't know ishow much he will still be involved and this will depend on his health.'The king left hospital on December 8 after suffering what wasofficially termed a 'sudden indisposition' but is known to have been astroke.Diabetic and overweight, King Fahd was seen on television yesterdayaided by a walking stick as he received Crown Prince Abdullah andPrince Sultan, the defence minister.Saudi officials yesterday suggested the move was aimed at putting anend to speculation of a power struggle within the kingdom.The talk had been fuelled in recent months by two big shocks. The firstwas the monarch's illness, the second a car bomb on November 13 whichdestroyed a US-staffed Saudi National Guard communications centre inRiyadh, the capital. theIslamic fundamentalists opposed to the regime have latched on to theseevents from their base in London and claimed a power struggle hasbroken out in the royal family.They viewed the bomb attack on the national guards as an attempt toundermine Crown Prince Abdullah.Yesterday's move preceded the unveiling of Saudi Arabia's 1996 budget.Early indications suggested the kingdom would continue public sectorretrenchment, maintaining expenditures at SR150bn (Dollars 25.7bn), thesame as in 1995.Faced with a cash crunch resulting from the collapse of oil prices andthe cost of the 1990-91 Gulf war, Saudi Arabia has since 1994 embarkedon a policy of cutting government expenditures and raising non-oilrevenues.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:TORIES BRACED FOR MINORITY GOVERNMENT: SENIOR MINISTERS ADMIT MAJOR MAYLOSE COMMONS MAJORITY BEFORE END OF 1996   By JAMES BLITZ, Lobby CorrespondentGovernment ministers yesterday contemplated the probability that MrJohn Major will lead a minority administration later this year, amidfears that the Conservatives can expect to lose more seats in the Houseof Commons.As left and rightwing Tories indulged in mutual recriminations over therecent defection of Miss Emma Nicholson, MP for Devon West andTorridge, to the Liberal Democrats, senior ministers privately admittedthat the government could expect to lose its Commons majority beforethe end of 1996 - and that it may rely for survival on the support ofthe nine Ulster Unionist MPs.Ministers played down claims by one left-of-centre Tory that at leastsix other MPs were prepared to defect to opposition parties. Yetseveral admitted that by-elections triggered by the deaths of MPs wouldput the Tories into a Commons minority this year. The departure of MissNicholson means the government can now expect two pending by-electionsto cut its Commons majority to just one, if Sir Richard Body, whoremains outside the Tory whip, is excluded from calculations.However, despite increasing signs that his party may have to rely ontheir support in any No Confidence motion, Sir Patrick Mayhew, NorthernIreland secretary, insisted there would be 'no special treatment' forthe UUP.'I recognise no difference in the essential equation by reason ofevents in the last few days or even a longer period,' he told BBC Radio4's Today programme.Other ministers, however, were already contemplating the need forconcessions to the UUP, with one privately conceding that relationswith the Ulster parties would be 'critical' to the government'sfortunes.Calculations about the government's majority coincided with signs thatthe delicate truce between left and rightwing Tories appeared to betottering in the wake of the defection.Mr Michael Portillo, defence secretary, launched a strong attack onMiss Nicholson, rubbishing her claims that the reason for her defectionhad been the party's shift to the right.'It is very silly to say that the party has tilted to the right - thatis completely incredible,' he told BBC radio. 'I think the party isprobably much the same. We have a broad breadth of opinion within theparty.'Mr John Redwood, last year's beaten Tory leadership challenger, alsoattacked the idea of a rightward shift by the government, claiming MrMajor's cabinet reshuffle last July had promoted left of centre MPs.However, Sir Edward Heath, former prime minister, rounded on MrPortillo, claiming the party had clearly taken an anti-European stanceand that Miss Nicholson's defection should be heeded. 'There is nodoubt at all that the party has moved to the right,' he said. 'Thatcan't be denied . . . it may be denied, but if it is denied it is afalse denial.'Mr Peter Temple-Morris, a pro-European backbencher, also demanded ahalt to the 'torrent of personal abuse' heaped on Miss Nicholson andcalled on ministers to rise above the warfare between the party'swings.'I would just like them to behave as if they were one cabinet, visiblefor all to see and not in such a way where undoubtedly the unhappinessproduced has led to two defections in three months. We cannot affordany more and I trust we will not have any more,' he said. Tory warning,Page 6 Editorial Comment, Page 15Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:TAX SELF-ASSESSMENT WILL HIT SMALL BUSINESS, SAYS LABOUR   By JAMES BLITZThe Treasury's plan to allow self-employed managers of small businessesto assess their own income tax liabilities will come under a strongattack from the Labour party this week amid claims that it will addsignificantly to company costs.Labour claims self-assessment will place new burdens on smallbusinesses running into hundreds of millions of pounds. It estimatesthe scheme will create extra recurrent costs of Pounds 130m to Pounds250m a year for self-employed business managers and mean big increasesin red tape.Mr Andrew Smith, Labour's shadow chief secretary, is also concerned thescheme contains a 'hidden tax bombshell'. He said yesterday theintroduction of self-assessment later this year would increase theTreasury's tax take by some Pounds 850m in 1997-98.Labour is expected to raise its objections to the scheme in the Commonson Thursday when the Finance Bill is published.Mr Smith said the increase in tax revenue would occur because theself-employed would make their assessments next year on the basis ofcurrent-year activities rather than those for the previous year.Because of anticipated increases in inflation and economic growth, thechange to current-year assessment would allow the Treasury to take morein tax from the self-employed.'While the principle of self-assessment makes sense, the way thegovernment is going about it on the current deadlines is a disaster,'said Mr Smith.He revealed that Labour would call for aspects of self-assessment to bedelayed to avoid confusion.But Mr Smith would give no guarantee that Labour would abandon theself-assessment plans, arguing that a new government might create newdifficulties by reversing changes of such magnitude.A spokesman for the Inland Revenue confirmed that the government wouldreceive the additional Pounds 850m in 1997-98. But he said it was a'one-off shift' that would not be repeated in future years.'Overall, self-assessment amounts to a clearer system with moredefinite deadlines - and one which people will find easier to operate,'he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SHORTS:THOUSANDS HIT BY WATER SHORTAGES AFTER SUDDEN THAWA sharp rise in temperatures following freezing weather over Christmasleft thousands of UK residents facing water shortages and flooded homesas mains and domestic pipes burst. Many water companies called in extrastaff to cope with calls to stop flooding. Water rationing wasintroduced for more than 100,000 consumers in Northern Ireland andflooding affected over 500,000 homes in Strathclyde. Page 7Forte, the UK's biggest hotels group, is expected to announce plans fora further 26 Meridien Hotels in a final defence document against thePounds 3.3bn hostile bid from Granada, the television, catering andleisure group. Page 17Terrorist insurance reform urged:Insurers are calling for reform of the government-backed terroristinsurance scheme, introduced after the 1992 IRA attack on the City,amid fears that some companies may be inadequately covered. Page 16New Look, the privately-owned fashion retailer founded by entrepreneurTom Singh was sold to a venture capital buy-out group for about Pounds170m. Page 17Benefits support Britain's poorest:The poorest 20 per cent of households get almost three-quarters oftheir income from state benefits, government statisticians have found.Page 6Countries not ready for EU directive:Only seven of the European Union's 15 member states were ready toimplement a directive designed to allow investment groups to operatemore easily across national borders, which came into effect yesterday.Page 16; Guide to 1996, Page 5; Editorial comment, Page 15; Guide tothe week, Page 32Scalfaro calls for Dini decision:Italian president Oscar Luigi Scalfaro (left) appealed to politicalparties to decide how long the government of Lamberto Dini should lastand to give a firm calendar for the life of the current parliament. Thehead of state's request followed his rejection of Mr Dini'sresignation, tendered last week. The president insisted parliament mustdecide whether Mr Dini should resign. Page 2Returns rise on pension funds:UK pension funds gave investment returns averaging 19 per cent lastyear, as they recovered from a poor performance in 1994, a survey bythe WM Company revealed. Page 16Fishing patrol in disputed area:A UK Fisheries Protection Vessel patrolled the controversial Irish Boxfishing area, between western England and Ireland, on the first daythat Spanish trawlers were legally entitled to work in the disputedzone. Page 7Chocolate sales drop:Consumers tried to cut down on their sugar in 1995, according to theannual survey for the chocolate and sweets markets carried out byCadbury-Schweppes, the confectionery company. Page 6Nationwide, the UK's second-largest building society, is hoping toreduce its dependence on mortgage-related financial services with newlife assurance and unit trust subsidiaries. Page 18Western hostages 'in good health':Four westerners, including two Britons, held hostage by separatists inKashmir are in good health after nearly six months in captivity, Indianauthorities said.Boxer arrested after fireworks accident:Former boxing champion Chris Eubank was arrested and released on bailafter two women were injured during a new year fireworks display heheld on Brighton's seafront. More than 100 people were arrested at newyear celebrations throughout the country.Police hunt armed gang:Police were searching for a four-man gang after a community centrecaretaker was killed and two other men injured while trying to stop amugging in Bristol's St Paul's area.European Monetary System:The Spanish peseta climbed a further place in the EMS grid, in anenvironment where some investors favoured high-yielding currencies. Theorder of currencies in the EMS grid, and the spread between strongestand weakest, was otherwise unchanged. Foreign exchanges in general werevery quiet in the run-up to new year. Currencies, Page 24Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:WALDEGRAVE GETS TOUGH ON SPENDING TO FINANCE TAX CUTS   By ROBERT PESTON, Political editorRemorseless pressure to bring down UK public spending to finance nextyear's widely expected tax cuts has been promised by Mr WilliamWaldegrave, chief secretary to the Treasury, in a new year interview.The chief secretary said he had a long-term aim of seeing publicspending fall to around 35 per cent of gross domestic product, comparedto about 42 per cent at present.He said this should not be seen 'against the background of a slavishtarget of numbers' but because of a 'genuine belief that too much isdone (by government) and a good deal of it is act-ually hindering theeconomy'.His views on the potential for shrinking the government's share of theeconomy are strikingly different from those of Mr Kenneth Clarke, thechancellor, who is not persuaded that there is scope to get theproportion much below 40 per cent of GDP without damaging publicservices.There is also a significant difference between Mr Waldegrave and MrClarke on European monetary union. Mr Clarke believes that the decisionto participate in a single currency is primarily an economic one.However, Mr Waldegrave said the decision to join was primarily 'an actof political will and choice'.He also hinted that Mr John Major's successful campaign to persuade theEU to study the implications of two-tier monetary union - with only asmall minority of countries joining the proposed single currency - ismotivated by a desire to delay the project.'I do think that it is possible to imagine technical questions whichwill be raised which will worry those who are going in very much,' MrWaldegrave said. 'The damage from a badly established union will bequite considerable.'The chief secretary also made it clear that he will contest anycriticism he may face in the Scott report on arms sales toIraq, due to be published in the next few weeks. Leaked drafts of thereport criticised Mr Waldegrave for failing as a Foreign Officeminister in the late 1980s to announce an apparent softening in thegovernment's policy on the arms embargo with Iraq.Mr Waldegrave, who has made further submissions to Lord Justice Scott,said: 'My conscience is entirely clear.' He would only considerresigning if he could be persuaded that his 'memory of the wholebusiness is so wrong'.He added that it would not only be his memory that was at fault butthat of 'the whole Foreign Office'.On next year's public expenditure negotiations, he said he would startvisiting ministries with a view to securing cuts in the early spring.One of the initial targets of his scrutiny will be the Pounds 15bn costto government of public bodies at arm's length from ministries andquangos. He said he was looking for savings of several hundred millionpounds in their running costs. He will also maintain pressure onspending departments to substitute private finance forgovernment-financed capital projects. 'In terms of extra cash flowthere is probably more to come from that,' he said.His other target will be to step up the government's fight againstfraud, especially in the social security budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:CHIRAC CONCEDES DIALOGUE NEEDED ON REFORMS   By ANDREW JACK in Paris   PARISMr Jacques Chirac, the French president, made a sharp break with thepractice of his predecessor, Mr Francois Mitterrand, on Sunday night byraising the political content of the country's traditional New Year'sEve address from its head of state.In an address lasting nearly 15 minutes and broadcast on mosttelevision news channels, Mr Chirac devoted much of his time todefending his decisions over the last few months and how they tied into his election campaign promises.He made patriotic play of France's historical mission and globalimportance, and its continued commitment to brotherhood, tolerance andjustice.Referring to the widespread strike action since last November, whichwas prompted by his government's proposed social security reforms, hecalled the resulting period one of 'crisis'.In his strongest statement of support for Mr Alain Juppe, he praisedthe 'courage and determination' of the prime minister, as well as therest of the government.However, in a sign of implicit criticism, he said that one lesson to bedrawn from the experience was the need for greater dialogue andconsultation - something which he acknowledged had not beencharacteristic of France in the past.Another lesson - in a jibe at his political predecessors - was that 'itis no longer possible to govern as we have for the last 20 years' withonly piecemeal reforms. He stressed the need for a country able to copewith 'global competition'.He said his aim remained to build a 'new France' based on justice,unity and resonsibility, and his top priority remained to reduceunemployment - which remains at more than 11.5 per cent.He placed less emphasis than in a previous television interview lastOctober on fiscal rigour, but talked about the need to set up acreative, productive economy. He pledged that taxes - which have risensince his election - would be cut as soon as possible.President Chirac made time to discuss the French commitment to Europe -a point brought home by the EU's flag hanging alongside that of his owncountry on the wall behind him.However, he also stressed the need for change in the administration ofthe EU so that it was 'more attentive' to the daily needs of theFrench, including their 'social hopes' and the 'real priority' ofemployment.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:BEACON FOR EMERGING DEMOCRACYDemocracy can be a baffling business. In Soviet times, Russia's voterscould vote for only one party whose political philosophy was force-fedto them from birth. In last month's parliamentary elections they had achoice of 43 parties with each one claiming to have the only answer toRussia's woes.Such a drastic democratic upheaval has clearly left many Russiansbewildered and may help explain why more than one-fifth of them optedfor the familiar and voted for the return of the Communists. But theelections also proved an education for Russia's political leaders whoare now scrambling to learn the lessons before the all-importantpresidential elections scheduled in six months' time.The Magnitogorsk Worker, the local newspaper for the Urals industrialtown founded as part of Stalin's industrialisation drive, encapsulatedmany of the confusions and controversies that came to dominate thecampaign. In so doing it reflected, in microcosm, the social pain andideological uncertainties that continue to bedevil Russia.The newspaper, founded in 1930 and still proudly bearing a Sovietemblem on its front page urging the proletariat of the world to unite,provided full, lively, and generally fair coverage of the campaign,encouraging those who see the media as an important factor in thedevelopment of a healthy civil society.Like most of Russia's local newspapers, the Magnitogorsk Worker couldhave been under enormous pressure from many quarters. The list of sixparliamentary candidates for the city seat included the deputy head ofthe local administration and a director of the steel combine whichemploys 60,000 workers and dominates the region's economy.But Mr Georgy Tikhonov, the chief editor, argued that the newspaper'srole was simply to provide an objective forum for the debate andencourage readers to participate in the vote. 'This newspaper does notagitate for or against particular candidates. . . it agitates forsomething else: for the widest possibility for people to discuss openlyone or another candidacy and the course of the campaign itself. Read,think, and make your choice]' the newspaper stated.In comparison with most western newspapers, the Magnitogorsk Workerprovided few reports and opinions from its journalists but carriedextensive personal contributions from the candidates and scores ofletters from its readers.Mr Alexander Pochinok, the incumbent deputy who represented the thenpro-government Russia's Choice party in the previous vote in 1993, wasthe dominant figure in the campaign for one of Russia's 225directly-elected seats.Although he supported the government's harsh monetary policies whichmany critics blamed for Russia's social ills, Mr Pochinok boldlylaunched his campaign by concentrating on social problems and promisingto improve the lot of the elderly.But his attempt to seize the mantle of social concern was fiercelycontested by the Communist candidate who wrote an emotional tiradeagainst the government's policies and promised a restoration of thecertainties of the Soviet era.These themes were echoed in the opinions of the newspapers' readers whoexpressed impassioned and disparate views.'During the war, millions were evacuated here and resettled. They weregiven work and a roof but now they have been thrown out. Every honestperson will vote for the Communists,' said one.'I do not want to return to the miserable plague-stricken camp of thepast but I fear the thorny road forward to civilisation,' commentedanother.One reader planned not participate in the elections at all given theywere merely a 'political spectacle distracting the country from itstrue problems' while another con demned the newspaper itself for givingtoo much space to the 'so-called democrats'.The Magnitogorsk Worker made clear it was aware of some dirty electoraltactics during the campaign but did not identify who was responsiblefor them in order not to prejudice opinions. In the week before thevote, it carried an item about a pensioner who had been contacted bysomeone claiming to represent the local telephone company. 'Votecorrectly and your telephone bill will be paid in advance for a year,'the mysterious caller promised.On the eve of the elections, the newspaper urged its readers to go tothe polls although it recognised that many voters were still confusedby the extraordinary range of parties on the ballot paper.The results were slow to trickle in and the Magnitogorsk Worker did notpublish the preliminary outcome until three days after the poll. Theelectors of Magnitogorsk had returned the pro-market Mr Pochinok astheir local candidate but they had also lodged a strong protest votebacking Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky's ultra-nationalist Liberal Democraticparty and the Communists in the simultaneous ballot for the seatsassigned on the basis of proportional representation.In all, 39 parties - including Russia's Choice - failed to garner morethan the 5 per cent of the vote required to win any of the 225 seats inthe 450-strong parliament allocated by proportional representation. MrPochinok, for example, has been elected as a representative of a partywhich will be unable to form its own faction in parliament.One voter told the newspaper: 'Voting is most democratic. But you mustwrite that Hitler also came to power in Germany by democratic means. Wemust go forward to the presidential elections but people must bevigilant.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:SCALFARO SEEKS CLARITY ON POLLS   By ROBERT GRAHAM in Rome   ROMEPresident Oscar Luigi Scalfaro has appealed to Italy's politicalparties to come forward with clear ideas on how long the government ofMr Lamberto Dini should last and to give a firm calendar for the lifeof the current parliament.The head of state's appeal was contained in his annual messagedelivered on New Year's eve.The highly political message was delivered in advance of this week'smeeting of the parliamentary group leaders to fix the terms of a debateon the future of the government following the resignation tendered lastSaturday by Mr Dini, the prime minister.As expected President Scalfaro rejected the resignation, insistingparliament must decide. In his message, President Scalfaro reinforcedthis point. 'In a few days the debate in the chamber of deputies willprovide the right opportunity to know precisely what the variouspolitical groups want and to see whether a consensus emerges that isboth clear to the general public and useful to the head of state.'The debate is likely to be staged next week, allowing further time forthe political leaders to negotiate behind the scenes. Until now none ofthe main political parties has come forward with a proposal either forthe continuance of the Dini government or a date for general elections.But Mr Dini, who has been in close touch with the main party leaders,appeared confident over the weekend that he would remain in office.Backed by President Scalfaro, he has argued strongly that the countrycannot afford a government crisis and a general election during Italy'ssix-month presidency of the European Union which lasts until June.Despite underlining the importance of parliament, the tone throughoutPresident Scalfaro's 35-minute New Year's message was of a man whointended to use his limited constitutional powers to the full. He madehis own preferences plain.He went out of his way to praise the 11 month premiership of Mr Dini -so indicating his desire to see the former deputy director of the Bankof Italy remain at the helm during Italy's EU presidency. He also saidhe would like to see the current legislature carry out a proper reformof the constitution in time for the celebration in 1998 of the 50thanniversary of its introduction. This was seen as a none too subtlehint that parliament should not be dissolved before institutionalreform has been tackled.Yesterday several political parties took exception to what theyregarded as President Scalfaro's overtly partisan stance. In particularthe president's message was attacked by the rightwing NationalAlliance, by the Greens and by Reconstructed Communism, which wasformed from the hardline members of the former Communist party.Editorial comment, Page 15Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:PARTIES WEIGH UP RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY   By ROBERT GRAHAMPolitical decisions in Italy are rarely made in a hurry.No one wishes to assume the responsibility - and risk - of the firstmove. This is why the politicians will take their time in deciding thefate of Prime Minister Lamberto Dini's government even though they havehad ample notice of the administration's limited duration.Mr Dini tendered his resignation on Saturday to President Oscar LuigiScalfaro, after approving an additional financial package for the 1996budget. This was his last self-appointed task.President Scalfaro has now thrown the responsibility back to parliamentto decide what should happen next. This will take the form of aparliamentary debate later this week or early next week.Having acquired a taste of power over the last 11 months, Mr Dini ismore than willing to stay on. Moreover, President Scalfaro, who has thefinal say on a date for the next general election, is clearly anxiousthe former director general of the Bank of Italy should remain inoffice.President Scalfaro believes it is too late for a big political shake-upnow that Italy has the responsibility (since January 1) of thepresidency of the European Union. He thus wants Mr Dini to remain primeminister - probably with a revamped cabinet - for the duration of thesix-month presidency. But this seems to be part of a broader strategyby Mr Scalfaro, a former Christian Democrat interior minister, to allowparliament to survive until 1997, thus permitting more time for arecreation of the centre grouping which dominated post-war Italianpolitics until 1992.The parliamentary debate is expected to focus on three broad scenarios:* Mr Dini heads the government to ensure a stable EU presidency andpermit elections around June.* Mr Dini presides over a caretaker government with elections held inlate February or early March.* A broad-based government is formed lasting up to two years to permita programme of big institutional reforms.The first scenario involves several variations. For instance, Mr Dinicould seek to maintain the backing of the centre-left parties, headedby the Party of the Democratic Left (PDS) who supported his governmentof non-parliamentarians all last year. This would provide a fragilemajority in parliament unless a prior understanding was reached withthe rightwing alliance headed by Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the former primeminister. The government would be little more than a caretaker, whilethe parties indulged in a six-month election campaign.Alternatively Mr Dini, who has no political base of his own, could tryto broaden the backing for the government to include the small centreparties in the rightwing alliance. This would have the advantage oflessening the exposure of the centre-left as the government's mainbacker and would provide some chance of parliament pushing through afew reforms in the next few months. It would also help offset thedestabilising effect of the populist Northern League, which, withalmost 80 deputies, retains considerable power to swing votes.The second scenario is straight-forward and would mean parliament beingdissolved shortly after the debate on the government's future. Mr Diniwould remain in office but with no real executive power. Given that itnormally takes a good six weeks to two months to form a governmentafter an election, Italy would be without an effective administrationprobably until May.The third scenario is the most complex. At a minimum it would require acommitment from the PDS, some of the centre parties and the bulk of MrBerlusconi's rightwing alliance to back the idea of carrying out overthe next two years important institutional reforms such asstrengthening the prime minister's position and ending the duplicationof the bicameral system. This would be done either by allowing a'technical' government to continue as the executive while a specialbicameral commission was formed to draw up the reforms; or a newgovernment would be formed, drawing ministers from the partiessupporting it. The onus would then be on the government to draw up thereforms.Mr Berlusconi has been exploring this idea of a broad-based governmentover the Christmas break. His scheduled trial later this month forcorruption probably played a part in his change of mind. But the PDS issceptical of his chances, and the rightwing National Alliance (AN), hismain ally, is openly hostile to the idea. The parties themselves arechanging too fast for a broad-based alliance to survive and be useful.The PDS has the power to force elections simply by refusing to continuebacking Mr Dini; but of late Mr Massimo D'Alema, the party leader, hasdropped his insistence on an early vote. This is because thePDS-dominated centre-left is increasingly divided on strategy and besetby doubts about being led in an election by the uncharasmatic Mr RomanoProdi, the Bologna academic and former head of Iri, the state holdingcompany.The centre-left staked much on striking an electoral deal with amovement headed by Mr Antonio Di Pietro, the former Milan magistrate.But Mr Di Pietro may now be prevented from entering politics because ofhis own problems with the law that have arisen as aresult ofinvestigations over his abuse of office before he joined the Milanmagistrates' anti-corruption team.Against this background, the simplest option for the political partiesis to allow Mr Dini to stay with the excuse that Italy needs anidentifiable government to play its full role as EU chairman. This is aconvenient fig-leaf behind which the politicians can hide theirconfusion. But it will merely postpone the day of reckoning at theballot-box and is unlikely to provide an authoritative government, evenif Mr Dini has proven to be a skilled and ambitious operator of thesystem.Robert GrahamBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:SAMPAIO LEADS AS PORTUGAL NEARS VOTE   By PETER WISE in Lisbon   LISBONCampaigning for Portugal's presidential election on January 14 beganthis week with Mr Jorge Sampaio, the Socialist candidate, showing aclear lead over Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, prime minister for 10 yearsuntil his centre-right Social Democrats were beaten in October'sgeneral election.Mr Sampaio, a former Socialist party leader who stepped down as mayorof Lisbon to run for the presidency, was given 41.6 per cent of thevote in a newspaper poll yesterday, compared with 34.9 per cent for MrCavaco Silva. A weekend poll based on a broader sample of more recentinterviews gave them 50 per cent and 34 per cent respectively.Since the return of democracy in 1974, Portugal has consistentlyelected presidents from the party opposed to the government so thateach acts as a counterweight to the other. Mr Cavaco Silva says thatPortugal will 'capsize' if all political weight is shifted to theSocialists, who are also dominant in local government.However, the polls indicate that most voters are inclined to provideadditional support for the Socialists, who are four seats short of aparliamentary majority, by electing Mr Sampaio. Under Portugal's 'semi-presidentialist' constitution, the president has the power to dissolveparliament and call an early election when governments run intodifficulties.Mr Antonio Guterres, the prime minister, is campaigning for the backingof a Socialist president. This would help his minority government meetelection commitments both to spend more on social reforms and exercisethe budgetary discipline required to meet the convergence targets forEuropean economic and monetary union.Ministers say Mr Cavaco Silva would seize the first opportunity todismiss the government if he won the election, although he has pledgedto co-operate fully with the Socialists in the interests of stability.The former prime minister's attempt at a transition from an aloofdecision-maker to the kind of benevolent figure of tolerance andconcern that Mr Ma rio Soares, the outgoing Socialist president, hasmade popular is proving difficult to achieve.Despite popular respect for his integrity, support for Mr Sampaio, aless charismatic leader, appears to be based more on disapproval of hisrival, whose government had grown increasingly unpopular before itsdefeat, and on backing for Mr Guterres.The government is avoiding decisive measures, including thepresentation of the 1996 budget, until after the presidential vote. Ithopes the political honeymoon that followed its election can beprolonged long enough to benefit Mr Sampaio.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:RUSSIA PLEDGES TOUGH LINE ON ECONOMY   By JOHN THORNHILL in Moscow   MOSCOWRussia's economics ministry yesterday pledged it would continue topursue a harsh monetary policy designed to stabilise the economy andcut the monthly rate of inflation to below 2 per cent despite thestrong anti-government protest vote in last month's parliamentaryelections.However, the ministry's tough stance, contained in an annual economicforecast, was seemingly at odds with the the softer rhetoric employedby President Boris Yeltsin in his address to the nation on New Year'sEve.'The main task for 1996 is that those in Russia who today are poorshould begin to live better,' he said, promising the government wouldrectify the problem of delayed wage and pension payments which hascaused great social distress.Mr Yeltsin also lashed out at the corruption in financial circles whichwas responsible for diverting money intended for social spending.Last week, Mr Yeltsin criticised the economics ministry, employingrhetoric reminiscent of the Stalinist era to denounce 'saboteurs' whowere responsible for undermining the reform programme.He promised to increase payments to pensioners by compensating them forsavings eroded by the hyper-inflation of the early reform years.Mr Yeltsin's pledges have led some economists to fear that thegovernment may consider loosening its monetary policy pushing upinflation early this year. The government may come under intensepressure to increase spending on social protection to curry electoralfavour before the presidential election in June.But ministers have repeatedly argued that there is no contradictionbetween tight monetary policies and a rise in the standard of living.* Russia confirmed that it had missed the New Year deadline fordestroying thousands of tanks and other military hardware beyond theUral Mountains and said Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan hadalso failed to meet the treaty commitment, Reuter reports from Moscow.General Dmitry Kharchenko said Moscow wanted to push the December 31,1995 deadline pledged by the Soviet Union in 1991 back to the end of1998. The pledge had cleared the way for ratification of theConventional Forces in Europe treaty.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:PACT TO OPEN UP STATE CONTRACTS: INTERNATIONAL NEWS DIGESTPublic procurement contracts valued at several billion dollars a yearwill be thrown open to international competition under a World TradeOrganisation agreement which took effect yesterday.The agreement covers more countries and purchasers - and applies to awider range of contracts - than existing rules agreed under the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade 15 years ago. In addition to coveringservices for the first time, the new rules extend to procurement bysub-central purchasers, such as states, provinces, departments andutilities, as well as to central governments.Though not all WTO members are obliged to participate in the agreement,it has been ratified by more than 20 governments, including the US, theEuropean Union's 15 members, Japan, South Korea and Switzerland.Singapore and several other countries plan to subscribe to it.The accord excludes defence contracts, EU telecoms and the US regionaland urban public transport sector.The complex new rules set a variety of thresholds, denominated inSpecial Drawing Rights, above which contracts must be opened tocompetition. The threshold for central government procurement isSDR130,000 (Pounds 125,000), for sub-central purchasers aboutSDR200,000, and for utilities roughly SDR400.000.The agreement also lays down specified tendering procedures, to ensurethat foreign bidders and foreign goods and services are treated on thesame basis as those in the purchaser's home country. Guy deJonquie'res, LondonQuake hits Indonesian islandA powerful earthquake measuring 7.0 on the open-ended Richter scaleshook Indonesia's Sulawesi island yesterday, destroying wooden housesand triggering tidal waves and aftershocks.Officials said the extent of damage along a remote isthmus, 38 miles atits widest, in central Sulawesi was unlikely to be known until todaybecause of poor communications. There were no immediate reports of lossof life.Information was slowed by a lack of telephone lines in the remote areabetween the towns of Palu, the provincial capital, and Tolitoli, to thenorth-east of Palu.Up to 1m people are believed to live in the 150-mile belt betweenTolitoli and Palu. Most of them live in narrow coastal strips separatedby mountains.Tremors and quakes are fairly common events in Indonesia. Butcasualties and damage are often minimal because of low populationdensities in many areas outside towns and cities. Reuter, JakartaWave of violence in CorsicaGunmen shot dead a Corsican nationalist and three bombs exploded on theFrench Mediterranean island yesterday, raising fears of a renewedvendetta between rival separatists.Gilbert Rossi, a 34-year-old member of the Cuncolta Naziunalistamovement, was killed by unknown attackers outside a restaurant duringNew Year celebrations in the port of Ajaccio in the south-west of theisland.Three bombs, including one at a flat owned by another Cuncolta member,went off in the town before dawn and police defused a fourth device. Noone was hurt in the explosions. Police said no one had claimedresponsibility for the killing or the blasts.The Cuncolta is linked to the hardline 'historic wing' of the outlawedCorsican National Liberation Front (FLNC).Rossi was the 13th nationalist to die since a bloody feud erupted lastyear between the FLNC and the rival Movement for Self-Determination(MPA), both demanding greater Corsican autonomy from France. Corsicahas been hit by more than a dozen bomb attacks since Christmas. Reuter,AjaccioGene cloning raises hopesA gene that has been linked with obesity has been cloned, a step thatbrings closer a new generation of treatments for the chronicallyoverweight.Two companies, Millennium of the US and Roche of Switzerland, describethe cloning - effectively the manufacture - of the 'ob' gene in thelatest issue of the journal Cell.The ob gene triggers the manufacture of a protein, leptin, which lastyear was been shown to affect the weight of mice with no significantside effects. But the relationship between leptin and weight in humanshas not yet been established precisely.The two companies claim to have narrowed research to the gene'sactivity in the brain, but further work is probably needed beforedevelopment of an obesity drug based on the ob gene could start.Last year, the US biotechnology company Amgen paid Dollars 20m for tothe Rockefeller Institute in New York, which first identified the gene,for the rights to products arising from it. Daniel Green, LondonBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:ZEROUAL PICKS LITTLE-KNOWN DIPLOMAT AS PM   By ROULA KHALAFAlgerian President Liamine Zeroual has chosen a little-known careerdiplomat as the country's new prime minister.Mr Zeroual, elected president in November, on Sunday named Mr AhmedOuyahia, his 43-year-old head of cabinet, to replace Mr Mokdad Sifi whohad been asked to stay on until the end of the year.Most Algerians met Mr Ouyahia, who comes from the Berber province ofTizi-Ouzou, for the first time when he appeared on state televisionlast July to read a statement telling them that the last round of talkswith the banned Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) had collapsed. The FIShas been battling the government since 1992. Mr Ouyahia is not believedto have taken a lead part in the negotiations.That he is among the youngest prime ministers the country has knownpoints to an attempt by Mr Zeroual to reach out to a younger generationin a country where more than 70 per cent of the people are under theage of 30. But Mr Ouyahia's appointment sheds little light on MrZeroual's post election politics.'Zeroual has opted for a safe pair of hands, a skilled functionaryrather than a political heavyweight,' said one Algerian expertyesterday. 'It means the composition of the government is not whatreally concerns him.'Mr Ouyahia's government is not expected to last longer than a yearbecause Mr Zeroual has promised legislative elections, although he hasyet to commit himself to a specific date.The prime minister's task will centre on overseeing economic reformsagreed with the International Monetary Fund and preparing for theelections.Mr Ouyahia is perhaps best known among his colleagues for arranging anaccord to end the conflict between Tuareg rebels and the Maligovernment in 1992, a task which won him recognition as a skilfulnegotiator.He was named ambassador to Mali to oversee implementation of theaccord, before becoming state secretary for co-operation and Maghrebaffairs in 1993.Although some experts have suggested the choice of a diplomat withnegotiating skills points to a determination on the part of thepresident to seek national reconciliation, any negotiations with theFIS or other opposition parties which opposed the presidential electionare likely to be conducted directly from the president's office ratherthan that of the prime minister.In a system in which the presidency enjoys wide powers, the primeminister's office is entrusted with more of a management role.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:JAPAN PUBLIC PRESSED ON LOAN BAILOUT   By GERARD BAKER in Tokyo   TOKYOMr Tomiichi Murayama, Japan's prime minster, has urged an increasinglysceptical Japanese public to accept the government's plan to spend morethan Y685bn (Pounds 4.37bn) in bailing out the country's failed housingloan companies.In a New Year message to the nation, Mr Murayama signalled the start ofwhat is likely to be a fierce political struggle over the bailout inthe new parliamentary session which begins later this month.The prime minister acknowledged the unpopularity of the plan, whichwill cost every individual in the country at least Y5,500, but said ithad been an unavoidable and 'painful' decision.He promised a full investigation into the causes of the failure of theseven companies. 'I will try from now on to shed light on the entireproblem,' he added.Last month the cabinet agreed to allocate Y685bn from next year'sbudget to pay for the cost of partially reimbursing creditors of thebankrupt housing lenders. The government also committed itself tospending more if the final costs of liquidation turn out to be greaterthan is forecast.The companies, which were established by the leading banks in the1970s, are on the verge of collapse under a pile of nonperforming loanswhich were advanced mostly in a bout of reckless lending to theproperty sector during the bubble economy of the late 1980s.Popular opposition to the principle of spending taxpayers' money hasescalated since the decision was announced and will be exploited byopposition parties when the parliamentary discussion of the nationalbudget begins at the end of January.Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the newly elected leader of the main opposition NewFrontier party, signalled his determination at the weekend to opposethe bailout if the government did not provide a satisfactory anddetailed account of who was responsible for the costly mess.The government has already attempted to propitiate the public's angerby hastily removing the senior bureaucrat at the ministry of finance,Mr Kyosuke Shinozawa. Mr Shinozawa, the administrative vice ministerfor finance, resigned last week, in part to take responsibility for thehousing loan problem.But the opposition wants the blame for the fiasco to be spread muchmore liberally among both politicians and bureaucrats.In its sights are Mr Masayoshi Takemura, the finance minister, and mostintriguingly, Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, the international trade ministerand leader of the Liberal Democratic party, the largest coalitionpartner. Mr Hashimoto was finance minister during the period when mostof the reckless lending of the housing loan companies was undertaken.In 1990 the finance ministry issued guidelines to all financialinstitutions to curtail their lending to property-related companies.But the instructions did not apply to the housing lenders whichcontinued to pour money into highly speculative real estate projects.The finance ministry has promised a full inquiry into the circumstancesof the housing lenders' demise, and has promised that those foundresponsible, bankers, politicians and bureaucrats, will be held toaccount.But even a spate of resignations may not prove enough in the currentpolitical heat. Many members of the socialist party, the second largestcoalition member, are profoundly unhappy about the bailout, as are someofficials in the finance ministry.If the political pressure intensifies, some members of the coalitionmay break ranks and oppose the deal.Defeat for the government on such a crucial part of its budget plansfor 1996 would have potentially disastrous consequences for itsviability.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:CONSERVATIVE ABDULLAH TAKES REINS OF POWER   By ROULA KHALAFSaudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah, yesterday entrusted with therunning of the government by his half-brother King Fahd, has beendescribed as more conservative than the king, less likely toaccommodate the west and possibly prone to pumping less oil to raiseprices.However, as experts and diplomats were quick to point out, Saudi Arabiarun by the crown prince is likely to follow the same economic andforeign affairs policies the west has become accustomed to under KingFahd.If the king's health improves, the handing over of the running of thegovernment may be no more than a temporary measure and, until CrownPrince Abdullah takes over for good, King Fahd will continue to havethe final word on big decisions.One of more than 30 surviving sons of the late King Abdul Aziz, the71-year-old crown prince is known as a traditional bedouin who enjoysimportant ties to the tribes of Saudi Arabia. The fact that he had adifferent mother from the king's other powerful brothers has meant thathe comes from a less prominent branch than the other sons of King AbdulAziz.But as the closest in age to King Fahd, he was named crown prince whenthe latter took over in 1982. Although this has been a source ofrivalry with the rest of the clan, the sons of Abdul Aziz are known tostick together when times get rough.The crown prince is well respected and known for a stutter which seemsto disappear when giving public speeches. The bedouin base is his mainsource of strength. Since 1963, he has commanded the National Guard, alargely bedouin force which looks after internal security and acts as acounterweight to the army.Citing his strong links to Syria and the Palestinians, as well as areported reluctance to allow American troops to set up their base inSaudi Arabia during the 1990 Gulf war, the crown prince is believed tobe less internationally minded than his half-brother. He is not knownto speak English, for example, and has played a role in cultivatinglinks with the Arab world.This, however, say diplomats, is unlikely to have a bearing on theKingdom's close ties to the west, especially the US. 'The US allianceis a vital strategic alliance which the Saudis will not do much tochange,' a diplomat said yesterday.Moreover, according to Saudi observers, the crown prince played aprominent part in drumming up public support within the Kingdom for theGulf war.'He is more decisive than the king but less reflective perhaps,' saidone veteran Saudi observer who knows the crown prince.'The king is very cautious and tends to see procrastination as avirtue. Abdullah is less hesitant in his style and quicker to judge.'Such a style, said the observer, may translate into more forcefuldealings with Islamic fundamentalists who have bombarded the kingdomwith faxes from a propaganda base in London.Islamic dissidents are also suspected of having perpetrated theNovember 13 bomb attack on a US-staffed Saudi National Guardcommunications centre in Riyadh.As the 1996 budget unveiled yesterday suggests, economic reformsstarted in 1994 will continue. Faced with the collapse of oil prices,Saudi Arabia has had to clamp down on spending in recent years, give alarger role to the private sector and boost non-oil revenues.In an address to the nation, Crown Prince Abdullah said: 'No doubt youknow the financial situation that emerged from the (1991) Gulf war andthat your government had (earlier) promised to continue its treatmentso matters could return to what they used to be - strength andbalance.'The kingdom in recent years has been committed to keeping crude outputat 8m barrels a day in order to avoid a repeat of the mid 1980s, whenit was faced with falling prices and falling production. Diplomats saidyesterday that the crown prince was in the 1970s believed to favour apolicy of increased production but that they were confident the storywould not hold today.As reforms are pursued, however, diplomats said yesterday that for aslong as the crown prince is only acting on behalf of the king, he willhave to find a way to accommodate the king's other prominent brothersto minimise friction.This may mean that in governing he will resort to consultation and seekthe co-operation of from powerful members such as Prince Sultan, thedefence minister, who is next in line for succession.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:INDONESIA'S CONGLOMERATES LOOK TO MARKET FORCES   By GREG EARL in Jakarta   JAKARTAIndonesia's big conglomerates, long regarded as 'crony capitalists'receiving government favours, are becoming much more dependent onmarket forces for their growth, according to a study.The study of sales and asset growth of the country's top groups,conducted by the Indonesian Business Data Centre, a private agency,also shows that 300 businesses are responsible for about half thecountry's gross domestic product.The centre's director, Mr Christianto Wibisono, said the study showed adistinct move away from reliance on government-awarded licences forbusiness growth in Indonesia. He said only 27 of the groups were nowdependent on managed trading and monopoly arrangements although many ofthe larger groups had been established under those business conditions.The 300 groups are estimated to have increased sales by 15 per cent in1994 to Dollars 74bn (Pounds 48bn).The figures point to some increased concentration in the hands of thelargest groups with the 10 largest recording a 17 per cent increase insales to Dollars 26bn. There were 31 groups with total sales of Dollars350m, accounting for 55 per cent of total sales, whereas in 1993 therewere estimated to have been 24 groups with that level of salesaccounting for 49 per cent of total revenue.Concentration is more evident on an assets basis with 56 groupscontrolling three quarters of the Dollars 118bn in total assets of the300 businesses.The dominance of the economy by people of Chinese descent is underlinedby the fact that only 79 of the 300 groups are owned by ethnicIndonesians and 203 by non-ethnic Indonesians, predominantly Chinese.While there are few surprises among the company's largest companies,several new players are fast emerging, with 11 groups estimated to havegrown by 50 per cent in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:TALKS TO RESUME ON US BUDGET IMPASSE   By PATTI WALDMEIR in Washington   WASHINGTONUS President Bill Clinton will meet congressional Republican leaderslater today to resume talks on ending the protracted federal budgetdispute, after extended negotiations over the New Year weekend failedto yield agreement either on balancing the budget, or on the moreimmediate problem of ending the partial government shutdown.Mr Clinton and Republicans met throughout Saturday and Sunday, beforerecessing for New Year's Day. Both sides said no significant decisionswere taken during those negotiations, which focused on outlining areasof disagreement.But Mr Bob Dole, Senate majority leader, said negotiators were nowready to 'start making the tough decisions'. And there were signs ofsome flexibility from radical freshmen Republicans in Congress: severalof them, interviewed on weekend television programmes, made clear thatthey were willing to compromise on the Dollars 245bn (Pounds 159bn) taxcut included in their plan, saying balancing the budget was moreimportant than cutting taxes. Mr Clinton favours a much more modest taxcut.Mr Mike McCurry, the White House spokesman, said today's negotiationswould focus on 'trade-offs' between cuts in healthcare spending, taxesand welfare needed to balance the budget over seven years, as agreed byboth sides in November. There was no sign at the weekend that the twosides had resolved the basic philosophical dispute which underlies thebudget impasse: whether to shift power away from the federal governmentto the states, as the Republicans want; and whether to curb guaranteesof healthcare for the poor and elderly.Both issues are likely to influence the outcome of this year'spresidential election campaign, which will soon shift into top gearwith a concentration of state presidential primary elections inFebruary and March.Parallel efforts will resume today to solve the more immediate problemof getting federal employees back to work, and ending the shutdown,which has already lasted more than a fortnight.The President and First Lady spent New Year's Eve and Day away from thefrustrations of the budget impasse, celebrating with 1,000 friends atthe Hilton Head resort in South Carolina, where they attended atraditional New Year seminar to debate subjects such as 'morals,manners, and today's pop culture' and 'politics, media and the declineof civility'.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:RHODES' HEIRS RETURN TO ZAMBIA'S COPPER MINES: AFTER 25 YEARS OFNATIONALISATION, BOARDROOMS IN JOHANNESBURG AND LONDON COULD AGAINDETERMINE THE DEVELOPMENT OF ITS LEADING INDUSTRY, REPORTS TONY HAWKINSCecil John Rhodes would have relished the irony. Twenty five yearsafter Kenneth Kaunda, Zambia's founding president, nationalised thecountry's copper mines, the government of President Frederick Chilubamay be on the verge of taking the first step towards meeting itspromise to put the industry back into the private sector.Negotiations with Anglo American Corporation for a feasibility studyfor the development of the Konkola copper mining project are close toconclusion, say industry officials.It would be a move as rich in symbolism as the 1969 take-over itself,seen at the time as heralding a new era for a country that was oncelittle more than a fiefdom of Rhodes' British South Africa Company.Rhodes' vision of the company blazing a commercial trail from the Capeto Cairo, in the name of an empire run by Englishmen, 'is now buried -I hope and pray, never to rise again in this part of Africa,' declaredMr Kaunda, architect of what turned out a disastrous socialistprogramme.Once again, however, boardrooms in Johannesburg and London coulddetermine the development of an industry still at the heart of Zambia'seconomy, accounting for more than 90 per cent of export earnings.With reserves at the Nchanga copper mine, which supplies ore to thestate-owned Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM), likely to beexhausted by the end of the decade, the government is under mountingpressure to give the go-ahead for the Dollars 600m (Pounds 390m)Konkola project.Although widely anticipated, the decision to invite the South Africanmining house, which has a 27.3 per cent stake in ZCCM, to prepare astudy and lead a consortium to develop the new mine will becontroversial, not just because Anglo American is being invited back.The Konkola decision will also have far-reaching implications for theprivatisation of ZCCM itself.While Zambia's privatisation programme has accelerated in the past year- by the end of September, 87 out of 217 business units had beenprocessed, resulting in a significant inflow of new investment andexpertise - progress in dealing with the politically sensitive coppermining industry has been slow.Whereas privatisation of dozens of small state-owned businesses haspassed off with little controversy, the sale of the crown jewels, inthe form of ZCCM, is a different matter, not least because Mr Kaunda isback on the campaign trail, preparing to contest next October'spresidential elections.United Nations Conference on Trade and Development figures, publishedlast month in the World Investment Report, estimate an inflow of morethan Dollars 350m in new foreign investment since the 1991 elections.In the last year a number of multinationals have returned to, orexpanded operations in, Zambia by buying state-owned companies.The list includes Tate & Lyle in sugar, Unilever and HJ Heinz in foodprocessing and toiletries, the Commonwealth Development Corporation incement and agriculture, South African Breweries in brewing and AngloAmerican in hotels.The net result is that Zambia attracted more foreign investment in1991/94 than any other sub-Saharan country, except oil exportersNigeria and Angola.Nevertheless, the announcement of ZCCM's privatisation just monthsbefore elections may seriously damage the prospects of Mr Chiluba'sMovement for Multiparty Democracy.The past four years of structural adjustment have been extremelypainful, with falling per capita incomes, rising unemployment, highinflation and interest rates and plummeting industrial production.That all of this was necessary to turn around an economy brought to itsknees by 27 years of mismanagement by Mr Kaunda's United NationalIndependence party (UNIP) may count for little when voters come to casttheir ballots.Economic reform would have paid dividends far more rapidly had theprivatisation programme, now beginning to show real results, beenimplemented both sooner and more efficiently; had the country not hadtwo droughts; and, most important, had the copper mines been able toexploit a period of strong demand and high prices.Figures for the first nine months of 1995 point to copper output ofabout 325,000 tonnes this year, down 8 per cent on 1994 and less thanhalf the average of over 700,000 tonnes a year in the late 1960s.In cost of production terms, ZCCM is in the top 10 per cent of globalproducers. Competitiveness will deteriorate further when costs grow asNchanga nears the end of its economic life, and the industry suffersfrom the cumulative effects of undercapitalisation, inadequate skills,reinvestment and maintenance spending, and weak management.If all goes to plan, Konkola will be developed as a joint venturebetween the government, whose contribution is likely to take the formof providing already existing smelting and refining capacity - therebyfurther weakening the rump of ZCCM itself - and a Anglo-led consortium,which may take some 60 per cent of the equity in the scheme.While such an arrangement makes sound commercial sense, it will leaveMr Chiluba open to the criticism of privatising ZCCM by stealth.An agreement in principle to develop Konkola, however, will reassure anincreasingly restive donor community.The response from the finance minister, Mr Ronald Penza, struck anequivocal note, speaking of the need for 'the utmost caution' inprivatising the mines.'We must have the necessary political support,' he said - which wasinterpreted by some donors as political shorthand for more delay.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:SRI LANKA'S WAR EUPHORIA FADES   By AMAL JAYASINGHE in Colombo   COLOMBOThe euphoria that erupted when Sri Lanka's military scored asignificant victory last month over separatist Tamil rebels in theirnorthern stronghold of Jaffna has sharply diminished with steep priceincreases coming into effect in the New Year to pay mounting war bills.President Chandrika Kumaratunga yesterday promised to press ahead witha carrot-and-stick strategy to end more than two decades of ethnicviolence which has claimed more than 50,000 lives.'The economic cost of the war will have an all-round effect in terms ofhigher prices,' Mr GL Peiris, deputy finance minister, said. 'This is awar for peace, so there is no question that we have to find theresources for it.'The government estimates that the war against the Liberation Tigers ofTamil Eelam (LTTE) will cost Dollars 760m (Pounds 495m) this year, upfrom a provisional Dollars 640m in 1995.The seemingly unending fighting was felt by the tiny Colombo StockExchange, which shed 33 per cent of its value during 1995. Amid fallingforeign reserves, the Sri Lankan rupee depreciated by 8 per centagainst the dollar in 1995.Yesterday the government lifted a ban on local banks raising capitalabroad, in an attempt to reduce domestic interest rates, which lastmonth galloped to 105 per cent amid a cash flow crisis.It is also raising telecommunications charges by 20 per cent, bus faresby 50 per cent and electricity tariffs by 20 to 100 per cent, dependingon the rate of consumption.However, Mr AS Jayewardena, the central bank governor, said theeconomic picture should improve in 1996, with foreign capital inflowsexpected to rise with the sale of state enterprises.The government is hoping to attract Dollars 420m in foreign capitalfrom privatisation, including the sale of the telecommunicationsoperator and the national airline, AirLanka. The projections areconsidered too optimistic by private analysts.Government politicians said the rising prices and the government'sfailure to turn the military success into a political victory hadturned initial enthusiasm into despondency.Despite the fall of Jaffna, the Tigers have shown that they are stillable to carry out spectacular guerrilla attacks using suicide bombers.Army camps and convoys have been targeted by lone Tiger guerrillasladen with explosives.Tamil men, women and children who fled the fighting in Jaffna aresheltered in areas of the country's north still under rebel dominance.The Tigers say they will not allow civilians to cross over togovernment-held areas of Jaffna.Defence analysts say that eventually the guerrillas will have to allowcivilians to return home because that would help the Tigers to go backto Jaffna and revert to hit-and-run attacks against the army.The military on the other hand is ill-equipped to supply its35,000strong force in Jaffna because all land routes to the region aredominated by the rebels. They depend on the minuscule air force and thenavy.Mr Anuruddha Ratwatte, deputy defence minister, said the army wouldsoon open a land route to Jaffna. It would mean a fresh offensive thatwould cost many more lives, officials said, and the army was alreadybracing for it.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:ZEDILLO RESHUFFLES CABINET   By DANIEL DOMBEY in Mexico City   MEXICO CITYA year to the day after he lost his finance minister in the fall-outfrom Mexico's botched devaluation, President Ernesto Zedillo last weekmade further changes to a government still struggling with theunpopularity unleashed by the currency crisis.Mr Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza, who as energy minister was criticised forlinks to the old guard of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary party,has been replaced, along with Ms Norma Samaniego, the country'scomptroller general, who was thought to be keeping too low a profile toget to grips with Mexico's allegedly rampant corruption. Mr CarlosSalomon, the head of Mr Zedillo's press office and frequent target ofcomplaints about the administration's news management at times whenspeculation about government changes unsettled the peso, has also beenremoved.The alterations leave key economic posts unchanged and do not indicateany big shift in strategy. While the new energy secretary, Mr JesusReyes Heroles, spent much of the previous administration of PresidentCarlos Salinas advocating a more interventionist economic approach, thenew comptroller general, Mr Arsenio Farell, helped push through thewage-labour pacts that then provided the centrepiece of economicpolicy.Mr Zedillo's supporters claim the alterations draw a line under thepolitical difficulties of the government's first year and set the stagefor further reform. But other observers deem the changes a tardyreaction to months of persistent criticism of Mr Zedillo's team.'This is a defensive move. It does not take the initiative as a morethorough going reshuffle would have done,' said Mr Juan Molinar, apolitics professor at El Colegio de Mexico, a graduate researchinstitution.Mr Zedillo does not face a nationwide electoral test untilcongressional elections due in 1997. But he can ill afford a repetitionthis year of 1995's election results, which saw the main right-wingopposition party establish control over roughly a third of localgovernment, and win three of five governorship elections.With the government predicting an economic recovery of only 3 per centgrowth this year after a fall of 7 per cent in 1995, Mr Zedillo's newappointees will find themselves the focus of added attention in theirtasks of managing the government's relationship with the press,reducing bureaucratic profligacy and reforming and attracting newinvestment to the country's energy sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:POOREST DEPEND ON BENEFITS 'FOR 70% OF INCOME'   By GRAHAM BOWLEYThe poorest 20 per cent of households get almost three-quarters oftheir income from state benefits, government statisticians have found.Cash benefits made up 70 per cent of the gross income of the bottomfifth of Britain's households in the last financial year (1994-95),according to the Central Statistical Office's latest survey of economictrends.Taxes and government benefits trebled the share of total income of thepoorest 20 per cent of households, the study shows.Their share of total UK income grew from 2.3 per cent before taxes andbenefits to 6.9 per cent after taxes and benefits.Before tax, the top fifth of households earned 20 times more than thelowest fifth but only four times as much after taxes and benefits.The top 20 per cent of households paid 19.6 per cent of their grossincome in income tax compared with 11 per cent paid by otherhouseholds.State pensions accounted for almost three-quarters of the cash benefitsreceived by retired households, the study finds.The distribution of income before tax is more equal among those stillat work than those who have retired.But the distribution of after-tax income is more equal among retiredthan among working households.The CSO gives, for the first time, a regional breakdown of grossdomestic product and investment. This shows that in 1994 - the latestyear for which complete figures are available - the south-east, home to31 per cent of the population, accounted for about 36 per cent of GDP.The north-west, which was the second most productive region, produced9.9 per cent of the UK's total GDP.Northern Ireland accounted for the lowest proportion of GDP at 2.3 percent.The south-east also had the highest GDP per capita at Pounds 11,407 perhead - compared with the UK average of Pounds 9,768.The lowest was Northern Ireland where people earned Pounds 8,027 perhead and Wales where the figure was Pounds 8,274.But this gap is narrowing. Growth in GDP per head has been higher inNorthern Ireland than any other region since 1990.Income from employment was the source of more than 65 per cent of GDPin Scotland, whereas it accounted for less than 61 per cent in EastAnglia and the south-west.Economic Trends, No. 506, Central Statistical Office, Great GeorgeStreet, London SW1P 3AQ.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:GLOOMIER PROSPECTS PREDICTED FOR THE ECONOMY   By GRAHAM BOWLEY, Economics staffA gloomier outlook for the UK economy emerged today with a leadingforecaster predicting that growth will slow in 1996 and a poll whichshows that business confidence is at its lowest since 1992.The latest report by Cambridge Econometrics, the economic consultancy,says a slowdown in the rest of the world will depress Britain's exportsthis year.It says companies will also cut output as they try to sell the stocksthey built up in 1995.As a result, UK gross domestic product will grow by less than 2.5 percent in 1996 compared with 2.75 per cent in 1995. This predictionclashes with the official Treasury forecast of 3 per cent growth thisyear.But growth will rebound in 1997 to 2.8 per cent, the forecasting groupsays. It thinks spending by consumers will grow modestly in 1996 andthen expand strongly next year - due partly to tax cuts in the nextBudget.Meanwhile, a survey of 2,000 businesses published today by Lloyds Bankshows that confidence is at its lowest level since the poll began in1992. For the first time the survey shows an increase in thosebusinesses reporting cashflow prob-lems and a slowdown in exportorders.Orders for goods and services continue to grow - but at the slowestrate since the second half of 1992. The poll shows that confidence hasdropped as economic growth has been disappointingly slow.Mr Michael Riding, the director of commercial banking at Lloyds Bank,said that although companies 'are still experiencing growth, they arehaving difficulty in coming to terms with managing in a low inflationeconomy. This, coupled with failed growth expectations, has made themsomewhat pessimistic - possibly unnecessarily'.Companies in the construction and retail sectors reported the slowestgrowth in orders, while manufacturing companies and hotels and cateringbusinesses reported strong growth.Companies told Lloyds Bank that investment spending has slowed becauseof slower profit growth and increased pressure on cashflow. However,Cambridge Econometrics predicts that investment will pick up in 1996 asthe private finance initiative fills much of the gap left by cuts ingovernment capital spending.The forecasting group says there is evidence of a build-up in stocks inthe motor vehicle, chemical and non-metallic mineral productindustries.It predicts that headline inflation will fall in the short-term inresponse to lower mortgage interest rates although the underlying ratewill remain broadly unchanged.In the longer term, headline inflation will rise to 3.7 per cent in1997 from 3.1 per cent currently.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:WALDEGRAVE RESOLVES TO START EARLY: NEW YEAR AIMS INCLUDE PUSHING THEPFI AND TACKLING FRAUD   By ROBERT CHOTELike the arrival of Christmas in the shops, negotiations between theTreasury and government departments over public spending seem to getearlier every year.The detail of the last public spending round was published only a monthago, at the time of the Budget. But Mr William Waldegrave, the chiefsecretary to the Treasury, is already preparing for the openingskirmishes of this year's battle.Mr Waldegrave said in an interview with the Financial Times that heplanned to emulate his predecessor, Mr Jonathan Aitken, by looking atthe spending of larger departments in spring, before the hagglingproper gets under way.The Department of Social Security will come under particular scrutiny,according to Mr Waldegrave. Its Pounds 90bn budget next year will beWhitehall's largest by far, so it is bound to be an important target inany search for savings.'It is essential that they are feeling the full force of thepossibilities of new ways of doing things,' Mr Waldegrave said. 'PeterLilley has exciting things to say about how benefits can be deliveredin a few years' time. What the Treasury has to see is whether 'a fewyears' time' can be made any shorter.'Mr Waldegrave has been criticised by some MPs for allowing too big anincrease in the DSS's running costs during the last spending round. Buthe argues that some cuts have actually cost money by weakening controlof the benefit system.Mr Waldegrave said it was clear that the proportion of social securityclaimed fraudulently - estimated at between 5 per cent and 10 per centfor some benefits - was much larger than most observers had thought.He noted that a pilot scheme to issue some claimants in London withswipecards was already saving money. 'One of the things I have to doearly in the new year is see what is a practicable, do-able,non-fantastic programme here which might generate another few hundredmillion,' he said.Mr Waldegrave said there was also scope to push the private financeinitiative, which attracts private sector funds and expertise intopublic sector infrastructure projects.'One thing we have broken the back of this year is institutionalresistance to the PFI, although it only generates a saving for publicexpenditure in terms of delivering better value for money,' he said.Mr Eddie George, the governor of the Bank of England, believes thateconomic activity may be slowed in the short term by an 'infrastructurehiatus' as private finance replaces direct public funding. But MrWaldegrave said he expected private money to be attracted more quicklythan the Treasury assumed in the Budget.There were no 'wonder drugs' which would deliver savings fromgovernment spending next year, Mr Waldegrave added. He ruled out theidea of taking a tougher line with the Department of National Heritagebecause of the extra revenue from the National Lottery.But Mr Waldegrave admitted he was attracted - although this was apersonal rather than a Treasury view - to the idea that artsorganisations could be funded through endowments. This would limit thecentralisation of public support for the arts, although it would notnecessarily save money.Mr Waldegrave said that in framing a long-term strategy for publicspending, it was unrealistic to aim for the low government shares ofnational income achieved in some Asia-Pacific countries.Nations such as the US, New Zealand and Switzerland were better rolemodels, implying a government share of national income of 35 per centor 36 per cent. Public spending stands at 42 per cent of nationalincome, compared with the formal target of less than 40 per cent.Mr Waldegrave said every chief secretary had the ambition of reaching astage where it was no longer necessary to hold public spendingnegotiations every year. He said it was worth investigating the ideathat departments could agree a tough settlement on the understandingthat their budgets were guaranteed for a number of years. But heconceded that departments would fear that a future chief secretarywould not feel bound by the pledge.So the annual ritual of the public spending negotiations remains withus. Every year departments will squeal about the pressure they areunder, and the chief secretary will proclaim one of the toughest roundsin living memory.Robert ChoteBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:TORIES WARN OVER NICHOLSON ATTACKS   By JAMES BLITZ, Lobby CorrespondentSenior left-of-centre Conservatives yesterday warned the government totone down its attacks on Miss Emma Nicholson, the MP for Devon West andTorridge, following her defection to the Liberal Democrats last week.As her decision to quit the Conservatives continued to inflame thelong-running battle between leftwing and rightwing Tories, Mr PeterTemple-Morris, the MP for Leominster, condemned the 'torrent ofpersonal abuse' being heaped on Miss Nicholson - arguing that thecriticisms were not helping to settle pro-European Tory MPs in the wakeof her defection.In recent days Mr Michael Heseltine, the deputy prime minister, hasclaimed that Miss Nicholson's departure followed her repeated andunsuccessful attempts to gain a ministerial post within the government.Mr Michael Portillo, the defence secretary, compounded the criticismyesterday by arguing that Miss Nicholson had 'demonstrated a history ofdisloyalty' - in part by deciding to vote against Baroness Thatcher inthe 1990 Conservative leadership contest.However, Mr Temple-Morris, a Euro-enthusiast who, ironically, is oftenassociated with Mr Heseltine's cause, warned that the attacks on MissNicholson were further damaging party morale.'If someone does defect from the party, then that is bad enough withoutpersonalising things,' he said. 'But ministers are creating a situationin which the public probably has some sympathy with her.'Sir Edward Heath, the former prime minister, attacked the language withwhich Mr Portillo had castigated Miss Nicholson, insisting thatministers needed to understand why she had made such a move.'This is what I regret, that members of the cabinet should be indulgingin this sort of language and this approach,' he told BBC Radio 4'sToday programme. 'We should be making sure that other people who haveanxieties should have those anxieties removed so the public should seewe are not a bitterly divided party, that we have pulled ourselvestogether and can work together.'Ministers were yesterday hoping that the circumstances of MissNicholson's move were exceptional and would not be followed by furtherdefections.But party whips will be heeding the recent claim by Mr Hugh Dykes, theMP for Harrow East, that a further six Tories could defect toopposition parties before the next general election. Mr Dykes, one ofthe most staunchly pro-European of Conservatives, will have his everymove watched closely by Tory whips in the next few months.Others whose names have been speculated upon as possible defectors areMr Temple-Morris; Mr Robert Hicks, MP for Cornwall South East; SirKeith Speed, MP for Ashford; Mr George Walden, MP for Buckingham; andMr Tim Rathbone, MP for Lewes.None of these has been prepared to admit that he is seeking to move toanother party. However, two of them - Mr Hicks and Mr Walden - haveindicated dissatisfaction with the direction of politics at Westminsterby announcing that they will not be standing at the next generalelection. Sir Keith Speed is also standing down at the next election.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:SALES SUCCESS LESS SWEET AS CHEWERS AVOID SUGAR   By JOHN AUTHERSConsumers tried to cut down on their sugar in 1995, according to theannual survey for the chocolate and sweets markets carried out byCadbury-Schweppes, the confectionery company.While Nestle's Kit Kat bar consolidated its lead over the Mars Bar -perceived as more fattening - in the chocolate market, the most popularsweet was Wrigley's Extra, a sugar-free chewing gum.Total consumption of chocolate declined slightly compared with 1994,from 530,000 tonnes to 526,000 tonnes, a trend which manufacturersattributed to the hot weather during the summer. But total spending onchocolate reached a new high of Pounds 3.2bn.Kit Kat's sales rose 4 per cent to Pounds 200m while those of Mars,fell 2 per cent to Pounds 150m.A report in June by Datamonitor, the market research company, said KitKat's share of the chocolate snack market had stayed at about 17.4 percent between 1990 and 1994, while the Mars Bar's share had dropped from16 per cent to 11.7 per cent.Mars made changes to its product last year in an attempt to appeal towomen and to make its bars seem less fattening, introducing bite-sizedversions and changing the recipe to make it taste lighter. Cadbury'sDairy Milk consolidated its place as the third most popular chocolate.In the market for sweets, Wrigley's Extra gum finished ahead of Polomints and Rowntree's Fruit Pastilles, according to the annual review byTrebor Bassett, the sugar confectionery division of Cadbury's. Orbit byWrigley, another sugar-free gum, came fourth, well ahead of the betterknown Wrigley's Spearmint, which was 17th.The total size of the market was less than half that for chocolate,with total sales of Pounds 1.4bn and 283,000 tonnes sold. Averagespending per capita for the year was Pounds 24.The hot summer weather also affected sales of sweets, which includecough lozenges in the top 20, according to Trebor Bassett. But itadded: 'There remains enormous future potential for market growth - westill have quite a way to go before we match the per capita consumptionfor sweets of our European neighbours.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:FIAT STEPS UP DRIVE FOR IMPORT POSITION   By JOHN GRIFFITHSFiat Auto UK is restructuring its dealer networks as part of a campaignto regain its status as one of the UK new car market's biggestimporters.The company is reorganising its 220-strong Fiat dealer network andincreasing its Alfa-Romeo dealerships by 25 per cent.The moves strengthening the dealer networks come as the Italian group'swholly-owned UK subsidiary prepares today to launch its Bravo and Bravamodels. They are intended to challenge Ford's Escort, Vauxhall's Astraand other similar-sized models in one of the biggest sectors of the UKnew car market. Fiat spent more than Pounds 1bn developing the newmodels.The new models appear set to return the Fiat brand to the 4 percent-plus market share levels not seen since the early 1980s. Mr JamesBlades, Fiat Auto UK's managing director, now expects final figures toshow Fiat's market share in 1995 reached 3.6 per cent, with total salesapproaching 75,000 when about 3,000 Alfa-Romeo sales are included.Fiat's UK market share peaked in 1979 at 4.9 per cent, with sales ofLancia models at the time lifting the group's share above 5 per cent.Yet for much of the 1980s Fiat's share slid downwards, mainly becauseof the parent group's failure to invest in new models. By 1992 it hadslumped to less than 2 per cent.So poor were Lancia sales that Fiat has stopped importing them to theUK altogether, while sales of Alfa-Romeo - bought by Fiat in 1987 -currently represent less than 0.2 per cent of the UK market.However, the launch of two small cars, the Punto and Cinquecento, hasalready brought about a strong revival. Mr Blades said: 'We are nowworking hard to ensure that further growth is stable and sustainable.That means making further inroads to fleets so as not to be subject tothe whims of private buyers.'Fiat's concern in this respect is illustrated by Society of MotorManufacturers and Traders statistics showing that the total new carmarket in the UK grew 2 per cent in the first 11 months of 1995. Yetwithin this total fleet demand grew 7 per cent whereas sales to privatebuyers have stagnated.The importance of the fleet sector to manufacturers and importers isunderlined by the fact that around 47 per cent of new cars in 1996 areexpected to be bought by fleets.Fiat's sales to fleets in 1995 played a big part in its outperformanceof the new car market overall. At 67,400 Fiat's total sales in thefirst 11 months were 20 per cent higher than in the same period in1994, compared with only a 2 per cent rise in the UK new car marketoverall. Within the total, however, sales to fleets have jumped 43 percent. The importance of Bravo/Brava to Fiat's further UK growth isunderlined by the fact that the model segment in which they willcompete accounts for more than 30 per cent of the fleet market.Under the dealer restructuring, Fiat is retaining the overall size ofthe network at about 220 dealers but replacing many of the smaller,less committed outlets with facilities owned by the bigger retailinggroups. As a result of the shake-up, now in its final stages, some 30per cent of the network is owned by members of the UK's top 100retailing groups which are capable of making the substantial investmentthat Fiat wants to see.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:CRITICS TURN ON TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY: AS THE IRA CEASEFIRE HASLITTLE EFFECT ON PREMIUMS, BUSINESSES QUESTION THE EXISTENCE OFREINSURER POOL RE   By RALPH ATKINSWhen the IRA bombed the City of London in 1992 and 1993 causing morethan Pounds 1bn in damage, businesses were thankful anyone was preparedto provide insurance against further attacks.With insurers set to exclude unlimited terrorism cover from commercialpolicies, the setting up of Pool Re - a state-backed 'reinsurance'company which would underwrite policies sold by conventional insurers -was seen as a sensible response.Nearly three years later, as many companies renegotiate policies duefor renewal, the mood has changed.Pool Re is criticised as expensive and inflexible. The Association ofInsurance and Risk Managers, which represents commercial insurancebuyers, reckons the high rates Pool Re charges are forcing companies tochoose between spending large amounts on terrorism cover - or riskgoing without.The IRA ceasefire has had a limited impact. Premium rates have fallen:a 20 per cent discount has been announced for next year. Pool Re alsocollects only 60 per cent of the policy premium at the start of theyear; the remaining 40 per cent is waived if total claims during theyear do not exceed a certain level (Pounds 75m in 1996).But terrorism cover used to be included in standard commercial propertypolicies at no additional cost. As Mr Leslie Lucas, Pool Re chiefexecutive, admits: 'Any policyholder is going to say that, if we oncehad it offered for nothing, any price is going to be too much.'There is also concern that the structure of Pool Re is preventing thedevelopment of an alternative terrorism insurance market.Because Pool Re started in 1993 without any capital, it had to operateas a mutual, pooling the resources of those who depended on itsservices. It insists member insurance companies only sell terrorismcover at rates and on terms set by Pool Re. Premiums are pooled into aninsurance fund which at the end of 1994 stood at Pounds 410m but islikely now to be substantially higher. Because most insurers are PoolRe members, companies have little option but to buy Pool Re policies.Moreover, corporate groups cannot 'cherry pick' - buying insurancepolicies backed by Pool Re only for vulnerable properties. Apart fromsmaller sites, they have to buy cover for all or none.Rates are set according to formula varying by location. There is onlylimited scope for taking account of measures individual companies mighttake to reduce their exposure to terrorist attack.Mr Alan Gavaghan, deputy chairman of insurance broker Willis Corroon,says: 'A lot of companies spend a lot of money on risk preventionaction, not just things like sprinklers and shatter-proof windows. Theyhave put a lot of thought into it, but they are treated in the same wayas people with clapped out warehouses.'Alternatives are available. Willis Corroon is one of five brokers whichcombined to provide terrorism insurance underwritten by syndicates atLloyd's of London which are not Pool Re members.Last month the facility was improved and policies paying out up toPounds 100m per terrorist attack are available. That means largecompanies could choose to insure just their most vulnerable properties.But the total amount of insurance coverage available is limited. Pricesmay also not be sufficiently attractive for companies to switch fromPool Re policies which provide unlimited cover. As Mr Jeremy Lowe, ofWillis Corroon, says: 'It is a viable alternative to Pool Re for thosewho want to be selective, rather than a competitor.'In spite of its criticism, the Association of Insurance and RiskManagers do not want to kill the idea of a pool.'The concept is a good one,' says Ms Ina Barker, executive director.'The premiums of the many pay for the claims of the few.' There is alsolittle sign that insurers and reinsurers are willing to return toproviding full terrorism cover without state back-up.The association's idea is that Pool Re should be funded by a flatcontribution, or levy, on all commercial property policies. That shouldallow a return to the automatic provision of terrorism cover. As fundsare built up by Pool Re - assuming there is no escalation of terrorism- there would be scope for contributions holidays.Potentially, Pool Re could evolve into a state-backed reinsurerproviding cover against other perils where the incidence is low butpotential costs could be catastrophic - London flooding is a possibleexample.The aim would be to achieve the basic principle of insurance -spreading big risks on the shoulders of many. Ms Barker says:'Terrorism insurance ought to be automatic for the benefit of society.'Ralph AtkinsBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:FISHING PATROL MOVES INTO DISPUTED AREA   By BERNARD GRAYHMS Lindisfarne, a UK Fisheries Protection Vessel, yesterday went onpatrol in the controversial Irish Box fishing area, between westernEngland and Ireland, to mark the first day that Spanish trawlers werelegally entitled to work in the disputed zone.Also on standby to monitor the situation were three commerciallychartered patrol aircraft which are used to oversee fishing fleets inBritish waters.However, in spite of predictions of confrontation, none of the 20Spanish boats which have so far registered to work in the Irish Boxappeared.The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food pointed to the holidayseason as a possible explanation and added that fishing conditions werenot particularly favourable in the area at present.Meanwhile, arguments continued between British politicians about theagreement, which allows the large Spanish trawler fleet to use thearea, traditionally the preserve of Cornish fishing fleets. Mr DavidHarris, a Conservative MP whose constituency includes the Newlynfishing port, said yesterday that Spanish access to the Irish Box wouldinevitably lead to further cuts in quotas, hurting the UK fishingindustry.Mr Harris said he had written to Mr John Major, the prime minister,arguing that more control of fishing zones should be handed back toindividual European Union member states, rather than regulated by theEuropean Commission through quotas.'The end result is going to be massive over-fishing of stocks alreadyunder pressure,' he said.Yet Mr Tony Baldry, the fishing minister, said that Spanish boats wouldnot be able to catch any additional fish by choosing to trawl in theIrish Box, rather than in other areas.'They will be policed equally fiercely on the catches that they take tomake sure the fish are the proper size and are within quota, as much asensuring that there are no more than 40 trawlers at any one time in theIrish Box,' he said.The two men also disagreed about whether Spanish boats would abide bythe rules of the agreement to use the disputed waters.Mr Harris predicted that Spanish trawlers would use 'every trick in thebook' to skirt the rules, while Mr Baldry argued that the Spanish boatswould comply.'It will be a very stupid Spanish skipper who seeks to break therules,' said Mr Baldry. 'If he does so he will be brought into court,he will be prosecuted and he will be fined up to Pounds 50,000.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:BIG THAW LEADS TO WATER CUTS: UK NEWS DIGESTThousands of homes throughout the UK were flooded and whole communitiesfaced water shortages yesterday as the Christmas freeze gave way to adramatic thaw, bursting water mains and domestic water systems. In someareas, temperatures soared from -20C to around 7C.In Scotland, 1/2m Strathclyde homes suffered burst pipes at some pointover the holiday. Water rationing was introduced in parts of NorthernIreland as reservoirs ran low because of water leaks and burst pipes.More than 100,000 homes were affected and water tankers were being usedin some areas.The Northern Ireland Housing Executive, which is responsible for publichousing, dealt with more than 5,000 calls. Plumbers ran short ofmaterials and the executive had to arrange special openings of supplystores to allow work to continue. Vast quantities of water were lostbecause affected schools, factories and offices were closed for theholidays.Thousands of consumers in the Carmarthen area of west Wales spentyesterday without water because of a burst main taking supplies fromthe river Towy. North West Water brought in extra staff to cope withphone calls, and other areas affected by the thaw includedNorthumberland, Tyneside and Wearside, East Anglia, Essex, and Suffolk.Thames Water said customers were cut off at various times but teamswere working to restore services. Press AssociationSCOTTISH BANK HOLIDAYS'Drop January 2' plan attackedScottish nationalists yesterday attacked plans to bring Scottishbanking industry holidays into line with England. The move could makethis the last traditional new year holiday period north of the borderand set a precedent for other employers, warned Ms Anne McNair, theScottish National party's employment spokeswoman.Scotland has two new year bank holidays - January 1 and January 2 -whereas England and Wales have only January 1.Announcing SNP backing for a campaign by the main banking union Bifu,she said: 'Once again it seems that Scottish families and society aretaking second place to English clearing banks and the London StockExchange. Making Easter Monday a bank holiday instead of January 2, asis proposed, would make no sense since demand for banking services isfar greater at Easter than at new year.' Press AssociationNHS TRUSTSPlea for help over fraud probeThe National Health Service Executive has written to all 458 NHS trustsasking them to co-operate with a police investigation into an allegedfraud by locum agencies.The investigation follows routine checks last year by the AuditCommission, the NHS watchdog, at four hospitals in north Wales.The Metropolitan Police's company fraud unit is now investigating theclaims. It believes that up to 80 trusts could have fallen victim tothe alleged fraud, which is said to have involved charging excessivefees or sending duplicate invoices for the services of locum doctorsand therapists. Four people have been arrested in connection with theallegations, and released on police bail. The total sum involved isalleged to be about Pounds 3m. John AuthersSUPERMARKET PRICE WARJ Sainsbury offers 200 cutsJ Sainsbury fired a new year salvo in the supermarket price waryesterday by cutting the cost of more than 200 items by up to 50 percent during January. The move comes three days after frozen foodchainstore Iceland announced it was reducing some prices to those of1986. However, Sainsbury's and other leading food retailers denied thatthe initiatives would trigger another round in the price war. PressAssociationBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:NERVES BEGIN TO FRAY OVER BUDGET IMPASSEIt is probable that the US government will still not be fullyfunctioning again this morning - and it is not possible to ignore therising tide of public and personal disgust with the wilfulness of thoseon the right wing of the US Congress who have brought about this prettypass.Note, from the outset, where the finger of blame is pointed: not atPresident Bill Clinton, though he may have contributed to the overallbudget impasse and is reaping political benefit from it; nor at SenatorBob Dole, though the majority leader might have been more resolute instanding up to his party's vizigoths if he did not need them for hispresidential ambitions.No, responsibility lies squarely with those so convinced of their ownrectitude and so insulated from the real world outside theirconservative salons and support groups that they cannot understand thedamage they are doing - not only to those affected by the longest, ifpartial, closure of the federal government ever, but also, ultimately,to their own cause of balancing the budget in seven years.It is doubtful that the impact of the suspension of government businesswill lop more than a fraction of 1 per cent off GNP. Importantindustries and cities have not ground to a halt because 280,000 federalbureaucrats have been laid off. No college football game, the opiate ofthe New Year season, has been cancelled.There has been damage, however: to the civil servants, not exactly fatcats, unpaid for two weeks over Christmas; to small federal contractorsdependent on government; to the 20,000 people who apply for passportsevery day and the 23,000 who register with social security; and to thesmall towns and businesses that live off the seasonal trade of greatnational parks like Yosemite in California, where the adjacent MariposaCounty has declared itself a disaster area.They may not amount to a collective blip in the national statistics,but their livelihoods are affected - for months ahead - and all aresome politician's constituents. To judge by their comments in streamsof US media interviews, they are mostly mad with what they frequentlycall 'the clowns of Congress', and soon some poll will doubtlessmeasure their anger.Perhaps more serious for the congressional right is the offence theyhave given to the chattering classes, who, when aroused, can still domuch to shape public opinion. Nothing has offended them more than thedenial of unfettered access to the most comprehensive collection everassembled in one place of the works of Johannes Vermeer, the Dutchmaster, at the National Gallery here in Washington.Last week, Rusty Powell, the gallery's director, was able to open itsdoors by releasing Dollars 30,000 from a private donor fund earmarkedfor future exhibitions. This was enough to make the Vermeers - but notthe rest of the formidable standing collection, nor the concurrentWinslow Homer exhibition - available to the public. And did they come,with lines in frigid weather stretching round the block for preciouspasses.But the money is only good for a week, which means that unless Congresscomes up with funding for the gallery pronto, the Vermeer exhibitioncannot complete its scheduled run until next month. And, like the smallbusinessmen in Mariposa County, just about all the gallery-goers havevented their spleen at Congress. One angry TV commentator suggestedthat, as a punishment, the 73 Republican freshmen in the House ofRepresentatives be permanently barred from looking at Vermeer'smasterpieces (though the impact of such contemplation might well besalutary).A more severe critic could go further by noting that few of theaffected are natural allies of the hard right. Art appeals to the eliteand is often decadent; passports are for foreign travel and thussomehow un-American; social security is for the weak; national parksmight be more profitable if opened up for oil drilling and commercialexploitation; and Washington itself, a veritable modern Sodom andGomorrah, would be better off turned into a pillar of salt.The last word should lie, surely, with the bureaucrats. While they areon unpaid furlough, members of Congress are receiving their salarycheques and, as is their wont during recess, travelling the globe. So agroup of US diplomats in Latin America ordered back to work to arrangeone such six-nation trip, sent this distinctly undiplomatic message tothe state department:'Frankly, we are disturbed by the thought that while American schoolchildren are being turned away from Smithsonian museums, nationalparks, monuments and memorials, some members of the US Congress arelooking forward to seeing exotic attractions like Copacabana, Iguazu,Cuzco, Macchu Picchu and Otavalo - largely at the expense of theparents of those school children.'Perhaps they should push the congressional delegation off a cliff, inthe manner of the Incas.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:WHAT, EXACTLY, IS THIS MILLENNIUM COMMISSION?   By ANTONY THORNCROFTWhat, exactly, is this Millennium Commission we keep hearing about? Thebody set up to plan the UK's celebration of the year 2000. Most othercountries hope to let off a few fireworks but the UK is taking it veryseriously indeed, and spending about Pounds 1.5bn.Whose idea was it? Lord Palumbo, former chairman of the Arts Council,thought the millennium a good excuse to spruce up Britain's nationalheritage - Stonehenge, the cathedrals, that sort of thing, and perhapsadd one or two modern landmarks. Prime minister John Major agreed, andPalumbo's idea has gathered great momentum.Organised by a quango of the great and the good, presumably? Spot on.Seven worthies, mixed to reflect the aristocracy, business, heritagelobby, science and women, plus a couple of politicians (VirginiaBottomley and Michael Heseltine) who are charged to give to it avote-gathering twist.Where on earth is the money coming from? From the UK national lottery,now a little over a year old. Projects to mark the millennium are oneof the five worthy causes that are getting great chunks of lotterycash, along with the arts, sport, the heritage industry and charities.To date the Millennium Commission has received almost Pounds 300m. Butunlike the other good causes, its good fortune ends on December 311999. After that, its share of the lottery cake will be divided amongthe other four.Hasn't the commission upset the Welsh? Yes, some of them. It wasdecided to spend about Pounds 600m on 12 landmark projects, the 20thcentury's gift to the future. These are to be spread conscientiouslyaround the UK. Wales was owed one, but the national rugby ground atCardiff Arms Park, and a proposed opera house for Cardiff Bay, eachapplied for Pounds 50m. Forced to choose between the two Welshpassions, rugby and music, the commission said 'No' to music and'Maybe' to rugby. The money will probably be spent refurbishing CardiffArms Park.So all this millennial cash is not spreading universal happiness? Noway. There are as many people whingeing as celebrating, especially inthe media. The commission is accused of being short on big ideas andlong on cautious pragmatism. It has imposed severe restrictions bydemanding that applicants should be able to provide half the cost ofany project, although some of this can be in land or labour. This makesthings hard for imaginative loonies.But some good must be coming from it? Well, the Tate Gallery is happy.It has Pounds 50m for its proposed gallery of modern art on Bankside;Kew Gardens has Pounds 21m for a millennium seed bank for plants; andPortsmouth Harbour picked up Pounds 40m to convert itself into theworld's classiest marina. Scotland has been sweetened with Pounds 46mfor a 'new' Hampden Park. These are among the landmark schemes.But I live in Twistelton-on-the-Marsh. I'll never get along to thesenational monuments. The commissioners have also set aside anotherPounds 600m to engender turn-of-the-millennium optimism at the grassroots. Over 300 groups of local activists have already received a goahead for good ideas. For example, there will be a new village hall forIngleton in Derbyshire, thanks to a millennium grant of Pounds 150,000;a coastal railway linking the Giant's Causeway and Bushmills inNorthern Ireland will please locals and tourists, at a cost of Pounds700,000; and Pounds 588,000 has been set aside for salmon ladders inthe River Thames.Strengthening communities and greening the land are buzzwords thecommissioners have taken to heart. The Pounds 42.5m for Sustrans, whichaims to cover the nation with 2,500 miles of cycle paths, just aboutsums it all up.What is going to happen in 2000? Good question. No one knows, althoughImagination, a group of creative whizzkids from London, and M2000,financed by Touche Ross and MAI among others, should have a good idea.They are the two consortia short-listed to organise the year-longcelebration, likely to be a cross between the Festival of Britain andDisney World. The winner will be chosen this month. Four sites havealso been short-listed: Greenwich, near London; the National ExhibitionCentre near Birmingham; Derby; and Stratford, in London.Greenwich, the chosen venue of M2000, is favourite, while Imaginationhas plumped for Birmingham.It depends whether the commissioners go for a site in London plumb onthe international dateline, or Birmingham, near the centre of the UK.With Pounds 100m of millennium money to oil the profit-making event, itshould be some celebration.And on December 31 2000, is it all over? The commissioners hope not.There will be the landmark buildings to enjoy, although there is noequivalent to the Crystal Palace or the Eiffel Tower on the horizon toamaze citizens of 2096. There will also be hundreds of village halls,urban parks and small woodlands.And there will be some bursaries, which are planned to continue adinfinitum. What are they. Can I have one? No reason why not. Thecommission is setting up a Pounds 100m endowment, which should produceabout Pounds 5m a year to be distributed in dollops of Pounds 2,000 andupwards to citizens who want to improve themselves, and then pass onthe improvement to their communities.More details will be announced this month, but you will probably haveto apply to a charity or a voluntary organisation for vetting. Goodluck.Antony ThorncroftMillennial architecture: Colin Amery, Page 12Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:MASTER OF RECOVERY EXPECTS SCRUTINY: A CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO DEBT DOESNOT RULE OUT A NEW PHASE OF GROWTH, WRITES ROBERT CORZINEJohn Browne, British Petroleum's chief executive, has marked thecompletion of his first six months in office with the conclusion of aDollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.27bn) natural gas deal in Algeria.The project, which analysts say will help turn BP into a significantinternational gas company, attracted headlines mainly because of itslocation in a country struggling with an Islamist insurgency. But thedeal is also noteworthy in that it will form one of the foundations fora new phase of growth and capital investment at BP, whose lastexpansive foray triggered a debt crisis in 1992 and the departure ofRobert Horton, former chairman and chief executive.That episode still influences the thinking of John Browne and that ofSir David Simon, BP's chairman and the man who engineered the recoveryof the company's fortunes. 'We must not leverage this company everagain,' said one senior executive last week.But the company says a cautious approach to debt does not mean that BPis afraid to act decisively to ensure future growth. It has embarked onbig oil and gas projects in politically unsettled parts of the worldsuch as Colombia, Azerbaijan and Algeria.Such projects are a marked departure from BP's traditional core areas -Alaska and the UK sector of the North Sea. But during Browne's tenureas head of the company's upstream arm, the board came to accept thatpolitical risk is best spread across a range of projects in differentcountries. 'The real risk is having too much in one basket,' says oneBP executive, 'not in going to risky countries which could have amaterial effect to the company's bottom line.'Browne also placed emphasis on the 'phased development' of suchprojects. That allows the company to limit its financial exposureduring the early stages of a project, when there is likely to begreater uncertainty about whether it will prove technically,politically or commercially viable.Industry observers say Browne's greatest success was in re-shaping thestrategic direction of the exploration arm and ensuring that it had astring of possible projects to choose from. It now has sufficientassets to ensure that reserves can be replaced for another 10 years.That means that while many other oil companies hunt for new reserves,BP can focus on projects that are likely to offer the highest return.Yet analysts wonder whether Browne will have equal success tackling theproblems in BP's downstream division, the one part of the company ofwhich he has no direct experience and a sector in which big changes mayhave an impact on BP's customer base.He has recently devoted time to downstream issues, in particular to thefuture of the company's refineries. They, like much of the industry,suffer from thin margins and offer little scope for any technologicaladvantage over competitors. An announcement on the furtherrestructuring of the company's refining assets is expected this month.Browne, an engineer who believes technology can continuously enhanceBP's financial performance, is upbeat about chemicals - a segment inwhich proprietary technology can increase competitiveness and thedivision that BP has chosen to lead its expansion in Asia.An announcement on broader corporate aims is expected in March. Therehave been rumours in the industry that Browne has contemplated radicalchanges to the way BP conducts its business, with some observersspeculating that Browne, a former corporate treasurer, would like toadopt more of a 'merchant bank' approach to the industry.BP executives say he is more likely to maintain a step-by-stepapproach, and emulate Simon by setting simple targets related to BP'sfinancial and performance ambitions.One of his biggest challenges will be to maintain BP's strong financialperformance. 'You can grow from an uncompetitive base by cuttingcosts,' says one executive. 'The hard task is to grow from acompetitive base, and not just capture the chemicals cycle at its top.'That means BP will have to focus on efforts to keep margins as high aspossible even in a downturn.Browne's strategic aim is to create a 'distinctive' company - one withelements that competitors would have difficulty copying and one whichwould provide unusual financial returns to investors. He emphasises theimportance of relationships with host governments, partners andsuppliers.Browne also wants a 'unique' set of assets, including markets. But bigacquisitions of the type that landed BP in so much trouble in the pastappear to have been ruled out for now, although executives say BP willcontinue to make small-scale acquisitions.Browne's first six months have been made easier by BP's strongfinancial performance. But in future there is likely to be greaterinvestor interest in how he and his colleagues deal with the narrowerissues of the downstream assets and with capital investment decisions.Senior BP executives say investors are right to demand the highestcapital efficiency possible. After all, says one, 'the industry as awhole has a pretty bad track record. It hasn't spent money wisely.'What of BP specifically? 'We should expect to withstand toughscrutiny,' he says. 'But I don't believe BP will repeat the past.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:FILMS FOR 1996   By NIGEL ANDREWSYou can always tell a new movie year. It stomps into view overturningChristmas trees and growling 'No more Mr Nice Guy'. 1996's firstaudiences are invited to choose between Seven (serial killer withhorrific murder methods), The Kingdom (ghoulies in a haunted hospital)and Four Rooms, which climaxes with Quentin Tarantino presiding overchopping a finger.Nevertheless, there are compensations to be found. The faint heartedcan take refuge in France's The Horseman On The Roof - more buckle andswash from director Jean-Paul Cyrano De Bergerac Rappeneau - and inSomething To Talk About, a marital comedy-drama with Julia Roberts. Shetwangs a pretty southern accent while Robert Duvall and Gena Rowlandsprovide power casting as Mom and Pop.In truth, even the nasties are not that nasty. The Kingdom, a weirdlyhilarious TV mini-series turned four-hour movie from Danish directorLars Von Trier, is more black comedy than spine chiller. And there ishumanity between the stomach-testing moments in Seven. Brad Pitt andMorgan Freeman play detectives sleuthing through a series of murderspatterned after the seven deadly sins.The moral is, if you want quality cinema you must take the rough withthe smooth. But you need not take Four Rooms at all. This quartet ofstories proves there are days when even wonder children like Tarantinoshould be locked in the nursery until they get the script right.On video, meanwhile, two films allow you to be adult and childlike atthe same time. Ed Wood is Tim Burton's funny-elegiac homage to theworld's greatest 'bad' director, with Martin Landau eating the sceneryas the horror actor Bela Lugosi.And Dianne Wiest similarly eats the scenery in Woody Allen's splendidshowbiz comedy Bullets Over Broadway. The two actors won last year'sbest-supporting Oscars.Nigel AndrewsBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES:BIG IDEAS, BIG BOOKS: SEVEN WISE MEN GIVE THEIR OPINIONS ON THECHALLENGES COMPANIES ARE LIKELY TO FACE IN 1996What will be the big management challenge of 1996? And what was thebest/most enjoyable/most instructive business book you read in 1995?On this page we print seven answers to these questions.Sumantra Ghoshal, professor of strategic management at London BusinessSchool:Challenge: Over the past few years many companies have focused onrationalisation and restructuring. Often this has requiredfragmentation of their organisations into small units and some radicaldecentralisation. Now, with much of the fat out of the system, thechallenge will be to reintegrate their fragmented organisations topursue new growth opportunities.Book: The Boundaryless Organisation by Ron Ashkenas, Dave Ulrich, ToddJick and Steve Kerr (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco).This is a wonderfully practical and down-to-earth book that is bothidea-rich and implementation-focused. It provides insightful ideas,clear examples and simple tools - a rare combination in the world ofbusiness publications.Gerry Robinson, chief executive, Granada Group:Challenge: Not to run out of steam. The 1980s was a period of hugegrowth and expansion through new markets, new technology and a globalview of business. The 1990s have been dominated by cost control, costcutting, streamlining and tighter management control in order tomaintain profitable growth. This must not become the main role ofmanagement - we must also use creativity, enthusiasm, leadership andsound strategic direction to improve a company's health and growth.Book: I have to confess that I did not read any business books at alllast year. This is not because I feel I have nothing to learn aboutbusiness but because I did not find the time.The most important book I read last year was unquestionably Wild Swansby Jung Chang (HarperCollins). Reading about China's culturalrevolution is more enlightening and satisfying than reading about thecorporate revolution.I am a strong believer in broadening the mind in spheres other thanbusiness.Tim Simpson, managing director, Arthur D Little:Challenge: 'Seventy per cent of all re-engineering projects fail',people will tell you, misquoting one of the big change gurus. My viewis not so pessimistic. Many companies have made large-scale change workfor them, and their performance has jumped as a result.But with the recovery faltering, and markets ever opening to worldcompetition, sustaining this performance improvement will be themanagement challenge of 1996.Book: 1995 was again notable more for books I wanted to read than thoseI found time for. But one which did hit home was the Fifth DisciplineFieldbook, by Senge and friends (Nicholas Brealey Publishing). Ease ofreading is one attraction - it's written for browsing and providesusable suggestions on almost every page.And its central proposition - that learning, and particularly teamlearning, is a key part of building competence in companies - isintuitively obvious. The book goes further, suggesting practical waysto manage the learning process and build competence faster. And itcomplements Senge's earlier, more theoretical work, with much morepractical experience.Peter Sutherland, chairman and managing director, Goldman SachsInternational:Challenge: To cope with the effects of globalisation. Within a veryshort time the world has decisively changed and management willincreasingly be required to focus on opportunities in, and challengesfrom, the emerging markets that will provide much of the economicdynamism for the world into the next millennium. An understanding ofrelatively familiar cultures and relationships will have to beaugmented by an under-standing of relatively different environments.Book: I am not proud to admit that I have virtually never read businessbooks (unless written by Sir John Harvey-Jones). In 1995, however, Ihave read some that I would recommend.The first of these is Corporate Level Strategy by Goold, Campbell andAlexander (Wiley), which looks at managing multi-business companiessuch as GE, ABB and Canon.My second and third books are not business books per se but I recommendthem because, in today's world, a good manager has to be tuned in todramatic political change in terms of national sovereignty. AndrewMarr's Ruling Britannia (Michael Joseph) is about more than Britain.It is about a world in transition. One doesn't have to agree with allhis conclusions to find his opinions both provocative and relevant.I would also include Where Did We Go Wrong - From the Gold Standard toEurope (Faber & Faber) by the remarkable Eric Roll, who analyses pasterrors in policy relating to the British economy and, above all, toBritish negativism towards European integration.Adair Turner, director-general, Confederation of British Industry:Challenge: Growing. British businesses have got very very good over thepast 10-15 years at being lean and mean, at increasing productivity.They need now to get better at investing for the long term, atmarketing, at creating new products. A stable economic climate shouldmake this possible.Book: Not business but economics, and not one but two. The State We'reIn by Will Hutton (Cape). Disagreed with lots of it and almost gave upafter the first two pages of polemic, but provocative and insightful ifyou persevere. And The World in 2020 by Hamish McRae (HarperCollins),crystal-ball gazing with insight.David Wellings, chief executive, Cadbury Schweppes:Challenge: The same as always. Putting forward the best face possibleon the past in order to attract investors; scanning the latest mountainfor that elusive and obstacle-strewn path to shareholder value; andensuring that managers of vision, tenacity and stamina are there tostep in when you eventually fall off the mountain.Book: Neville Bain's Successful Management (Macmillan Business). Sound,practical advice from a businessman to businessmen. Blessed relief fromconsultants peddling the latest irrelevant buzzword for keeping inshape 'corporate re-engineering' or motivation 'empowerment'.George Yip, adjunct professor of strategy at the University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles (UCLA):Challenge: Multinational companies will continue to face in 1996 thechallenge of globalisation and of building global capability.A successful global company today needs the capability to access and totransfer anywhere in the world technology, ideas, factors ofproduction, and other sources of competitive advantage.In this regard the biggest challenge will be moving executives aroundthe world in the face of escalating costs.Book: Strategic Alliances: An Entrepreneurial Approach to Globalizationby Michael Y. Yoshino and U. Srinivasa Rangan (Harvard Business SchoolPress).Strategic alliances are a major method for globalisation and this isthe best book I have read to date on the international aspects of thissubject.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES:A PRODUCT OF POETRY: RUPERT MORRIS WONDERS HOW FAMOUS VERSE COULD BEUSED IN ADVERTISINGReaders of the Management Page may have noticed that Union Bank ofSwitzerland has been using poetry in its advertisements.'Thoughts that transcend time from Union Bank of Switzerland' haveappeared on global satellite and cable channels, featuring Sir JohnGielgud and others reading classic poems like Ozymandias, Ulysses andso on.The poetry was chosen, according to project manager VincentoTravaglione, to embody corporate values of 'responsibility, openness,courage and perseverance'.Of course, there is nothing new about poetry in advertising. In theearly years of this century, we were regaled with gems like these: TheOnoto, the Owl and the Waverley pen, They come as a boon and a blessingto men . .Or the following, proclaiming the attraction of Everybody's, a popularmagazine of the inter-war years: Oh Mr Porter, whatever shall I do? Iwas reading my Everybody's and got carried on to Crewe] Copy-writingwas in its infancy in those days, I suppose, which may explain whythese excruciating verses lasted for several years; and yet they wereprobably extremely effective, imprinting themselves on the popularconsciousness in much the same way as the catchiest pop songs.Nowadays, alas, advertisers are more image-conscious. You can't imaginethe Body Shop using some naff rhyme, can you? Ovaltine is thehonourable exception, resurrecting the delightful song of those 'happygirls and boys', the 'Ovalteenies'.But Advico Young and Rubicam, the Zurich agency which dreamed up theUBS campaign, have been doubly smart. Not only have they regaled TVviewers with some decent poems for a change, subtly enhancing theirclient's image; they have also done it on the cheap by using authorswho are long out of copyright.There is no end to the number of commercial interests that mightbenefit from a quick glance through the Oxford Book of English Verse.Brewers, for instance, need look no further than AE Housman. Indeed,Ind Coope should surely consider funding an AE Housman chair of poetryat its Burton-on-Trent headquarters.No modern copy-writer could improve on this passage from A ShropshireLad: Say, for what hop-yards meant, Or why was Burton built on Trent?Oh many a peer of England brews Livelier liquor than the Muse. And maltdoes more than Milton can To justify God's ways to man. Ale, man, ale'sthe stuff to drink For fellows whom it hurts to think.Your AB audience might blench somewhat at the last line, butself-conscious intellectuals are not usually beer drinkers anyway, so Idon't think we need worry.Haircare has been a fruitful medium for advertisers, and yet one doesfeel that there is a certain creative vacuum in this field.Purveyors of hair bleach must despair of that stubborn group ofindependent-minded modern women who refuse to emulate the models withflowing locks on their screens and become bottle blondes. Perhaps theyshould try a touch of Wordsworth: Earth hath not anything to show morefair  .And if that doesn't work, there's always Eliot: Stand on the highestpavement of the stair - Lean on a garden urn Weave, weave the sunlightin your hair On reflection, this verse might be more appropriate forwigmakers. But that's the joy of poetry as an advertising medium. It'sso flexible.Other products and services might not be so easy. It is certainly timethe army came up with something better than that macho stuff with younglads driving tanks, swimming, skiing and and generally behaving likewould-be contestants on Gladiators. How about something that brings outthose unchanging values of selfless patriotism? The Soldier, by RupertBrooke, has the right combination of gravitas and romanticism. But thatfirst line is a bit of a downer: 'If I should die . .' You might aswell make it a commercial for funeral services.Now there's a thought. Undertakers have been loath to advertise up tonow, but poetry might give them just the opportunity they need. Thewords of the American Stephen Vincent Benet spring to mind: You maybury my body in Sussex grass, You may bury my tongue in Champmedy, Ishall not be there, I shall rise and pass. Bury my heart at WoundedKnee.At Berry & Birnam we always respect the wishes of the departed. Organrefrigeration a speciality. Or something like that.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES:LIQUID THERAPY FOR THE NEW YEARIhave not been myself recently. Not since I filled my body with astrange orange liquid at the start of the festive season. The incidentwas quite out of character and the memory of it leaves me feelingsheepish and puzzled even now. Lest you conclude that I went wild onthe mandarin liqueur, I should assure you that my liquid was imaginaryand that it has made me calmer, unflappable, ready for the new year.The bizarre story began when a lady named Deborah Marshall-Warrenoffered me a free trial of something called Orange Liquid Therapy. Shesaid this was a 'mental de-tox' session that involved hypnotism, deeprelaxation and direct suggestion to sooth all my stresses away. Halfwayround the bend with pre-Christmas strain at the time, I felt willing totry anything. When she told me her practice was in Regent Street, thatclinched it: I could sort myself out and do some Christmas shopping aswell.Yet when I arrived at her office, I started to feel uneasy. There wasan unnatural calm about Ms Marshall-Warren. Her eyes were red and shelooked as if she had been crying for weeks. We sat in a tiny cubicle ashot as the Sahara and lit by a large bright globe. 'I'm going to putyou under quickly', she said. Obediently, I sat in the chair and triedto relax. I looked at the spot on her hand. I closed my eyes. 'Feelyour calves filling with a warm, orange liquid', she crooned. 'It issoothing, tingling, and it is moving, up, up into your knees. Feel yourknees filling with a warm, orange liquid. It is soothing, tingling. Itis moving, up, up into your thighs . .' You get the picture.When I was full to the brim with orange liquid, I had to imagine itscrubbing out my cares, fears, anxieties, fizzing and dissolving themin much the same way that Domestos gets to work with stubborn householdstains. Then, when there was no more work for it to do, I was told topicture it slowly draining out through my fingers and toes. Clean andemptied, I was informed that I was feeling lighter, more confident,better able to cope and happier.Set down in black and white, orange liquid therapy sounds daft as abrush. I am constitutionally opposed to New Age nonsense. I do notbelieve in trendy miracle cures for complex problems. The sort ofstress relief that makes sense to me is to work less, drink less or togo on holiday.So imagine my bewilderment to find myself feeling much better after 45minutes of semi-conscious sloshing around in make-believe colouredfluid. Before entering the cubicle I felt tense, on the verge ofhysteria. Afterwards I was cheerful, unbothered even by Oxford Circusin the rain at rush hour, and more or less equal to Christmas.Yet when I tell my friends and colleagues my wonderful hypnotism storythey give me a wary look. As far as they are concerned, I've started ona slippery slope, and soon I will be pushing all kinds of dubiousmanagement gimmicks. I insist I am still the same person. They are notso sure. We shall see.1995 was the year in which the re-engineering craze died. Areplacement, developed by McKinsey and explained in the consultant'slatest quarterly bulletin is called: Do It, Then Fix It. I like thisnew fad more than the old one, because it comes in words of onesyllable. The idea behind it is equally hard to argue with: companiesshould work out what changes to their business need to be made, thenthey should carry them out without more ado. Once done, they shouldassess the result, and if it has flaws, they should swiftly put themright. Indeed, this seems to be such a sensible way of going aboutthings, it is a mystery to me why companies need McKinsey to spell itout to them.In the middle of all the change that companies are supposed to beundergoing, one thing remains constant: workers feel their bosses donot have their best interests at heart.Never mind all the empowerment, teamwork and egalitarian structures,employees take the same dim view of their managers as they always havedone. According to actuaries Watson Wyatt, less than half believe theircompany is well managed, or think that their bosses make the rightstrategic decisions.The only thing that has changed in recent years is that workers nowview their superiors as hypocrites: good at drawing up a set of valuesfor the company, less good at living by those values themselves.I realise it is not for me to volunteer new year's resolutions forothers, especially as I have not made any for myself. But might it notbe time for senior managers to start practising what they preach? Iused to think that human behaviour was difficult to change, inparticular that old dogs could not be taught new tricks. But now I amnot so sure. Dare I recommend a little hypnotherapy? On second thoughtsit would only work if they wanted to change. And that, surely, is theproblem.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:HOTELIER'S STARCK CHOICE: IAN SCHRAGER'S HOTELS ARE FOR THOSE WHO CANAFFORD CHINTZ BUT WANT SOMETHING DIFFERENT, SAYS ALICE RAWSTHORNOn paper, Ian Schrager looks like the sort of self-indulgentbusinessman who is rather too self-indulgent for his own good.He did, after all, fly 80 palm trees from Washington to the Delanohotel he opened in Miami last summer, because they were more attractivethan the local crop. And, after taking a closer look at the sand onnearby Miami Beach, he shipped in a ton-and-a-half of a superiorvariety.Yet Schrager is not just another architecture junkie who allowsaesthetic excess to cloud his business judgment. He can rattle off theprofit margins on almost every aspect of the Delano and of his threeNew York hotels. He has harnessed his love of design to turn them intothe hotels of choice for what he calls 'the generation that wantssomething different' - artists, actors, designers and musicians who canafford four-star or five-star establishments but find them ratherboring.The three New York hotels - the Royalton, Morgans and the Paramount -are almost always fully booked. The Delano in Miami is so popular thatlast month's American Vogue prefaced an article on other Miami hotelsby saying: 'If you can't get into the Delano . . . .'. Schrager is nowrenovating the Mondrian Hotel in Los Angeles and searching for a sitein London.The progress of his business career has been erratic, to say the least.He made his name in the late 1970s with Studio 54, a New York nightclubthat he ran with his university roommate, the late Steve Rubell. Studio54 captured the hedonistic spirit of the late 1970s. But in 1980Schrager and Rubell were sentenced to 3 1/2 years in prison for taxevasion.After their release they opened a nightclub, the Palladium, anddiversified into hotels. Neither had any experience of the business,but they knew what sort of place to open. 'There was no point inopening another luxury hotel,' says Schrager. 'That end of the businesswas well served by Claridges in London, the Bel Air in LA and theCarlyle in New York. They serve room service course by course atClaridges. You can't beat that.'They sensed a need for a new type of luxury hotel for the sort ofpeople who used to go to Studio 54 - people who wanted, and werewilling to pay for, the comfort and service they got in conventionalluxury hotels, but would prefer a less formal setting more in tune withtheir taste than the chintzy interior of Claridges.They started by renovating Morgans, a discreet mid-town hotel with 154rooms built in the late 1920s. Schrager commissioned Andree Putman, theFrench designer, to refurbish Morgans in her understatedly elegantmodernist style, but they were more adventurous in their choice ofdesigner for the next hotel, the Royalton, which they entrusted to theflamboyant Frenchman, Philippe Starck. Schrager worked with Starckagain on the Paramount, an equally extrovert but less expensive hotelthat opened in 1990.Each of the New York hotels has its own character. The Royalton is themost audacious. The Paramount is for people who love the Royalton butcannot quite afford it. And Morgans is the most discreet. Schragerensures there is a difference of at least Dollars 50 (Pounds 32)between the room rates: Dollars 250 for the Royalton, Dollars 200 forMorgans and Dollars 100 for the Paramount. They all have an averageoccupancy rate of more than 90 per cent, against the US industryaverage of 71 per cent.'Coming from the nightclub business was great training for running anhotel,' says Schrager. 'You're selling a commodity product. A nightclubsells the same drink and plays the same music as the competition. Theonly thing that differentiates them is production values. It's the samewith hotels.'Production values are Schrager's forte. Starck, with whom hecollaborated on the Delano's all-white interior and Alice In Wonderlandgarden, is prodigiously talented but notoriously difficult to workwith. Schrager's solution is to set up a project management team ofarchitects, art directors and buyers to implement Starck's ideas andbring them in on budget.'After doing three hotels with Philippe, we know what to expect,' saysSchrager. 'We don't panic when we get these weird faxes from him.' Thissystem has produced some of Starck's best work. He is one of theworld's most sought-after designers who receives three or four requestsa month to design hotels, but says 'no to all of them, except Ian'.All Schrager's hotels look expensive. The fittings are speciallycommissioned and the renovation budgets seem high - Dollars 28m for theDelano, Dollars 35m for the Royalton, Dollars 60m for the 610-roomParamount. But Schrager is careful to buy existing hotels which will beeasy to convert. 'We replace everything, even the plumbing, but leavethe rooms intact. You can get into trouble by banging on walls.' Hesays it would cost 'much more' to kit out his hotels in conventionalchintz than in a sumptuous Starck design.His latest project is the Mondrian in Los Angeles. It was purpose-builtas a 1960s apartment hotel and is now being redesigned by Starck, whosays he wants it to be 'very, very white with one or two symbols ofcolour' to emphasise the 'dreaminess of LA'. Schrager has asked artistJames Turrell to create a 'three-dimensional living art piece' for thefoyer 'so it will be like walking into an artwork.'As his hotel chain expands, Schrager has cut costs by pooling areassuch as purchasing and marketing. He is careful to concentrate on roomrental, and licenses out services such as bars, restaurants and gyms.Brian McNally, who has turned the Royalton's '44' into one ofManhattan's most chic restaurants, runs the Delano's Blue Room with popstar Madonna as a co-investor. Schrager even licenses the newsstands.'When we ran the newsstand at the Paramount, it lost Dollars 1,000 amonth. We've given it to a guy who knows the business and it makesDollars 4,500 a month.'The Mondrian is scheduled for completion in October and Schrager willthen expand outside the US. He has hunted for sites in London withoutsuccess, although Granada's hostile Pounds 3.3bn bid for Forte couldcreate some opportunities.'My customers travel on a certain axis,' says Schrager. 'New York,Miami and Los Angeles are on it, so are London and Paris. You couldn'topen hotels like mine just anywhere because there wouldn't be enoughpeople to fill it. And I'd put as much effort into a place with 17rooms as I would into one with 700.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:BANGKOK GETS TOUGH ON MOTORISTSMore than 100 people were arrested on the first day of a campaign byBangkok police to force motorists to heed traffic regulations as partof an attempt to unsnarl the city's gridlock.In Bangkok, known for the world's worst traffic jams, drivers routinelyflout the rules. Violators often slip the police small bribes and areswiftly on their way.Car sales in 1995 are expected to have topped 500,000, making Thailandthe largest car market in south-east Asia. But only 8 per cent ofBangkok's land surface is covered by roads, compared to 25 per cent inNew York and Paris. Short trips in the city can take hours.Bangkok's traffic problem is affecting the city's development. Someforeign businesses have decided to locate elsewhere, and tourists spendless time and money in the capital, citing their aversion to thetraffic. The campaign is part of a plan by Thaksin Shinawatra, abillionaire businessman and deputy prime minister, who was elected lastJuly on a pledge that he would solve Bangkok's traffic problems in sixmonths or resign. Thaksin's deadline - January 26 - is approaching withno noticeable improvement in traffic conditions.However, the World Bank recently announced it will provide a Dollars150m (Pounds 97m) loan to Thailand to help alleviate its trafficproblems. Maurice Le-Blanc of the bank said: 'The government ofThailand has taken a leading role in the region in addressingenvironmental and road safety issues in an aggressive manner, which todate have proved very successful. This will further those efforts.'* For those who can make it through the traffic, Bangkok's firstCyberpub has just opened, providing a focus for the party-lovingafter-work crowd. For Dollars 12 an hour, customers can sit at one of10 glass-topped tables equipped with a Compaq Presario.Getting into the spirit of things, an opening night trio of womenclicked on to a virtual dating service which bills itself as 'Your linkto true love'. As the picture and vital statistics of a young hunk fromNew York appeared on the screen, one adjusted her glasses and took acloser look.The Cyberpub is in the same ownership as the local upmarket Dusit Thanihotel chain.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:POBOX AND THE MAGIC COOKIEWhich company will have the greatest effect on the development of theInternet this year? My answer is neither Microsoft nor Netscape. It isa tiny new company in Philadelphia called Pobox. com - spelt as if itwere an abbreviation of Post Office Box, but pronounced as the singleword 'Pobox'. Its product consists of a simple forwarding service thatis an electronic equivalent of a post office box.The system works as follows. Customers give out an e-mail addressending in pobox. com - like the one that appears at the bottom of thiscolumn. When their friends or colleagues send them e-mail at thataddress, a computer in Philadelphia looks up the recipient in a database and forwards the message immediately to their Internet provider.This service allows people to give out an e-mail address that isindependent of where they work or where they choose to buy Internetaccess. Moving from one Internet provider to another is simply a matterof sending a message to pobox. com giving a new forwarding address andquoting a 'magic cookie', a number that establishes the customer'sauthenticity.I have already discovered an advantage of the service. Having recentlymoved from London to Silicon Valley in order to work on a book, I haveswitched Internet providers. But my address has remained the same, andmessages sent to me as if I were in London are forwarded to me inCalifornia without my having had to tell anyone how to reach me.Yet people moving house are not the sole market. Other potential usersincludes customers of CompuServe, which allows people to use only anindecipherable string of numbers as their e-mail address.Equally attracted will be those who are embarrassed by the cumbersomelength or strange letter-and-number combination of their real e-mailaddress.The entrepreneurs behind Pobox. com are a pair of students at theUniversity of Pennsylvania, still living in a college dormitory: ReuvenBell, 23, whose subject is religious studies, and Meng-Weng Wong, 21, acomputer science major born in Singapore. The two launched theirservice in early 1995, and already have 3,000 users. In keeping withthe principle that most of the best Internet businesses start off bygiving things away, the pair offer a generous free trial lasting threemonths.Thereafter, the price for forwarding mail starts from Dollars 15 ayear, payable by credit card - with the incentive of six years for theprice of five to those who choose to pay Dollars 55 in advance.Three months is exactly right for the trial period. It is long enoughfor customers to become comfortable with the service and to give theirnew e-mail address to all their friends, but not long enough for anyoneto find it worthwhile to start again with a new name from scratch.So far, 850 electronic invoices have been sent out, and almost halfhave been paid. Because of a glitch in the billing software, Bell andWong have not yet had time to send out reminders. But early indicationsare promising, and the pair claim that an automated trawl of Internetnewsgroups has turned up more than 1,000 mentions of their service,only one of which was negative.Whether Pobox. com will make serious money or not is too early topredict. Its founders certainly hope so. Bell has just taken time offfrom his degree to work on the business 12 hours a day, and is planningto pursue some Wharton MBA courses on his return to academia. Moreover,the company already has imitators: a sign, surely, that others see thepotential in its idea.Even a modest success could have a sharp effect on the Net. It wouldremove the fear of changing e-mail address that forces many to staywith an unsatisfactory service provider. In doing so, Pobox. com'ssuccess would make a large global industry significantly morecompetitive.* Talking of magic cookies, someone recently sent me the followingstory by e-mail. A woman who had eaten a delicious cookie at the cafeof a department store in Dallas asked for the recipe. 'We don't give itout,' said the waiter. However, the customer persisted and offered topay for the recipe.On hearing that the price would be 'two fifty', she agreed to charge itto her credit card along with the bill for her lunch, and was thenhanded the recipe on a printed sheet. Thirty days later, her Visastatement revealed she had been charged Dollars 250.The furious cookie lover called the company's head office, thinkingthat the real figure should have been Dollars 2.50, but was told therewas no mistake.The Dollars 250 was to insure that not just anyone could afford therecipe. Accordingly, her request for a refund had to be turned down,but the woman got her own back in the end.She copied the recipe into an e-mail, which she posted to all herfriends. They posted it to their friends, and they in turn to theirs.'I paid for it,' her e-mail said, 'so you can have it for free.'I find it hard to imagine that the department store named in the e-mailwould behave in such a pig-headed way.But even if apocryphal, the story illustrates the power of theInternet. By the time you read this, tens of thousands of people mayhave baked cookies according to the recipe without paying Dollars 250.And the name of the store chain will have been blackened on computerscreens all over the world. Tim. Jackson@pobox. comBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES:HOME SHOPPING TAKES A TUMBLE FROM ITS TROLLEY: ENTHUSIASTIC PREDICTIONSOF A COUCH-POTATO FUTURE WERE PREMATURE, WRITES WINSTON FLETCHERA funny thing has happened. Home shopping, that supposedlytrail-blazing benefit of interactive television, has fallen out of itssupermarket trolley.Less than a year ago the pundits were predicting a couch-potato futurefor us all. Sitting comfortably in front of our screens, we would surfthe stores and trawl the malls. Never again need we venture into therough, tough world of Marks and Spencer or Sainsbury's. We wouldclick-on, cruise-thru', and our cyber-shopping trollies would be filledby techno-magic.Well, it hasn't happened yet. But is it on its way?The picture is confused as there are two types of televisual homeshopping. First, conventional satellite/cable channels offeringmerchandise in a fairly traditional way. Second, shopping emporia -mostly American - are burgeoning on the Net.The more knowledgeable US home shopping gurus have long been suspiciousof the forecast explosion in their marketplace. QVC, America's largest,highest profile home-shopping channel, mostly sells jewellery (42 percent of its turnover) and clothing (18 per cent). For clothing, thereturn rate is about 40 per cent.A couple of years ago QVC's then retiring chairman, Joseph Segel, saidin a notable speech: 'The number of people tuned to a particularchannel when your advertising runs is likely to be a small fraction ofthe number you could reach with direct mail. The cost of running ashopping channel is much greater than most people realise. Some systemdevelopers and their software programmers assume that consumers areitching to be converted from passive to interactive TV viewers.Certainly there are some people who fit that mould. But I venture tosay that the great American public prefers just to watch television andlet someone else do the work.'In turn, futurologist John Naisbitt's well-informed Trend Letter - apublication understandably keen to embrace almost anything andeverything new under the sun - recently asked: 'Is the much-hyped ageof online shopping about to bloom? Not really.' The same issue of TrendLetter reported that 'merchants on the Internet are reluctant tosolicit credit-card numbers for payment, lest hackers steal accountnumbers' - a little cybernetic difficulty that has by no means beenresolved.Nonetheless, research estimates suggest that 2m online purchases weremade in the US in the last year. That sounds an awful lot until youremember that it equates to a single purchase by less than 1 per centof America's population. And Americans, particularly those living wayout nowhere, have always been catalogue shoppers, so direct marketinghas always been big business in the US.It is a far-flung country, and even with gasolene as cheap as Coke itdoesn't make a lot of sense to drive hundreds of miles for a rubbergrommet. In other words, established home shoppers may just beswitching media, from print to Net - without new shoppers beinginveigled into the couch-potato lifestyle.Where Americans are slow to lead, Europeans are even slower to follow.At the end of 1994 a study of the multimedia marketplace in Europecarried out by leading research group Inteco reported that the demandfor home shopping was non existent. 'No one in the study,' itproclaimed, 'showed any interest in being able to order goodselectronically.'The progress of home shopping in Britain confirms that. QVC startedwith a bang in the UK but sales appear to be stabilising at aboutPounds 50m annually - not a lot with which to run a full-time channeland supply some 300,000 customers.Part of the reason for this disappointing growth is the result, Isuspect, of the hype attached to the phrase 'virtual reality'.Televisual shopping, it is claimed, provides 'virtual reality'. In avirtual reality supermarket you can whiz round the aisles picking up apack of this and a jar of that as you skid past the shelves. It soundsso futuristic, so clever, that we have been seduced into believing itwould be wonderful. But would it?It would certainly be fun once or twice, like a video game. But we allknow what has happened to the sales of video games. The problem is thatvirtual reality really doesn't bear much resemblance to reality.We encounter reality through our five senses: sight, sound, smell,taste and touch. So-called virtual reality offers reality in - at best- two dimensions: sight and sound. Sight is the most important singlesense involved when we go shopping. But it is not the only one.As supermarkets are well aware, smell is all-important. That is whythey put fruit and vegetables at the front of the store, and bake theirown bread. For many products, touch is as important as smell. ('If youdon't want the goods, don't muck 'em about', went the oldcostermongers' injunction, to restrain customers from manhandling theproduce).Paradoxically, it is in the area of sight that virtual reality is leastreal. If Bill Gates, the boss of Microsoft, believes that projectinghuge cyber-blowups of great masterpieces on to his walls will conveyeven a tad of their artistic merit, it is as well he never tried tomajor in aesthetics.But never mind great paintings. Would you even buy fresh meats or fish,or even fruits and vegetables, without seeing them in the flesh? Ifpeople didn't want to inspect the goods carefully and choose thefreshest, why would they shop at the deli counter? The newest Tescostores now have large old-fashioned butcher's sections. And if you wantto inspect groceries before you buy them, why not shop for the lot atone stop?Apart from groceries, the sector that has generated most chatter amongthe marketing classes - but again, little action so far - is cars. (Themarketing classes are not much interested in jewellery - not in sellingit, anyway).Automotive gurus constantly predict that the end of the showroom isnigh: motorists, it is said, will compare and contrast different modelson-screen before selecting their test-drive short-list. And one day,even the test-drive will be taken on-screen.The assumption is that video information is more appealing to motoriststhan printed or personal (showroom) information. Maybe. But feel,comfort, guidance - even smell - are important reasons for showroomvisits, and cannot be duplicated by 'virtual reality'.Which may explain why the only area in which home shopping seems to betaking off is one in which virtual reality is virtually non-existent -the marketing, not of goods, but of services, particularly financialservices.As financial products are, so to speak, invisible and intangible, theyare ideal for telephone selling. While financial service providersincreasingly use direct response television advertisingcost-effectively, their commercials could hardly be described asvirtual reality. Or indeed, in many cases, as reality of any sort.Not that home shopping is not going to grow. It will, but it will beslow and highly specialised. Delivery takes time and costs money. Manypeople, perhaps most, will never feel comfortable with computers.Forget those middle-class parental boasts of brilliantly sophisticatedcomputer-literate kids; think, instead, about all the underprivileged,computer-illiterate kids.Nor is home shopping quite as revolutionary as cyberbuffs believe.Almost exactly a century ago the Victorians were opening up their ownversion of the information superhighway (and with at least as muchhyperbole). The UK postal service, the railways, the telephone and thetelegram were bustin' out all over. Telegrams were described - as newmedia so frequently are described by their sponsors - as 'the boldestadvertisements in modern times.'By the turn of the century, all the great London department stores hadmail-order departments. Harrods, which pioneered home shopping bytelephone, rejoiced in the telephonic address EVERYTHING, LONDON.Whiteley's in Bayswater boasted they could supply anything 'from a pinto an elephant' door-to-door.And the Army and Navy store sped huge mail-order catalogues to itscustomers in every corner of the globe, carrying within their covers acornucopia of sumptuous and succulent merchandise. Moreover, deliverywas often a good deal faster and cheaper than it generally would betoday.Home shopping may yet be the bonanza of the future. But I wouldn't betmy Tesco shares on it.Winston Fletcher is chairman of the UK advertising agency DelaneyFletcher Bozell.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MANAGEMENT & BUSINESS FEATURES:KICKING OFF THIS US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION YEAR* Kicking off this US presidential election year, the Doonesbury TownHall site ( www. doonesbury. com/ main. html), based on Garry Trudeau'sconsistently brilliant strip cartoon, looks a fine way of keeping tabson the campaign as it unfolds. The site (slogan: 'Join the fightagainst cluelessness') has a daily news briefing and links to thePoliticsUSA resource, as well as a chat hall and a straw poll. Topnotch.* As access increases to the former Soviet Union and eastern andcentral Europe, the Prague-based Open Media Research Institute (www.omri. cz) - a successor to Radio Free Europe - offers useful resourcesincluding a daily digest of economic issues affecting the region.* A new site from United Airlines (www. ual. com) is an example of howa primarily corporate marketing site can be user-friendly andinformative. Very well done, nice graphics, not too much text per pageand easy to navigate around.* The Taiwan Business Directory (http://business. com. tw) is asearchable guide to products and companies from Taiwan. It's indexed bycompany name and, comprehensively, by product classification. There areeight contact entries alone under the heading Food and using thesub-category Soy Sauce.* Empower (www. megalinx. net/empower) is 'Black America's Magazine forthe Information Age', with a newswire, articles about the affirmativeaction debate, and a good business profile feature, focusing onAfrican-American achievers. Stephen McGookin steve@mcgook. demon. co.ukBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS & LEISURE:GREEN TURNS DARK FOR THE STRUGGLING GOLF CLUB PROPeter Alliss recently observed that the average club golfer expects thelocal professional to play like Nick Faldo, teach like John Jacobs andbe as good a shopkeeper as Marks and Spencer.Very few club members realise how much of an endangered species thenon- tour golf professional is about to become, especially in Britain,the home of golf. Traditionally, the pro has received a small retainerfrom his club but earned the bulk of his living selling equipment andgiving lessons.Yet selling equipment to club members is becoming virtually impossibleas the tiniest of retailers strives to compete against specialist chainstores such as American Golf Discount and Nevada Bob's.'The members don't realise what a financial strain it is to carry thestock on a big overdraft and they can be such fickle customers,' saysHaydn Darrell, the pro at the small Devon club of Sidmouth. 'I'll seethem turn up to play with a new set of clubs and I won't even have hadthe chance to match the price they've paid from one of the big chainstores.'Darrell's experience is echoed nationally. A recent report from thespecialist Golf Research Group predicted that the 2,400 retail outletssupplying the UK golf equipment market will have shrunk to only 200 to300 shops within a year or two.'The traditional pro shop just cannot survive,' says Colin Hegarty,head of GRG. 'The average gross turnover is around Pounds 110,000 ayear and they cannot stock the shop and survive on that kind ofvolume.'His figures show that the bigger retail outlets are growing fast, witha matching shrinkage at the smaller end. Hegarty says the club pro hastwo options: 'Get out of the business quickly: it's better to take abig loss than stay and starve to death. Or become an Alan Walker.'Walker is a former club pro - 10 years at the coalface - who realisedhe was a doomed species in a thriving industry, so he now has ahigh-volume shop adjoining his Warren Park driving range in Essex, plusa management company looking after a nearby pay-and-play course.Walker says that club pros have lost their retail business'frighteningly quickly. Five years ago it was a Pounds 130,000 averageturnover with a 35 per cent margin. That's all over.'His own shop turns over slightly more than Pounds 1m a year, but abranch of American Golf Discount has just opened on Walker's doorstep.'We're being hurt,' he admits. 'Teaching alone isn't the answer toreplacing lost income. Firstly, statistics show that the British arethe worst golfers in the world in terms of readiness to takeinstruction. Secondly, it's too seasonal. Who's having a lesson today?'He looked out of his office window as an arctic snow shower blastedacross the 14th green. Few issues currently occupy the ProfessionalGolfer's Association as intensely as the livelihoods of its 3,500members. As a result, a PGA working party is radically re-thinking theraison d'etre of the pro.It doesn't help that while the public image of the golf professional isNick Faldo or Ernie Els, superstars like those are a light year awayfrom the everyday work of the pro at the local club.When the PGA wanted a leading figure for a publicity campaign, it foundFaldo's fee unaffordable, so ended up using Nigel Mansell, one of thegame's better-known amateurs.Alan Walker is a committee member at the PGA and is deeply involved inthe process of reviewing future direction. As one experienced insiderput it: 'We have to stop training people for futures they are nevergoing to have. They're not going to be Woosnam or Norman, and nowthey're not going to be a successful shopkeeper, either.'Walker acknowledges the problems. 'At the end of the day we're allfailed players,' he says. 'I went into the game thinking I could playand was going to spend my days on the course winning tournaments, andI've ended up an accountant.' Later this month the PGA opens an Pounds8m training academy at its headquarters, The Belfry, the hotel coursein the English Midlands that has hosted several Ryder Cups.Leisure management and course architecture are much more important nowthan learning how to spend several hours repairing a persimmon-headeddriver for a tiny fee.The qualifications dished out at The Belfry will be equivalent to adegree. 'We've always been reluctant retailers, and the tour is for atiny minority, of whom 75 per cent won't cover their costs,' saysWalker. 'The jobs we've got to aim for are those of actually managingthe facilities, which in the past have gone to food and beveragespecialists or greenkeepers.'In the future, if your local club pro can't drive a computer and workthe local media, forget admiring his short game around the green.'If the pro can re-engineer himself to survive, what of the shop? We maynot buy much, but which weekend golfer doesn't enjoy a mooch around hisclub shop's over-stocked shelves?'It's history,' says Colin Hegarty. 'Marks and Spencer are alreadymoving into clothing in a huge way and the big chains will be sellingall the clubs and equipment. A starter's hut where you can buy a gloveand a ball - if you've forgotten to bring them - is the most likelyoutcome.'1995 UK Equipment Survey: Golf Research Group, Pounds 495. Tel:0181-987-9950. Fax: 0181-995-1573.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS & LEISURE:YEAR OF THE MILLENNIAL RE-THINK   By COLIN AMERYAt least 1995 ended on a note of pure wisdom. For once, the old Englishsystem of independent representative groups of well-informedindividuals appointed by the crown to guide our affairs workedbrilliantly, with the millennium commissioners proving themselves worththeir salt by refusing to allocate national lottery money for theproposed Cardiff Bay opera house.For too long Lord Crickhowell and his opera house trustees have beenled by the nose by London architectural groupies and admirers of thedesigns of Zaha Hadid, who won the competition to design the proposedopera house.The common sense of the minister, Virginia Bottomley, and hercommissioners will save Wales the embarrassment of a design that is notsupported by the people of Wales and is already dated.A Cardiff Bay opera house as a new home for the Welsh National Opera isa good idea, and no doubt a large theatre will be built there. Themistake was for the opera house trustees to believe they had to buildsomething approved by a narrow segment of the internationalarchitectural mafia.The jury for the competition was unrepresentative and innocent,seemingly prepared to let Miss Hadid's quaintly modern period piece goahead even though she had never built a serious building. Miss Hadid isreally a talented futurist painter - her work would have been avantgarde in turn of the century Russia. Today it is labelled'uncompromising' and 'exciting'. It is neither. The trendy Londonchatterers who influence people like Lord Crickhowell should be seenfor what they are: rearguard types trying to protect a brieflyfashionable designer. But Miss Hadid is no genius.The tragedy of the inevitable row about Cardiff Bay is that the failureof Miss Hadid's design will be seen as a triumph for the philistines.It is actually a dated, awkward design that only got this far throughendless lobbying. The millennium commissioners, who distribute part ofthe proceeds of the UK national lottery, have called the bluff of thetrendies.Sensible opera house trustees should look at the newest opera houses inthe world; meet their architects and managers; and choose someone withexperience. The trustees must start again with a good new architect.Life is tough, but Virginia Bottomley is tougher, and in this case sheand her commissioners are right.Last year, national lottery money gave a fillip to the UK'sarchitectural profession. The turnover of the British constructionindustry should benefit by some 5 per cent or so in the years to themillennium. It is large-scale projects that attract attention, but some90 per cent of lottery grants are for projects of less than Pounds 1m.Yet 1995 saw construction still in recession and architects onlybeginning to see green shoots of recovery fertilised by lottery cash.The secretary of state for the environment, John Gummer, belatedlyrecognised the value of towns. His new planning policy guidance notes,to be issued early this year, will stress the value of mixeddevelopments. That is an almost complete volte face for the entireplanning system. If he is serious, Gummer will presumably bere-educating the entire planning profession at the new University ofGreenwich.He will have to start with the Corporation of the City of London which,since the inspired but disastrous experiment of the Barbican, hasabandoned any pretence that the City is more than a Square Mile ofoffices. The recent announcement of two big office schemes in EC4, andthe decision to encourage Mitsubishi to go back to the drawing board onthe Paternoster site, means the City may be in danger of becoming ahorizontal version of Canary Wharf.The opportunity at Paternoster to build a mixed development, givingMitsubishi the chance to build as many offices as it likes on, say,London Wall, must not be missed. In turn, the chance to move the Museumof London to a marvellous site next to St Paul's should be grasped, andwhy not have hotels and residential accommodation overlooking Wren'swonder?Architects in 1996 need to learn to be different kinds of animals.Those like Miss Hadid and Sir Richard Rogers (imminent adviser to thenew Labour party) who are wedded to dogma, are now old fashioned.Architects like Sir Michael Hopkins, Sir Norman Foster and RichardMacCormac are the leaders of the profession, and also admired by thepublic.That is a breakthrough, and one that has come about because the publicare under-estimated by architects at their peril. The public - you andme - understands the difference between quality and a dead cow informaldehyde. Virginia Bottomley and her commissioners understand thedifference, too. In 1996, quality and common sense may replace dogmaand fashionable nonsense. I live in hope.Colin AmeryBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:UK COMPANIESTOMORROWBOARD MEETINGS: Final: Throgmorton Pfd Inc TstTHURSDAY JANUARY 4BOARD MEETINGS: Final: Warner Estates Interims: Abbey DruckFRIDAY JANUARY 5 COMPANY MEETINGS: MMT Computing, 14, Angel Gate, CityRoad, EC, 2.00 Company meetings are annual general meetings unlessotherwise stated.Please note: Reports and accounts are not normally available untilapproximately six weeks after the board meeting to approve thepreliminary results.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS & LEISURE:MAN OF MUSIC WITH PERIOD APPEAL: ANDREW CLARK TALKS TO THE CONDUCTORWHO CHALLENGES OUR ASSUMPTIONS AND OPENS OUR EARS TO THE PASTThis looks like Roger Norrington's year. He opens and closes it inSalzburg, conducting the Vienna Philharmonic there later this month andreturning in December to rehearse Mozart's Mitridate for the 1997festival. In between there will be Berlioz with the LondonPhilharmonic, Dvorak in Boston, Henze in Basle, Elgar in Washington,Beethoven in Chicago, Nicholas Maw at the Proms and Brahms in Vienna -not forgetting three European tours with his own period-instrumentorchestra, the London Classical Players.Did someone say Norrington was a period specialist? If so, the periodranges pretty wide - from 1600 to 2000. That distinguishes him frommost early music pioneers. And he uses the same forensic skills tounravel Vaughan Williams and Part as he does for Beethoven and Bruckner- which sets him apart from other high-profile conductors. No Britishmusician has done more to challenge our assumptions or open our ears tothe past. At 61, Roger Norrington fully deserves the internationallimelight.He clearly enjoys it. The early music revolution, he says, is not aboutperiod instruments or a particular type of repertoire. 'It's a habit ofmind. Even if I didn't know anything about early music, I would stillbe the conductor I am now. I just can't look at a piece of musicwithout taking it back into the garage and stripping it down, findingwhat the hell is going on and putting it back together again. Vroom]'Earthy enthusiasm has always been a Norrington hallmark. It inspiredhis singers and orchestra at Kent Opera, where his 13 years as musicdirector gave him a vast repertory and an intimate understanding of howa company works. Enthusiasm has also been the key to his 'Experience'weekends, where he and the LCP discuss, rehearse and perform acomposer's work to the amused enlightenment of all. And it continues topermeate his day-to-day contact with conventional orchestras.'You don't often come across that kind of enthusiasm for the way themusic is realised,' said a member of the Basle Symphony Orchestra afterNorrington's latest visit. 'His contact with the players is amazinglylively - the orchestra had a great time. He got a humming performance,the music really took off.'Longstanding colleagues say Norrington has mellowed over the years. Hehas had two operations for cancer and become a father again: his wife,the choreographer Kay Lawrence, and their two-year-old son often travelwith him. 'But when it comes to the music, he's just as strict anddemanding as ever,' says an LCP stalwart. 'He has an incontrovertibleidea of how it should be. His point is that this is real music writtenby real people, and he gets that 'immediate' element across. He wantsto get round the traditional interpretation, demythologise the music,remove the waffle and ballast.'That is one of the reasons why Norrington now enjoys such a highprofile outside the UK. Long popular in the US and Italy, he has onlyrecently begun to make his presence felt in the Austro-Germanheartland. He says CDs have had a proselytising influence - 'they'resinking into the subconscious. People there are getting used to theidea that there are things they need to know about. Despite my roughGerman, the orchestras have been very responsive.'Norrington has not forgotten the UK. A former choral scholar atCambridge, he lives in Berkshire, organises the LCP's schedule with acouple of helpers and conducts 10 programmes a year with the LondonPhilharmonic. He says he is perfectly happy to work with moderninstruments. 'If you're changing the score - because many of thepublished scores are inaccurate - and you change the seating, thetempo, the phrasing, the light and shade, the Weltanschauung, italready makes a huge difference. But once they get used to the style,they may hesitantly say 'We're doing everything else, shouldn't we dropthe vibrato?'. That happened with the LPO, and the result wasabsolutely marvellous. As they begin to trust you, they realise you'renot going to turn up in a gown and mortar board. They see you're a realmusician.'Norrington's interest in historically aware performance began in theearly 1960s, when he went round the churches of Europe performingSchutz with his own amateur choir. There was no Schutz style: he had toinvent his own. From there it was but a short step to Bach, Telemannand Handel - and on to Gluck and Haydn, Beethoven and Berlioz, Schubertand Schumann. The journey has now reached Wagner and Bruckner, and theresults astonish Norrington as much as they do his admirers.In his LCP recording of the Meistersinger overture, Norrington knockstwo to three minutes off the standard performance length. 'I keepthinking that with the next thing we do, there won't be quite the samethings to discover,' he says. 'A year ago, we didn't know how Wagnerwould sound on period instruments. I thought the tempo wouldn't be abig question, it would be a matter of just hearing the same music onthese instruments. Then I started my research. In Ueber das Dirigieren,Wagner writes that when he conducted the Meistersinger overture, itlasted a few seconds over eight minutes. I thought wow] What will itsound like if we do that?'It was a revelation - less pompous and more humorous than usual, with aspring-in-the-step in the climaxes. There were similar results inBruckner's Third Symphony, which Norrington conducted at the LinzBruckner festival last autumn. He opted for the first version - the oneBruckner never heard, with none of the 'improvements' carried out byhis pupils for later performing versions. And he delved into Bruckner'sown recorded comments, which include references to a polka in thefinale.'What do most conductors do? They play it like a dirge. But if Brucknersays it's a polka, it's a polka. So I take it at a steady polka speed,which makes it sound like a dance - and the chorale suddenly becomessingable. All I'm trying to do is put the record straight, to believein the past. You don't set out to prove people wrong - you start as aninnocent, asking questions, and you stumble across these glaringlyobvious things.'Norrington says he deals with every composer's music in the same way:'I feel it, I get as much information as I can about it, and then I doit. I want to obey both sides - the heart and the head, they're inconstant creative tension. You can have the best intentions to followwhat the composer wants, but after a couple of days in rehearsal youmay find you're doing it quite differently - and that's how it shouldbe. In the end, feeling is king. It has to be your own vision.'For the past two summers he has conducted at the Rossini festival inPesaro. Was there much for him to contribute there? 'The management waskeen I should continue de-cloying Rossini - no high notes at the end,cadenzas as written, decorations with taste, tempi not too slow. Hedoesn't need to be livened up, but there's more allure in the phrasingthan he's given credit for. He's usually hijacked into 19th-centurystyle. But Zelmira was written in 1822. He went to Vienna and metBeethoven. These are fully classical works, in the sense that Beethovenis fully classical.'Norrington's journey into the past is far from finished. He visitsPrague in May to give the first historically aware performances ofSmetana's Ma Vlast. Given the chance, he would also take the LCP to theFestspielhaus at Bayreuth - 'the right orchestra in the right hall'. Hewants to play Tchaikovsky in St Petersburg, to do an 'Experience'weekend on Berg, and to conduct Lulu, Les Troyens and Meistersinger inthe opera house. He dreams of reviving the Early Opera Project, withwhich he toured Monteverdi's Orfeo in Italy in the 1980s. 'Historicalstaging is in the same state as early music was in 1960. The materialis all there. It just needs a mad entrepreneur with the right theatre.'Norrington admits that much of what he does is guess-work: it is ahazard of the road he has chosen to take. He may go wildly wrong attimes - that is the result of his risk-taking - but none of hisperformances has ever been dull or routine. Long may it stay that way.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS & LEISURE:TELEVISIONLocal heroes (7.30pm BBC2) is a little hymn to English eccentricity,both in style and content. Adam Hart-Davies is a one-man store oftrivia (or general knowledge as it used to called in less ruthlesslymercenary days) about inventions of the past including laughing-gas (Ialways thought invented by Humphry Davy out of sheer boredom withBristol; eminently likely) and a spanking-machine.For those who remember Richard Harris' play Outside Edge, first onstage then on television with the incomparable Maureen Lipman, thesitcom with the same name hasbeensomething of a disappointment. Itscharacters verge on the caricatured and lack that consistency that evensitcom creations should have. Still, a show that avoids aping Americancomedy and even takes cricket as its theme is worth a plaudatorychuckle (8.30pm ITV).Great Ormond Street continues its gripping survey of the greatchildren's hospital (8pm BBC1); and Wild Britain (8pm C4) is a repeatabout the bramble bush and its dependent wildlife.Martin HoyleBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ARTS & LEISURE:TALES FROM ARABIA: THEATRE   By SIMON READEThere is no better place to tell a spell-binding story than in thetheatre, especially around Christmas, when we are at our mostchildlike. This is the motivation behind Battersea Arts Centre'sambitious current programme 'Telling Tales'. Alongside new Christianfables and fresh glosses on the European tales of the Brothers Grimm,it is refreshing to experience the contrasting oral tradition ofPersia: Alf Laylah Wa Laylah - Arabian Nights: The Tales ofSheherazade.The excitement starts when you enter the modest studio to find itre-formed. We sit cross-legged in-the-round, raised above the courtyardarcade beneath, peering into a shimmering arena which transforms fromking's bedroom to bustling bazaar, the banks of the Nile and the plainsbetween Cairo and Basra in the tiniest flicker of our mind's eye. 'Thishot land called Egypt' is conjured from nothing more than a fistful ofsand draining through a woman's fingers. Michael Gordon's direction andLiz Cooke's design create a compelling environment for their dedicatedcompany of ten focused performers. 'Listen,' they command: 'Listen.'It is the whim of King Shahrayar to execute his virgin brides afteronly one night, as a means of purging his kingdom of unfaithful Woman.He scapegoats them because of his own self-loathing: he murdered hisfirst queen in a fit of ill-founded jealousy. A strong-willed princess,the Sheherazade, is determined to end this needless sacrifice, andvolunteers to be his bride, but only after she has told her sister abedtime story - beautifully in Arabic - which intrigues the King. Soshe tells him more.The stories selected by the company are not of the Boys Own 'Ali Babaand the Forty Thieves' variety, but all craftily develop theproto-feminist theme. Each tale has jealous husbands wrongfullymurdering their wives for imagined infidelity, or women enduring sexand childbirth, and even broach pre-ordained marriage. Thisinterpretation of the exotic Arabic world of the Middle Ages as oneriddled with miscarriages of natural justice against women, pursues aclear agenda, but not one which is worn on the sumptuous sleeves of thewomen. The stories are elliptical, graceful and enchanting.There are stories within stories, tales chasing their own tales, richlyinterwoven like a magic carpet. The 75 minutes of storytelling does notonly reinvigorate a moribund king, but revivifies the wider audience.Suitable for older children, it could run for 1001 nights.Simon ReadeAt the BAC, London until January 7 (0171-223 2223).Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:AN ABSENCE OF INFLATION: THE FEELGOOD FACTOR IS SET TO REMAIN ELUSIVEIN 1996, SAY MARTIN WEALE AND GARRY YOUNG   By MARTIN WEALEBy most measures, 1995 was a good year for the UK economy. Inflationremained subdued, output grew by more than 2.5 per cent, unemploymentdeclined by more than 200,000 and government borrowing fell, albeit byless than was expected at the beginning of the year. In addition, MrKenneth Clarke, the chancellor, was able to take a penny off the basicrate of income tax and cut interest rates by a quarter of 1 percentagepoint.This very favourable mix of growth and inflation is rare by Britishhistorical standards and, while we think it likely to continue, thereare risks that the economy will not be as successful in 1996.The most striking aspect of the present economic situation is thevirtual absence of domestically generated inflation at a time ofrelatively fast growth and falling unemployment. This is partly areflection of the extent of disinflationary pressure in the UK labourmarket. Since the peak in unemployment in 1993, wage increases haveshown no sign of picking up and real wages have scarcely grown. Thismeans that the benefits of increased productivity have beenappropriated into profit margins. These have risen substantially:profits as a proportion of gross domestic product - at 36 per cent in1994 - are higher than in the early 1970s.One important question in present circumstances is whether thesurprising lack of growth in wage rates is evidence - as claimed by theTreasury - that the sustainable rate of unemployment has fallen. In the1980s and early 1990s it seemed that this figure was about 8 per centof the labour force. Certainly, when the unemployment rate fell to 5.5per cent by 1990, there was a sharp acceleration in inflation which wasonly squeezed out by the rise in unemployment during the lastrecession.Assuming productivity growth of 2 per cent a year, the rate of increasein wages could probably rise from its existing level of 3.25 per centto 4.5 per cent per annum and still be consistent with annual inflationof 2.5 per cent and very high profit margins. This suggests thatunemployment at 8 per cent is still above its sustainable rate.It would be premature, however, to assume from this that thesustainable rate of unemployment has indeed fallen. Unit labour costspicked up noticeably in 1995 and in manufacturing were growing inOctober at an annual rate of 4 per cent. This probably reflects thestagnation of productivity associated with the slowdown in output. Butit may be an early indication that unemployment is reaching itssustainable level.If the sustainable unemployment rate has fallen, it will be possiblefor output to grow for some time to come at more than its underlyingtrend rate without generating inflationary pressure. This does notguarantee that the chancellor's inflation target of 2.5 per cent by theend of the present parliament will be met - the weakness of domesticprices has been offset by increases in import prices arising fromsterling's depreciation of close to 7 per cent through 1995.We expect the underlying inflation rate by the end of 1996 to beslightly over 3 per cent. A better way of putting this is to say thatwe think there is only a 40 per cent chance of meeting the inflationtarget. There is also a risk that inflation will be substantiallyhigher if faster growth in import prices feeds through to domesticprices.This assessment depends on the outlook for demand, which appears tohave stalled in the second half of 1995, leading to fears that theoverall rate of growth in 1996 will be considerably slower. This timelast year the National Institute forecast growth of 2.7 per cent for1995, and this is likely to be very close to the eventual out-turn. For1996, we are predicting growth of 2.4 per cent, much lower than theTreasury's forecast of 3 per cent.Our forecast assumes that continued weakness in domestic demand will beoffset by higher export demand, helped by the fall in sterling in 1995.Individual monthly figures are erratic, but it was gratifying to seehigher exports in November as an early indication of this trend.We do not expect much of a feelgood factor to develop in 1996. This ispartly due to the very slow growth in wages.There is at present much discussion about whether the economy will belifted by a surge in consumer spending, with the suggestion thatspending is depressed by consumer gloom inspired by fears aboutemployment prospects. But the truth is that consumers are behavingperfectly normally. It looks as though they will have saved about 9 percent of their income in 1995 and we are expecting a similar figure for1996. This is lower than in any year since 1971, except during the boomperiod of 1986 to 1990 - and we doubt consumers are ready for a bingelike that of the late 1980s.In spite of the pause in growth, we expect a continuing fall inclaimant unemployment to about 1.9m, or just under 7 per cent of thelabour force. This is partly due to changes in the administration ofbenefits. While we expect some acceleration in wage growth, this willbe consistent with a downwards drift in the inflation rate as the rateof increase in import prices subsides. Profit margins will stop rising,but there will be no great pressure on them.The main risk of this forecast is that demand will be weaker thanexpected as a consequence of companies adjusting to an unintendedbuild-up of stocks, tight fiscal policy and possible weakness in demandfor British exports. In this event, inflationary pressure should weakenfurther and we would expect to see cuts in interest rates to maintainthe economy's momentum as the next general election approaches.In the longer term, we expect these favourable trends to continue. Theimproved picture in the labour market will be backed up by slightlyfaster productivity growth as the economy starts to benefit from therecent expansion of higher education and, we hope, the more stablemacroeconomic environment established since sterling left the Europeanexchange rate mechanism. We can see the growth rate accelerating to 2.8per cent and unemployment falling to 1.2m. This would not exactly be aneconomic miracle, but it would at least make a pleasant change from theyears of stop-go.Martin Weale is director of the National Institute of Economic andSocial Research, a UK research institute, and a member of theTreasury's panel of independent economic forecasters. Garry Young is aresearch fellow at the institute.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:NEITHER BOOM NOR BUST: CONDITIONS ARE NOT RIGHT FOR SHARPLY LOWER USINTEREST RATES, SAYS STEPHEN S. ROACHThe financial markets always want more of a good thing. And that seemsto be the case in looking to 1996. It is fashionable to worry that theUS economy is soft and getting softer, and that inflation is headingdramatically lower. In such an environment, the Federal Reserve isexpected to reduce short-term interest rates aggressively. Moreover,with the budget deal of a lifetime finally thought to be at hand, mostforecasters expect a dramatic further rally in the bond market.Needless to say, such a scenario hardly poses a threat to the gloriousbull market of 1995.Our prognosis for the US economy in 1996 is at odds with many of thesepresumptions. I expect neither a boom nor a bust. Real gross domesticproduct is likely to expand in a 2.5 per cent to 3 per cent range -essentially in line with what I believe to be the US economy'sunderlying long-term growth potential. The case for upside growthsurprises is relatively straightforward. It is based on solid supportfrom three important macroeconomic forces: real income generation (atpresent running above trend at 3.7 per cent); interest rates (which arenear historic lows); and the currency (which is vastly undervalued).In such a constructive environment, I expect the US economy to showsurprisingly broad-based gains in 1996. With mortgage interest ratesdown about 200 basis points over the past year, the turnround in theresidential construction sector should continue well into the new year.And there should be no let-up in US business's record-setting boom incapital spending.This is a structural phenomenon - triggered mainly by spectacularproductivity breakthroughs - that should continue to be surprisinglyimmune to the whims of the business cycle.Upside surprises in the export sector can also be expected, reflectingthe combined effects of a supercompetitive US economy and more diversetrade flows. The strong impetus for export growth in 1995 - with unitvolume growth accelerating from 4.8 per cent in the first quarter to10.6 per cent in the third - stands in sharp contrast to widespreadfears that there will be an export collapse in a sluggish globaleconomy.The good news is that the US is less dependent on its traditionaltrading partners: sales to Europe and Japan have fallen to 34 per centof overall US exports, down sharply from 42 per cent at the end of1990.Finally, reports of the demise of the American consumer are vastlyexaggerated. With consumption well supported by income generation, I donot share the widespread conviction that households are being draggeddown by excess debts. The ratio of annual debt servicing expenses toincome stands at present at 16.8 per cent, well below the highs hit inthe latter half of the 1980s. While I do not expect a consumer buyingbinge, the forecast of 2.5 per cent growth in real consumption through1996 is sufficient to account for over 1.5 percentage points of realGDP growth.The inflation prognosis is particularly intriguing. While I continue tobelieve the cost-efficient, productivity-led US recovery remainsintact, I am now of the view that the inflation rate is slowly movingup from its cyclical lows. The consumer price index rose 2.9 per centin 1995, up 0.3 percentage points from the low of 1994, and a littlemore acceleration in 1996 is expected, to an annual rate of 3.2 percent.I do not share the view that price stability is now at hand. The bulkof the disinflation of the 1990s has been a by-product of anextraordinary compression of labour costs. With productivity andcorporate profitability surging, with the unemployment rate at 5.6 percent, and with real compensation virtually stagnant for over a decade,I do not accept the notion that a submissive workforce has no choicebut to capitulate further on wages.In spite of the supposed threat of the dollar-a-day Chinese worker,this strain of productivity enhancement has now gone far enough. Thedays of asking the labour force to keep sacrificing for the noble causeof disinflation appear to be largely over. The risk of a backlash fromworkers is a growing concern - one that might have an important impacton the sociology, politics and economics of the US for years to come.As for the Fed, it is hard to accept the widespread conviction than anaggressive monetary easing is now at hand.Given the outlook for the economy and inflation, the urgency for afurther dramatic easing just is not there. Granted, the central bankmay offer a token easing in the aftermath of a budget accord. But ifmarket expectations of sharply lower short-term interest rates wererealised, the Fed would have to throw its traditional caution to thewind. If it takes its commitment to price stability seriously, and Ibelieve it does, it is difficult to imagine the Fed turning away fromthe restrictive policy bias that worked so well in the 1980s.The budget is obviously the wild card. The problem is that it is stillbusiness as usual in Washington. The best we are likely to see is aplan based on back-loaded spending cuts, front-loaded tax cuts,immunity for social security and dubious economic assumptions (forexample, that the perfect path of trend growth, low inflation anddeclining interest rates continues forever). I have come to thereluctant conclusion that the same creative mathematicians who gave usGramm-Rudman I and II and the great budget accord of 1990 are hard atwork today. Credible deficit reduction remains a dream, not acertainty.Adding it all up, it is hard to be thrilled about US Treasury bonds.Everything good is just about priced into the market. On the chancethat a budget deal is struck - even if it is a classic smoke-and-mirrors compromise - a final bull run to bond yields of 5 1/2 per centis possible.But as reality sinks in, and the economy and inflation fail to conformto market hopes, I continue to believe that the next big move in bondsis back towards an equilibrium level of 7 per cent. I expect such acorrection to take place by mid-year, at the latest.The author is chief economist and director of global economic analysisat Morgan StanleyBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:WAYS TO VIEW SUPPORT FOR STEELMAKING PLANTFrom Mr George Becker.Sir, In the US we have been reading with interest the reports thatBritish Steel is seeking to close an Irish steel plant on account ofsubsidies that the Irish government is to provide.In the US British Steel is seeking one of the biggest subsidies fromthe taxpayer ever recorded in order to operate a steel plant inAlabama, which British Steel is proposing to build in partnership withan American and a Japanese company.Support worth Dollars 250m is being sought from - and granted by - thestate legislature of Alabama in order to persuade British Steel and itstwo partners to open the steel plant in the state. If built, the plantwill directly threaten the jobs of at least 3,500 steelworkers in otherparts of the country.Without entering into the merits of the Irish steel plant's case, wefind it puzzling that British Steel is so hostile to subsidies inEurope and so ravenous for them in the US.Transatlantic trade and co-operation can not be built on this kind oftilted playing field.George Becker, international president, United Steelworkers of America,Five Gateway Centre, Pittsburgh, PA 15222, USBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:CANADIAN PEOPLE CAUGHT IN THE TRAPPER'S SNAREFrom Ms Carla Bennett.Sir, Thank you for Bernard Simon's comprehensive article ('Hunting fora kinder kill', December 13). The trap research compound nearVegreville is a ploy that illustrates how far the Canadian governmentand the fur industry will go to preserve this barbaric industry.The fur industry professes to champion Canadian native people, but ithas been the most destructive force in their history. It has exploitedthem, their culture and their way of life. Native people do notprocess, sell or store furs but are at the bottom of the fur industrychain.Because of the sympathy people feel towards the plight of the Canadiannative people, the Canadian government and the fur industry arepromoting the myth that trapping is culturally and economically centralto the native people.Fewer than 50 per cent of native homes are fully serviced with sewerageand water, native infant mortality is 60 per cent higher than theaverage among other Canadians, and 70 per cent of natives have not hada high school education.Fur trapping has not and will not relieve these problems. It willperpetuate them.Carla Bennett, senior writer, People for the Ethical Treatment ofAnimals, PO Box 42516, Washington DC, USBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:BREWING UP CONTROVERSYFrom Mr Joe Grahame.Sir, I feel that your front page article 'Che beer leaves Cubansfoaming' (December 22) is unfair. The project was created to help Cubaexport beer, modernise its brewing sector and draw attention to theUS's embargo of the island.Che beer's success is due to its distinctive taste and CCC's effectivemarketing campaign. Unfortunately, some people have chosen to undermineour efforts by stirring up controversy.Joe Grahame, Corporacion Cerveza (Europe), Bouverie House, 154 FleetStreet, London EC4A 2DQBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:DIAGNOSING MIDDLE-CLASS ANGSTFrom Prof Peter Curwen.Sir, In his otherwise excellent article on middle-class insecurity('Bang go the great expectations', December 27), John Plender is surelyincorrect in claiming that an occupational pension is 'not an asset atall'.For the great majority of members of occupational pension schemes, thepension is tied to the salary earned during the years immediately priorto retirement and is unaffected by whether or not the company pays itsfull contribution in every year.It is certainly true that the benefits could be improved werepension-fund surpluses to be used for that purpose, but the basicpayment is secure and does indeed form a substantial asset for thepensioner.The whole point about personal pensions, which yield direct ownershiprights, is that whereas the benefits are not tied to salary, and may bemuch greater than under an occupational scheme, the risk element isalso much greater and hence the pensioner cannot rely upon the size ofthe asset.It is most unlikely that members of occupational pension schemes areoverly concerned about being 'disenfranchised', although they mostcertainly detest those 'bosses' who manipulate their own pensions forpersonal advantage.Insofar that 'frustrated expectations' are the cause of 'middle-classangst', it is not negative equity which is of direct concern since, asJohn Plender notes, this has affected relatively few middle-classhouseholds, but rather the possibility of falling house prices.This is a very new phenomenon, and often accompanied by greatdifficulty in achieving a sale, but it has no parallel in respect ofoccupational pensions since their value is unknown prior to retirement.Professor Peter Curwen, Policy Research Centre, Sheffield BusinessSchool, Hallam University, Sheffield Science Park, Howard Street,Sheffield S1 2LXBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:OBSTACLES FACING THE SPREAD OF DEMOCRACYFrom Ms Philippa Rann.Sir, Martin Wolf's piece on whether democracies are growing in numberand influence, and to what extent democracies are less warlike thanautocracies ('Mightier than the sword', December 28) reminds me ofdiscussions 30 years ago on whether history moves inexorably in thedirection of communism, and to what extent communist governments woulddecrease international tensions.There are indeed powerful 'forces that are driving countries towardsrepresentative political institutions', but there are equally powerfulforces undermining democracies from within. Democracies have been votedout, and there is no evidence that the increasing gap between rich andpoor will not weaken many democracies.It is curious that Protestant societies were the first to nourishdemocratic institutions, and that no non-Protestant society hassustained democracy for longer than 70 years. There is nothingautomatic about progress, and nothing inexorable about the direction inwhich history will go: that will depend on the choices each of usmakes.Philippa Rann, Advance: Management Training, 58 Ridgway Road, Farnham,Surrey GU9 8NSBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:WHEN POLITICS REPLACES POLICYBritain's general election campaign is under way in earnest. Thedefection from the Conservatives to the Liberal Democrats of Miss EmmaNicholson could not have been a more potent reminder of the fragilityof Mr John Major's government. The prime minister's parliamentarymajority is now down, in effect, to three. Further deaths or defectionscould soon eliminate it entirely.Mr Major appears determined to defer the election until the lastpossible date in the spring of 1997, relying if necessary on thesupport of the Ulster Unionists to sustain him in any vote ofconfidence. Privately, opposition leaders admit that he may wellsucceed in that objective. But, amid rumours of further defections,ministers equally are obliged to acknowledge they can no longer becertain of the parliamentary arithmetic. An autumn election is now areal possibility if not yet a probability.The prime minister would be wise to pay close attention to the messageof Miss Nicholson's defection. Since his leadership victory lastsummer, Mr Major has been too anxious to appease his opponents byspeaking the language of the Eurosceptic right of the Tory party.Whatever her personal motives for joining Mr Paddy Ashdown's LiberalDemocrats, Miss Nicholson's charge that the government has beendeserting the political centre ground finds a dangerous echo amongvoters.Rhetoric calculated to appeal to the more hardline Conservativeactivists will not recover for Mr Major the support of the lesscommitted voters who will decide the outcome of the election. Mr Blairhas learned one of the golden rules of British politics - elections arenot won from the extremes of left or right but from the centre.Gruelling businessEither way, the looming campaign promises to be a gruelling andunedifying business. Politics, it seems, leaves little room these daysfor policy. The normal business of government has been suspended. MrMajor's legislative programme is designed above all to minimisecontroversy within his own party and to highlight areas of differencewith Labour. Mr Tony Blair meanwhile concentrates on inflictingtactical defeats on the government at Westminster. Those expectingLabour to unfold a detailed blueprint for government are likely to bedisappointed.As they make their promises and level their charges in the scramble forvotes, however, Messrs Major, Blair and Ashdown should pause for amoment to reflect on a more worrying feature of British political life.Politicians of all parties have rarely been held in lower publicesteem. They have themselves, mostly, to blame.Wider developmentsIt is true that wider developments have contributed to a generalweakening of faith in the ability of politicians to 'solve' nationalproblems. Global markets have delineated more clearly the limits ofeconomic independence. The necessary sharing of sovereignty in Europehas robbed Westminster of other pretensions. But to acknowledge suchtrends is not to exonerate the politicians.The important gap is not that between the limits imposed by the harshrealities of modern life and the unreasonable demands of the voters.The real disillusion stems from the gulf between promises andperformance. If politicians more readily acknowledged the constraints,the voters would be more willing to adjust their expectations. Instead,the parties wittingly exaggerate their power, promising easy solutionsto complex problems.To take the most obvious example: the central debate about the rightlevels of public spending and taxation is conducted with shamelessmendacity. One side promises painless tax cuts, the other perfectpublic services. The reality is that modest rates of economic growthwill allow neither for the constant ratcheting down of income tax ratespromised by Mr Major nor the cost-free and comprehensive welfare statepledged by Mr Blair.It is perhaps too much to expect the politicians to mend their ways soclose to an election. But this erosion of trust and confidence inparliament is inimical to good government and dangerously corrosive ofdemocracy. Ultimately, the politicians as well as the voters will bethe losers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:ITALY AND THE EU PRESIDENCYFor the fourth time in a row, the six months' presidency of theEuropean Union has fallen to a member state whose government isseverely distracted by domestic difficulties. It seems to be becoming abad habit. First there was Germany, with a general election inmid-presidency back in 1994. Then there was France, with presidentialelections last May. The Spanish government in the past six monthsmanaged to postpone its demise in order to complete its EUchairmanship, in spite of losing its parliamentary majority.Now Italy is supposed to take the chair, not even sure if it has agovernment. Mr Lamberto Dini offered his resignation on Saturday aftercompleting his limited mandate. President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro wantshim to stay on, but he is leaving it to the fractious Italianparliament to decide. It hardly makes for firm leadership and a clearagenda for Europe.Those four Euro-enthusiastic governments were supposed to co-ordinatetheir plans for the two-year period. They intended to lay thegroundwork for a clear-sighted and coherent inter-governmentalconference this year, which would mark another important step towardsthe goal of European political union. Instead, the EU is stumblingtowards that target in a familiar state of muddle.Spanish achievementsAdmittedly, Mr Felipe Gonzalez's government in Spain achieved rathermore in the past six months than one might have expected from itspolitical weakness at home. It completed preparations for the IGC,albeit with more modest ambitions than committed integrationists wouldlike. It persuaded the other 14 member states to agree a blueprint forthe launch of the single currency in 1999. It finalised a programme toreinforce the fragile relationship between the EU and US. And itorganised an impressive gathering of Mediterranean states to cementbetter co-operation between Europe, the middle east and north Africa.Not bad for a lame-duck administration.The challenge for Mr Dini, or any other head of an Italian government,is to keep that good work going. At least he does not appearover-ambitious. Italy has not tabled any heavy agenda of nationalpriorities, as other member states are sometimes tempted to do. Asuccessful launch to the IGC at the end of March is one priority;agreement on a reconstruction plan for Bosnia is another. The formershould be a formality, but the latter could be a very difficultnegotiation: the European Union must be generous if it wants the peaceinitiative in Bosnia to succeed, but every member state faces toughdomestic budget constraints, limiting the room for manoeuvre.Difficult issuesThere are always other difficult issues on the EU agenda which requireclear leadership from the presidency. In the next six months thoseinclude the plans to liberalise the EU energy market; reform of theTacis aid programme for countries of the former Soviet Union; andreform of the EU wine market. There is also strong German pressure foragreement on a stabilisation package to regulate the behaviour ofmember states after creation of economic and monetary union. These areall issues on which Italy has clear national interests, and on which aweak government in Rome may find it difficult to compromise, let alonenegotiate a deal.A strong Italian government is out of the question for the foreseeablefuture. At this moment, early elections would not solve the problem:under the present electoral laws, they are unlikely to produce a resultmuch different from the present stalemate. President Scalfaro is rightto urge the main political factions to stop bickering and agree on aprogramme of essential constitutional reforms. That could be enacted bya broad-based cross-party coalition, as Mr Silvio Berlusconi, theformer prime minister, appears to favour - though this seems somewhatunrealistic.Alternatively, Mr Dini could be asked to serve on for another sixmonths, dedicated to the EU presidency and to securing theconstitutional reforms. That would be an acceptable compromise, in theinterests of Italy and Europe.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:EUROPE UNLOCKED FOR DEALERS: ON THE FIRST DAY OF TRADING UNDER NEWRULES BREAKING DOWN EU BORDERS, JOHN GAPPER AND RICHARD LAPPER ASSESSWHO THE WINNERS AND LOSERS WILL BEThis morning NatWest Securities will commence trading on the SwedishStock Exchange from its offices in the City of London. For the firsttime, the stockbroking arm of the British bank will buy and sell sharesin Swedish companies without having to do so through local brokers. 'Wecan sit in London with a screen on our desks, and trade as if we werein Stockholm,' says Mr Scott Dobbie, chairman of NatWest Securities.The ability to trade securities across borders in this way is a productof the European Union's Investment Services Directive (ISD), whichtakes effect today. The directive aims to give Europe's thousands ofbroking firms a 'passport' to trade anywhere in the Union, and isaccompanied by the Capital Adequacy Directive (CAD) which imposes freshcapital requirements.Progress in implementing the two directives is likely to be slow - byDecember 31, only seven of the 15 EU states had passed the necessarylegislation. But whatever the delays, the changes are happening fasterthan previous efforts to harmonise banking supervision. 'It is far morecomplex, and it is having to be accomplished in a much shorter time,'says Ms Jane Welch, head of legal advice at the UK Securities andInvestments Board.And the impact on Europe's stock exchanges and derivatives markets willbe far-reaching. The directives are likely to favour larger investmentbanks and stock exchanges, at the expense of smaller firms andexchanges.There are two key measures in the Investment Services Directive. Thefirst is that firms will be able to operate in any EU member state,provided they are regulated in one of them. When operating outsidetheir home countries, they will be subject to rules on the conduct ofbusiness devised by the local regulators for all banks and brokers.For the larger banks already operating in more than one EU country, the'passport' rule will reduce costs and ease the regulatory burden.However, the directive is unlikely to make a significant difference totheir operations. Although there have been instances of member statesimposing strict requirements on foreign banks, most of them have beenable to operate where they want. 'We have never felt constrained aboutcrossing national borders,' says Mr Wilco Jiskoot, senior executivevice-president for merchant banking at ABN Amro, the Dutch bank.But for smaller firms operating in countries with no regulation forsecurities traders, the directive will mean being regulated for thefirst time - together with the accompanying costs, even if they areoperating purely in their domestic markets. They are also likely tolose the share of commission and fees they make in carrying out localbusiness for large investment banks. From today smaller brokers willhave to find a substitute for such earnings if they are to survive.The second key measure of the directive is to allow stock exchanges andfutures and options markets to trade throughout the EU. With increasingvolumes of equity dealing, derivatives business and bond markettransactions carried out electronically, this should in effect allowbrokers to conduct business from offices located anywhere in Europe.The effect will be to increase competition between Europe's 32securities exchanges and 24 derivatives markets. Already, for example,the Deutsche Borse, which runs the German stock and derivativesmarkets, plans to extend its electronic network to several othercountries. Early this year it is opening an access point in London,which will reduce the telecommunications costs for London-basedDeutsche Bo rse members to transact their business directly withFrankfurt.It is widely expected that many smaller exchanges could fold as thesepressures intensify. Mr Gerard Pfauwadel, chairman of the Matif, theParis-based futures market, expects a wave of restructuring with somederivatives markets disappearing, either through merger or takeover.'It will mean some substantial modification in the landscape of futuresand options exchanges in Europe,' he says.Matif is planning to launch an ambitious joint electronic network withthe Deutsche Borse and two other French exchanges later this year whichwould allow traders to deal in French and German equities over the samescreens. It would also cover a range of futures and options products.'With the prospect of a single currency it all amounts to a new bigbang in Europe as far as the markets are concerned,' says Mr Pfauwadel.One target for European exchanges such as Paris and Frankfurt is likelyto be the London Stock Exchange's Seaq-I electronic bulletin board,which marketmakers use to advertise large blocks of European shares forpurchase and sale. Already, European bourses which have invested alarge amount on modernising their trading and settlement systems havewon back dealing business in local equities from Seaq-I.But many market participants argue that large exchanges - particularlyLondon - are likely to gain rather than lose from the directive.NatWest's strategy of trading increasingly on local exchanges ratherthan on Seaq-I does not lessen its commitment to its main base inLondon. Remote trading on overseas exchanges could help London's roleas the physical location from which traders operate by electronicmeans.Mr Giles Vardey, director of markets development at the London StockExchange, argues that remote trading is now 'commercially inevitable'.Mr Vardey accepts that competition from large exchanges will intensify,but says smaller exchanges could suffer. 'Trading power is likely tobecome concentrated in London, and the directive will hasten thisprocess,' he says.The most immediate effects of Capital Adequacy Directive are likely tobe felt by the investment banks. They will be required for the firsttime to allocate capital to cover risks of losses through adversemovements in the markets for shares, bonds or currencies. At themoment, banks have to allocate capital only to cover lending risksunder the 1988 Basle accord of international supervisors.The new rules also demand that banks and securities firms monitor theirrisks at all times keeping a permanent watch on large exposures. Forexample, trading exposures to a single customer will have to be limitedin most cases to less than 25 per cent of capital base - and can onlybe exceeded with the national regulator's permission. The larger banksare best placed to comply with such demands, having invested hugeamounts over the past few years in systems to allow them to monitortheir exposure.Smaller banks are less prepared. 'Developing the ability to spot largeexposures across the business is a significant headache for manyplayers,' says Mr Arun Aggarwal, partner in treasury and capitalmarkets at Price Waterhouse, the accountants. 'It imposes a level ofintegration that only the top few players have.'In theory, the Capital Adequacy Directive could lead to some bankshaving to set aside significantly more capital. But most banks believethat the directive's impact will be minimal. Mr Ian Linnell, bankinganalyst at Standard & Poor's, the credit rating agency, says for mostthe impact has been 'neutral to marginal', and believes that some bankswill be able to operate with less capital than before.However, there could be extra burdens for those banks which are heavilyinvolved in equities trading, for which Capital Adequacy Directiverules are stiffer in some cases. For example, BZW, the investmentbanking arm of Barclays, will have to put aside a little more capital,according to Mr David Band, chief executive.But the biggest impact so far has arisen from the need to invest inupgrading technology to comply with the directive's requirements tomonitor group operations globally. Some of the bigger banks have spentup to Pounds 5m on systems and software, and even the smaller firmsface minimum costs of Pounds 50,000 to pay for software. Mr Band saysthere has been a shortage of technicians in London able to work on banksystems. 'That has been a big problem for the market,' he says.As the directives come into action this morning, the immediatebeneficiaries look to be the large investors who increasingly tradeacross European borders and are likely to see a reduction in charges.In the longer term, the winners will be the large investment banks,many of which are now based in London. The losers will be the smaller,less efficient brokers and the smaller exchanges that cannot find arole as the EU's stock and derivatives markets become increasinglyintegrated.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:NATWEST SEEKS TOP GUN* What will the NatWest Group do with Dollars 3.6bn that it is raisingfrom the sale of its US retail banking business to Fleet Financial? Notso long ago NatWest was the biggest of the Big Four UK banks. Now it isthe smallest. So the money should come in handy helping fulfil itsambition to transform NatWest Markets into one of the top 10 globalinvestment banks.Although NatWest appears to have ruled out bidding for a a well-knownWall Street name, like Lehman Brothers, it will have to buy something,or someone, if it wants to be a serious player in the big league. InOctober it paid a hefty Dollars 135m for Eric Gleacher's five-year-oldUS mergers and acquisition boutique. Gleacher, 55, made his namerunning Morgan Stanley's M&A department during some of the biggesthostile takeover battles in the 1980s. Now he has made his fortune byselling out to NatWest.As long as Gleacher hangs around, NatWest Markets has a chance of beingtaken seriously in the domestic US investment banking market. However,Gleacher is not an international player and NatWest Markets desperatelyneeds to beef up its global investment banking team if it wants tocompete with Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley etc.Hence the owners of some European corporate finance boutiques must behoping that NatWest will be as generous to them as it was to Gleacher.After all, when Morgan Grenfell was looking for a new chief executivein 1987, it had to pay Pounds 15m for John Craven's Phoenix Securitiesto secure Craven's services.The obvious UK candidate is Hambro Magan's George Magan who worked forMorgan Grenfell before starting his own boutique in 1988. He is a goodfive years younger than Gleacher and has an equally impressive recordin the UK M&A market. But would Magan join NatWest Markets for lessthan Gleacher?Surely not. Once again NatWest may have to make do with second best.Car maintenance* What do you call a Trabant on top of a mountain pass? A miracle. Andwhat do you call a Yugo which looks like a submarine? A work of art.Motorists stuck with unloved and unwanted Yugos, products of of the nowdefunct Yugoslavian motor industry, can take heart. Kevin O'Callaghan,a lecturer at the School of Visual Arts in New York City, has bought 39abandoned Yugos for his art class. After six weeks tinkering they go ondisplay at this week's Los Angeles Auto Show.The only thing that the exhibits have in common is that they can nolonger be driven. Apart from a submarine, the students have turned thecars into such items as a giant telephone complete with push-buttonnumbers and handset; an accordion; a confessional - complete withcrosses; a grand piano which actually plays, and even a portable loo.Collect call* Who says Serbia's president is above the law? The home phone ofSlobodan Milosevic was disconnected last month because the bill wentunpaid while he was in Dayton negotiating a peace settlement for formerYugoslavia.However, justice was done in the end. According to Nasa Borba, a localnewspaper, the telephone company employee was fined 10 per cent of hermonthly wage, because she had failed to notice that the phone was on a'protected list' registered in the name of the ruling Socialist party.Honour guard* Another New Year's honour's list has come and gone and dear oldAndrew Buxton, Barclays' chairman, has still not picked up hisknighthood.There are lots of other good guys, such as the chief executives ofShell and SmithKline Beecham, who have not got their Ks. But Buxton isdifferent. He is a chairman of one of the top dozen companies in the UKand all his fellow chairman have titles. What has he done wrong?Whether Buxton deserves a knighthood after 33 years with Barclays isneither here nor there. But the latest honours list just goes to showhow little progress has been made in tidying up the present system ofhonours for business folk.Peter Wood, who created Direct Line, gets a CBE, whereas GrahamKirkham, a fellow entrepreneur, gets a knighthood. Alan Jackson, thedeparting chief executive of BTR, gets nothing. But Malcolm McIntosh, afellow Australian, gets his K for keeping down the cost of the Ministryof Defence's weapons bill.One can only hope that the leaders of big business who have not gottitles turned them down. But one suspects not.Car wars* South Africa has a problem. With one serious crime committed every 17seconds it is getting a reputation as the most dangerous country in theworld which is not at war. However, it is also starting to make a namefor itself as a testbed for new measures to combat crime.A group of insurance brokers has come up with a novel tip for motoristswhen attacked by armed hijackers at a traffic intersection. Ram the carin front. The hope is that the fuss will scare off the hijackers.Great idea. The snag is that South Africa's hijackers already use thesame tactic to tempt drivers out of their vehicles. So when a motoristreceives a bump up the rear, it is either bad news or very bad news.Safety first* How do Eskimos cope with the snow?They grit their teeth.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERSEAS NEWS:EU STATES SLOW TO ADOPT DIRECTIVE ON INVESTMENT: ONLY SEVEN COUNTRIESREADY FOR CROSS-BORDER REFORM   By ANDREW JACK in Paris with ANDREW FISHER in Frankfurt, ANDREW   PARIS, FRANKFURT, MILAN, BRUSSELSOnly seven of the European Union's 15 member states were ready toimplement the Investment Services Directive when it came into effectyesterday, the European federation of stock markets reported.The directive is designed to allow non-bank investment groups to carryout several activities more easily across borders.It aims to create a 'passport' system allowing an institution regulatedin one EU country to operate in all the others without having to complywith additional requirements.Stock market officials in some countries say they have restructured andare ready to meet the requirements of the directive but theirgovernments have not yet passed the necessary legislation. Othergovernments have expressed concern about accepting the 'passport'.Market officials say the seven which have to all intents and purposesmet the requirements of the directive on time are the UK, the Republicof Ireland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, Luxembourg and Belgium.In some of these, however, the legislation itself still needs to bepassed. Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark and France are expected tointroduce the legislation by the middle of this year. Germany, Greeceand Spain will not be prepared for full implementation until 1997.Some countries such as France and Italy have used the enablinglegislation for the directive to push through broader financialregulatory reforms, which has held up progress.There are already strong links between the Frankfurt and Parisderivatives markets which are expected to deepen in the coming months,but the directive should extend links throughout Europe.In Germany, this will create considerable new work for the FederalSupervisory office for Securities Trading (BAWe), which was set up onlya year ago to root out insider traders and enforce compliance withstricter disclosure requirements. Analysts believe the main effect ofthe directive may be less to encourage financial institutions to openoffices in other countries than to change the location of wheretransactions are carried out - reinforcing the position of thosemarkets which already have the greatest liquidity for any particularsecurity.Mr Giuseppe Zadra, director general of the Italian banking association,said he feared the focus of trading in Italian instruments could shiftto other markets if his country's institutions did not invest andmodernise. 'National markets don't have a future, and that's why theywill have to be changed and compete on a European scale,' he said.The new rules have also raised fears there will be new risks forinvestors because institutions receiving their passport in the countrywith the weakest regulatory requirements will be able to obtainrecognition elsewhere.'I have already heard anecdotally that some dubious firms from outsideEurope are looking for the best place to get initial authorisation,'said one stock market official. 'The strength of the whole will rely onthe standards imposed by the least experienced regulator.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:CHANGES SOUGHT IN TERRORISM INSURANCE FOR CITY   By RALPH ATKINS, Insurance CorrespondentReform of the government-backed terrorist insurance scheme, which wasintroduced after the 1992 IRA attack on the City, is being urged amidfears that some companies may be inadequately covered.The Association of Insurance and Risk Managers is worried thatbusinesses are having to pay excessively high premium rates, which areforcing them to make a difficult choice between buying cover or riskhaving to bear the cost of a terrorist incident.Insurance industry estimates suggest that less than half of thosebusinesses which buy commercial property insurance purchase fullterrorism cover, although many have their own 'captive' insurancecompanies providing dedicated insurance cover. Others could cover thecost of an incident from other resources.However, Ms Ina Barker, executive director of the association, said:'The danger is that a lot of big businesses do not have enoughterrorism cover and are therefore putting business at risk.' Such fearscould intensify if the IRA ceasefire broke down.Airmic hopes to hold talks with the Department of Trade and Industryabout possible reform to Pool Re, the state-backed mutual reinsurancecompany. This was set up in 1993 to ensure that conventional insurancecompanies could provide terrorism cover to commercial clients.Pool Re members - which include most of the main UK-based commercialinsurance providers - have to provide terrorism insurance on fixedterms and rates. Premiums collected by insurers are pooled and used topay any claims. If Pool Re runs out of money, the government would makeup the shortfall.Since the IRA ceasefire was announced last year, premium rates havefallen. But buyers and brokers say the system remains inflexible andexpensive.Airmic is proposing a scheme in which all commercial property policieswould include a flat contribution towards the costs of Pool Re,allowing a return to the automatic provision of cover against terroristattack. Debate in City, Page 7Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996UK NEWS:PENSION FUNDS RAISE RETURNS BUT MISS OUT ON BIG US GAINS   By GEORGE GRAHAMUK pension funds recovered from their poor performance in 1994 withinvestment returns averaging 19 per cent last year, according to asurvey by the WM Company.Pension funds benefited from a return of almost 24 per cent on UKequities, which make up more than half of their portfolios.But they missed out on the big gains in the US stock market, whichreturned 33.8 per cent last year. Only 4.3 per cent of the Pounds 380bnof funds measured by WM was invested in US equities.'Everybody thought the US was overpriced at the end of 1994 but itreally took off,' said Mr Peter Warrington, a director of WM, whichspecialises in performance measurement.He added that the longer-term performance of UK pension fundsdemonstrated consistently impressive results. Whether measured overfive years or 20 years, they showed the same average annual return of15.3 per cent, nearly twice the rate of inflation.'In the mid-1980s, people were saying that equities couldn't go onproducing these high returns. We had disappointing years in 1990 and1994, but over five years there is still a positive return of 16.7 percent on equities,' Mr Warrington said.Property has proved a more disappointing investment for pension funds.Although it was the best-performing sector in 1994, in 1995 propertyproduced a return of only 5.3 per cent, compared with a return for allother sectors of 20.1 per cent. Over five years, property returns haveaveraged 6.0 per cent, and property sank to 5.1 per cent of totalpension fund assets at the end of the year.WM's survey, which covers about 80 per cent of UK pension funds,reveals little change in the mix of assets held by managers, despitewidespread discussion of a tendency to 'rebalance' portfolios with morefixed-income investments and less equity.Some actuaries and investment managers have argued that pension fundsare maturing, with fewer members now actively contributing and morereceiving benefits. That should mean funds will increase bond holdingsto provide a more guaranteed stream of income.But the funds measured by WM held 77.5 per cent of their portfolios inequities last year compared to 76.6 per cent at the end of 1994.Holdings of UK and overseas bonds, other than index-linked, alsoincreased, but only to 9.9 per cent.'All the talk we have heard about funds maturing and moving into bondshasn't materialised,' said Mr Warrington.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:GOING FOR GROWTH: THE LEX COLUMNIt is perfectly reasonable to feel sanguine about the prospects for theworld's main financial markets in 1996, but it is difficult to getexcited. Inflation is low and apparently under control; growth may haveslowed, but most economies will still expand this year; and the USeconomy's soft landing looks convincing enough.But after last year's bull run, there is much less to go for. In 1995,inflation fears proved overdone, allowing interest rates to be cut. Theresulting bond market rally, coupled with bid activity, fuelledadvances in stock prices.Even though there are more interest rate cuts to come, the pace isslowing and much of the benefit is already priced into both bonds andstocks. Furthermore, the US market, which led the way last year, looksrather overvalued. The stock market, having risen more than 30 per centlast year, faces a proliferation of earnings downgrades. Since earningsare not likely to fall off a cliff, a slowdown in economic growth doesnot necessarily mean stock prices will stall. But the market looksexpensive relative to trend earnings and bond yields. Dividend yieldsare low, even when share buy-back programmes are taken into account.The benign economic environment probably rules out a 1987- style crash,but a correction is not only likely, it would probably be beneficial.And there are several potential triggers: the US budget agreement, forexample, has still to be thrashed out.EuropeA correction in the US would hit the UK hardest, since it has benefitedmost from the bull run. Although strong earnings growth is likely tocontinue into 1997, the UK has other problems, including the growingpossibility of an early election, as the Conservative party's majoritydwindles. In fact, Prime Minister John Major is likely to hold on topower until 1997 even without a majority, but any weakening of hiscontrol over the election's timing will be viewed as a negative by thestock market.The UK also has more to fear from inflation than most other markets,given its relatively rapid economic growth and an expected rise inconsumer spending. This will benefit some sectors, such ashousebuilding and retailing, but the danger is that any further ratecuts in the first half of the year will have to be reversed in thesecond - or worse that the government may try to ignore overheating ofthe economy, since raising rates in the run-up to the election wouldhardly be politically expedient. With gilts currently yielding twice asmuch as equities, the balance looks about right. But inflation jitterscould cap gilt prices, halting further equity advances.Further bid activity, as in the US, will help underpin stock marketprices, but estimates that the FT-SE 100 index, whatever early gains itmakes, will end the year around 3,750, less than 100 points above itscurrent level, are probably sensible.In continental Europe, the problem is too little growth. This bodeswell for bonds. Even without further short-term rate cuts in Germany,there is room for bond yields to fall. More generally, any signs thatthe structural problems of high social spending and unwieldy budgetdeficits are being addressed should encourage investors. Bunds andother European bond markets may well outperform the US market in 1996 -the problem is the strongest outperformance is often on the way down,so it may be safer to bet on yield differentials than on absolute pricemovements.JapanTokyo's Nikkei-225 has ended the year roughly where it started, justbelow 20,000, inviting the question of whether US and European fundmanagers are right to increase their weighting in Japan. Few marketshave performed as well over the past six months. The index has gained37 per cent since its July low, though the yen's decline over thatperiod has eroded more than half that gain when measured in dollars.Currency risk will continue to bedevil foreign investors as economicrecovery sucks in more imports, further driving down the trade surplus.But the attraction of Japan in 1996 is that it is the only leadingmarket set to benefit both from the early stage of an economic revivaland a pick-up in corporate earnings. A rise in sales should kick in, ontop of the margin improvements achieved over the past year.On the surface, much of this recovery has already been discounted, withthe index standing at around 83 times prospective earnings - high evenby Japan's historical standards. However, a more useful guide to theNikkei's value is the ratio between equity and bond yields. Currently,Japanese government bonds yield 1.5 times as much as equities, wellbelow the long-term average. As a result, Japanese institutions, heavynet sellers of equities last year, may well favour equities over bondsin 1996. The top Japanese life insurers and brokers have shed recentpessimism and forecast a 1996 high for the Nikkei in the mid-20,000s.They may be right.Emerging marketsEmerging markets look cheap. On most valuation measures, a rebound isalready overdue. Last year's lacklustre performance partly reflects thecrisis of confidence following the collapse of the Mexican market atthe start of the year. In fact, international investors had littlereason to take the higher risks associated with emerging markets. USfund managers in particular were able to make impressive returns intheir own domestic market.But there are signs that US money is starting to move offshore again.As fund managers are forced to look for growth outside the domesticmarket, emerging markets are bound to get at least some of that money.Typically, US managers have looked south of the border. But there arestill good reasons for avoiding Latin America, not only because of thedire economic problems which continue to afflict some countries. Themain bond market is the dollar-denominated Brady bond market, whichwould suffer from a US market correction. Slow growth, particularly byemerging markets standards, makes stock markets relativelyunattractive, given the associated currency risk.Asian stock markets look a better bet. Not only does Asia enjoy strongeconomic growth and a cash surplus; the markets are likely to benefitfrom funds from Japan, as well as the US and UK.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:CHRISTMAS BRINGS CHEER TO TRADING STATEMENTS: UK RETAILERS   By NEIL BUCKLEYExpect to hear news of another strong Christmas as large retailers maketheir January trading statements, writes Neil Buckley. Christmasaccounts for a large part of many retailers' annual profits. Reports ofa buoyant December and good start to the post-Christmas sales havebreathed life back into a sector depressed by gloomy results in theautumn.Three retailers thought to have had the liveliest festive seasons -Argos, Dixons and Next - report next week. Argos should unveil a totalsales increase in double digits for the third Christmas running, whileNext is expected to have at least maintained the 10 per cent increasereported in September. Dixons is forecast to report a 10 per centincrease in like-for-like sales, which exclude new store openings, overChristmas.Also reporting the same week are Boots and Sears. In the former, strongperformances from Boots the Chemists and Halfords will be tarnishedslightly by sales declines in Do It All, and the Fads/Homestyle homedecorating business. For Sears, total sales are expected to be slightlyup, but like-for-like sales down.The following week, Body Shop, Storehouse and Marks and Spencer areforecast to report sales increases of at least 5 per cent. At House ofFraser a like-for-like increase of perhaps 3 per cent is expected.One year after the poor trading statement that sparked the departure offour directors, Kingfisher is expected to reveal recoveries inWoolworths and Comet, but falling sales in Darty, the French electricalchain.WH Smith is forecast to report a Christmas sales increase of up to 7per cent in its interim results on January 24, while Burton, at itsannual meeting the following day, is expected to announce a continuingimprovement in sales and gross margins.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:GREENBURY GUIDELINES WILL BE PUT TO THE TEST: OTHER COMPANIES   By WILLIAM LEWISThe Greenbury committee's report on executive pay will move into thespotlight in January and February, with the publication of aconsultation document and several companies' annual meetings held underGreenbury rules for the first time, writes William Lewis.Next Monday, a consultation document on possible methods for disclosingthe true value of directors' pensions will be launched. The Faculty ofActuaries and the Institute of Actuaries, together with the StockExchange and the Department of Trade and Industry, are to send thepaper to public companies and are seeking their views by February 9.The Greenbury committee's report, published in July, recommended thatpension costs be disclosed to shareholders to reflect the value to theindividual as well as the true cost to the company.The Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries put forward apreferred method but there were calls for wider consultation.Many companies feared that directors' remuneration could appear toincrease by startling amounts under the new code. The consultationdocument will include a number of options - including allowing for the'smoothing' out of the effects of Greenbury.Other Greenbury recommendations have already been put in place by somecompanies and are due to be tested at annual meetings in the next fewweeks.Bass and Burton, in their annual reports sent to shareholders lastmonth, were the first companies to give a separate remunerationcommittee report on executive pay. Both companies' remunerationcommittee chairmen will be answering shareholder questions on pay atthe meetings on February 8 and January 25 respectively.Greenbury also recommended that companies seek shareholder approval fornew long-term incentive schemes. Burton and Capital Radio on January 17will ask shareholders to vote through new schemes for executives attheir annual meetings.Following the rule changes announced in the November budget regardingthe taxation of executive share options, Euromoney and Berisford areasking shareholders to approve changes to their executive share optionschemes. Berisford's meeting is on January 22 and Euromoney's is onJanuary 18.* Cable and Wireless: At an extraordinary general meeting on January15, shareholders in the UK-based telecommunications group will have theopportunity to question the board on the abrupt departures of thechairman, Lord Young of Graffham, and Mr James Ross, chief executive.The purpose of the EGM, however, will be to change the company'sarticles to allow a non-British citizen to hold one of these top jobs.This would allow the New Zealand-born finance director, Mr Rod Olsen,to act as chief executive until a replacement is found.* US companies: US investors are looking forward to some good news thismonth as most companies start reporting their 1995 earnings figures.Throughout the year, the quarterly numbers have produced pleasantsurprises, with results often beating analysts' estimates.Analysts prefer to look at the 'operating earnings', excluding one-offcharges.Forecasters expect the S&P 500 companies to announce earnings per sharetotalling about Dollars 38 per share compared with Dollars 32 in 1994,a rise of nearly 20 per cent.* Banco Santander: Mr Emilio Botin, chairman of Spain's largest bankinginstitution, announces the group's 1995 consolidated results later thismonth, writes Tom Burns in Madrid.Santander raised its attributable profits after minorities by 5.9 percent to Pta63.3bn (Pounds 334m) in the first nine months of 1995, aheadof market expectations, and said it had absorbed the impact of thetroubled Banco Espanol de Credito (Banesto), which it acquired in 1994.* Fokker: Negotiations on a capital injection for the loss-making Dutchaircraft maker are due to resume early in the new year, but there is noindication when the rescue plan may be agreed.Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa) of Germany, the controlling shareholder,and the Dutch government, a big minority shareholder, failed to agreethe package, believed to be worth more than Fl2bn (Pounds 808m), beforethe end of 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:FORTE TO EXPAND THROUGH MERIDIEN   By DAVID BLACKWELLForte, the UK's biggest hotels group, is planning a further 26 MeridienHotels in a push to expand internationally.The move is expected to be announced in today's final defence documentagainst the Pounds 3.3bn hostile bid from Granada Group, thetelevision, catering and leisure group.Forte is also likely to promise a special dividend or share buy-back ifthe Pounds 1.05bn sale of its roadside businesses to Whitbread goesthrough. Last week, the group agreed to sell its Little Chef and HappyEater roadside restaurants, Welcome Break motorway service areas andTravelodge budget hotels to the UK brewing and leisure group. The dealis conditional on the failure of Granada's bid.The document is expected to include a promise to increase annualdividends, which were cut from 9.91p to 7.5p for the year to January 311993 and were last raised five years ago.The document will show that Christie & Co, the property surveyor, hasrevalued the hotels upwards by Pounds 355m to Pounds 3.35bn, just over10 per cent above the last estimate in January 1994 and representingnet asset value per share of 325p. This excludes the stake in the SavoyGroup, which Forte plans to sell.The revaluation was dismissed by Granada, which said if the increasehad been added to assets on July 31 last year, the return on assetswould have fallen from 7.4 to 6.5 per cent. 'Frankly, this looks like abit of an own goal by Forte,' said Mr Gerry Robinson, Granada chiefexecutive.Forte paid Pounds 280m to acquire the Meridien chain of 58 hotels fromAir France just over a year ago in order to give it a biggerinternational presence. Of the 26 new projects under consideration, oneis in Manchester and all the others abroad, including Beirut andBangkok.Most will be management contracts, although equity stakes have not beenruled out. Expansion in the US remains a priority.Sir Rocco Forte, chairman, said the main thrust for Meridien would beoverseas. The first year had been spent in integrating the business,and Pounds 14m had been taken from head office costs.'We have only just started,' he said. 'Now we will be much morepro-active.'Today's document will concentrate almost entirely on the hotels, givingdetails of performance. Meridien is expected to have contributed 20 percent to group operating profits.Operating profits from Forte's Exclusive hotels - including the GeorgesV in Paris and the Grosvenor House in London - are expected to accountfor 10 per cent of hotel profits, with other London hotels accountingfor 25 per cent. The Posthouse (including Crest) and Heritagetraditional hotels are likely to show contributions of 25 per cent and20 per cent respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:NEW LOOK RETAILER SOLD TO INSTITUTIONS FOR POUNDS 170M   By TIM BURTNew Look, the privately-owned fashion retailer founded by entrepreneurMr Tom Singh was yesterday sold to a venture capital buy-out group forabout Pounds 170m.Mr Singh, who started the company in 1969 with a Pounds 5,000 loan, hasagreed to sell the 323-store chain to institutional purchasers led byBZW Private Equity and jointly underwritten by Prudential VentureManagers.The sale follows New Look's abortive attempt to come to the market inOctober 1994, which it abandoned the day before its scheduled flotationamid fears it would not raise the estimated Pounds 150m it was seeking.Under the terms of yesterday's deal, New Look's shareholders -dominated by Mr Singh and his family trusts - will initially receiveabout Pounds 105m in cash and shares worth about Pounds 50m in Vallsar,an investment vehicle set up for the transaction.That will leave the Singhs with 25 per cent of Vallsar, which is to berenamed New Look. BZW Private Equity has also offered a further Pounds15m payment contingent on New Look's performance in the three years toMarch 1998.Mr Gavin Aldred, New Look's director in charge of corporate strategy,said proceeds from the disposal would fund expansion: 'In the 12 monthsto March this year, we will have opened 76 stores in the UK and 10 inFrance, and we aim to continue growing at about 50 outlets a year.' Heclaimed New Look - advised by J. Henry Schroder - was Britain's mostprofitable specialist women's wear retailer. In the year to March lastyear, pre-tax profits more than doubled from Pounds 6.01m to Pounds 15mon sales of Pounds 141m (Pounds 83.4m).Its rival Etam, by comparison, reported first-half losses of Pounds3.85m in the autumn, against pre-tax profits of Pounds 4.74m.Mr Graeme White, a director of BZW Private Equity, praised New Look'soperating performance and said the existing management would remain.Mr White has joined an enlarged board of New Look as a non-executivedirector, as has Mr Martin Clarke of Prudential Venture Managers. Hesaid the two backers had no timetable for an exit, but did not rule outa fresh flotation attempt.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:LONDON BRACES ITSELF FOR A REPO REVOLUTION: AN OPEN MARKET IN SALE ANDREPURCHASE AGREEMENTS FOR UK GOVERNMENT BONDS STARTS TODAY   By RICHARD LAPPER and PHILIP GAWITHDealers in UK government bonds are today braced for one of the biggestchanges in the City since Big Bang 10 years ago.The introduction of an open market in gilt repos, agreements to selland then repurchase government bonds, will allow all participants inthe market to borrow and lend stock, removing the monopoly over suchactivity that a select number of firms have long enjoyed and bringingthe UK market into line with practices in the US and France.The Treasury and Bank of England hope the changes will make it easierfor investors to trade gilts, increasing their attractions to overseasinvestors and ultimately reducing the cost of funding government debt.But in the longer term, the development of repos could also lead tobroader changes in the structure of the UK's short-term money marketsand in the way that the Bank of England manages liquidity.'I'm not saying that repo is going to take off overnight but it is thebrave new world,' says Ms Una van Dorssen, director of repo marketingat NatWest Markets.In simple terms, a repo is an agreement to sell a security and thenrepurchase it at an agreed future price and date.One party to the deal 'borrows' money, using the security as acollateral. The other party 'lends' the money and 'borrows' the bond,in much the same way as a pawnbroker would take temporary possession ofvaluables in return for a personal loan. But although the repo lookslike a loan, in reality it encompasses a disposal and a subsequentacquisition, reducing credit risk in the event of default by eitherparty.And in the international bond markets, repos play a more complexeconomic function. Dealers frequently borrow money through repos tofund the purchases of the same bonds, which are then committed ascollateral. Securities firms usually rely on this means to financetheir operations as they do not have access to the interbank marketswhere banks lend to each other.At the same time, dealers 'lend' money through repo agreements, in asimilar way to how they might place money on deposit with a bank,although in this case they have the additional security of holding abond as collateral. At the same time, the 'borrowed' bonds can be usedto meet short-term trading needs. In the bond markets, dealersfrequently take short positions (sell bonds they do not own), when theyfeel prices are likely to fall.In the UK, the ability to carry out repos or to borrow or lendgovernment stock through stock lending agreements has been restrictedby law to stock exchange money brokers - effectively middlemen. Inaddition, only gilt-edged market-makers, a group of more than 20securities firms licensed by the Bank of England, have been allowed to'short' the market.The new, more liberal rules will make it possible for a much widerrange of traders and investors to operate in the UK gilts market. 'Thefact that it is now seen as a clear and open market will make itattractive. It will encourage people into the marketplace. They nolonger see it as an esoteric market with rules of its own,' says MrDavid Brayshaw, managing director LM Money Brokers.Ms van Dorssen at NatWest Markets says that with a deep and liquidunderlying market and a robust futures market in place, repo'sdevelopment will increase the range of strategies open to traders.The impact of repo on the UK's money markets should also besignificant. 'It will be beneficial for the money market and shouldhelp to restore liquidity,' says Mr Brayshaw. 'There has been a lack ofshort-dated government paper that can be traded. Also, the overnightmarket, which determines funding costs, has come to be dominated by asmall group of players.'Ms Van Dorssen says cash managers will be able to place larger amountsof money on 'a repo line' than on an 'unsecured deposit line'.And in the short-term, at least until liquidity in the market picks up,dealers expect repo rates to be close to the London interbank rates,offering investors the double advantage of security and extra yield.Nevertheless, traditional market participants may take time to adapt tothe new environment.Some UK institutions, which currently earn a fee by lending stock ontheir books to money brokers, may have to modify their systems andlearn new skills. Specialists in managing medium and long-terminvestments, they may be less prepared for the demands of short-termmoney market management necessary in the repo market. And dealers mayprefer to obtain finance through existing relationships with moneybrokers.In the long-term, however, dealing directly with other dealers andinvestors through repos should become cheaper and more attractive. MrSimon Briscoe, chief UK economist at Nikko Europe, says money marketoperators will respond to repo similarly to way in which Britishmotorists responded to the opening of the motorways in the early 1960s.'It wasn't an immediate transition. Even though motorways allowed formore traffic and bigger lorries people still use the A roads.' Stepaway from tradition, Page 22Richard Lapper and Philip GawithBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:DISNEY AIMS TO PUMP UP THE VOLUME   By ALICE RAWSTHORNWalt Disney, the US entertainment group which recently bid Dollars 19bn(Pounds 12.2bn) for the Capital Cities/ABC television company, plans tostrengthen its presence in the music business.It is believed to have joined forces in the autumn with PolyGram, theworld's largest record company, in an attempt to sign up Janet Jackson,the US singer. Mr Michael Eisner, group chairman, wanted to sign her inthe hope that a high-profile star would raise Disney's stature in themusic market and attract other acts.Under the terms of Disney's agreement with PolyGram, Ms Jackson wouldhave split her recording contract between the two groups. She wouldhave signed to Disney in North America and to A&M, the PolyGramsubsidiary which was her original record label, for the rest of theworld.It now looks as though Janet Jackson will sign a new contract withVirgin Music, the record label to which she has been contracted since1991 when her A&M deal ended. Virgin, owned by Thorn EMI, the UKleisure group, is thought to have out-bid Disney and PolyGram justbefore Christmas, although it has not yet signed a contract with MsJackson.Mr Eisner is still keen for Disney to expand in the music market, whichis one of the fastest growing and most profitable areas of theentertainment industry. Until now the focus of the group's musicinterests has been its Hollywood Records subsidiary founded six yearsago.Hollywood's performance has been erratic. It has released a number ofhighly successful soundtrack albums under the Walt Disney record label.The Lion King, the soundtrack to the 1994 animated hit, has sold morethan 9m copies in the US. But it has failed to become a force in themarketplace.One option for Disney would be to continue to try to attracthigh-profile stars. This could be slow and expensive as there is fiercecompetition among rival labels for best-selling acts. An alternativewould be to bid for EMI Music, the Thorn EMI division that owns Virgin,which is expected to be demerged from the rest of the Thorn EMI groupnext autumn. But Disney could face fierce competition from other NorthAmerican companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:DANA PETROLEUM PLANS LISTING AND SEEKS POUNDS 16MDana Petroleum, the independent oil production company, plans to seek aLondon listing and raise approximately Pounds 16m from a placing, openoffer and intermediaries offer. The company, which produces oil inwestern Siberia in partnership with some of Russia's largest energycompanies, plans to use the proceeds to develop production at the SouthVat-Yoganskoye field.Under the placing and open offer, Guiness Mahon has placed 145m newordinary shares at 7p, while 57.5m new shares are being offered toshareholders on a 3-for-10 basis. A further 28.6m are being offered tointermediaries, also at 7p.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:MEDIOBANCA TO GIVE FERFIN OFFER TERMS: NEWS DIGESTMediobanca, the powerful Milan merchant bank, is expected to revealshortly the terms of its public offer to buy 158m shares of FerruzziFinanziaria (Ferfin), the holding company that controls the Montedisonindustrial group.The move has been forced upon Mediobanca after it lost two judicialappeals against a public offer for an amount of shares equal to thoseacquired in an October raid to gain control of Ferfin. The completionof the offer will mean Mediobanca will hold 15.26 per cent of Ferfin,with an estimated disbursement of L582bn (Dollars 367m).Mediobanca finally accepted the ruling of Consob, the stock exchangewatch dog, late last Friday. It had initially lodged an appeal with theregional administrative court of Lazio, and when that failed with thehigher court of the state council.Pricing of the offer presents several problems. Principal among thesehas been the L953bn Ferfin rights issue in mid-December. This came wellafter Consob's first ruling that Mediobanca must make a public offer.Before the rights issue, analysts suggested L1,580 per sharerepresented the average price paid by Mediobanca in its October raid onFerfin.But just before the rights issue they were suspended at L1,056; andConsob announced only shareholders on the register before the issuecould be the subject of Mediobanca's public buy offer. This point isapparently being questioned by Mediobanca's lawyers.Analysts also pointed out that by being obliged to acquire 15 per centof Ferfin, the outlay represented over 10 per cent of Mediobanca'sassets, a large exposure.Robert Graham in RomeHealth groups abandon mergerAfter a busy year of consolidation, the US healthcare industry ended1995 on a sour note with the formal dissolution of a Dollars 1.6bnmerger that would have created the country's largest managed careorganisation.WellPoint and Health Systems International, two Californian healthcaregroups, abandoned a merger agreement reached last April. Friday'sdevelopment came two weeks after the two organisations announced theywere in discussions to break off merger talks, and follows indicationsthat executives from each side were unable to reach agreement on how toshare power in the new company.The merger would have created a West Coast giant with the financialmuscle to acquire other managed care groups around the country. The twohad listed the ability to grow beyond their Californian base as a keyreason for the combination.Under the terms of the all-stock deal, shareholders in Health Systemswould have received 45 per cent of the shares in the combined group.However, the two sides are believed to have been unable to agree onwhat role the smaller company's managers should play after a merger.The deal would have provided the springboard for a far more widely-heldpublic company than either is at present.Richard Waters in New YorkMaculan, the troubled Austrian construction group, said creditor bankshad agreed an extensive financing package to salvage the company in itsentirety.The financing measures include cash-credit lines worth Sch910m (Dollars90m) which will be divided between the group's Austrian and Germancreditor banks according to the previous volume of credit granted. Inaddition, the creditor banks and credit insurers will make guaranteelines available, totalling Sch770m, Maculan said.Maculan Holding in turn has undertaken to forgo the repayment ofshareholder loans made to its operating subsidiaries with a totalvolume of some Sch938m. Reuter, ViennaTabacalera, the partly-privatised Spanish tobacco company, has sold itslossmaking dairy subsidiary La Lactaria Espanol SA (Lesa) for Pta4bn(Dollars 33m).Tabacalera acquired Lesa, Spain's biggest milk company with 10 per centof the market, in 1988. The buyers, the milk companies Leyma andIparlat, will also assume Pta5bn of Lesa bank debt, guaranteed byTabacalera. The state's Official Credit Institute is providing thebuyers with an Pta8bn loan to pay Lesa's debts and restructure thecompany. Reuter, MadridBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:VICTORS AND VICTIMS OF BOARDROOM UPHEAVAL: TIM BURT LOOKS AT THE HIGHNUMBER OF COMPANIES STARTING THE YEAR WITH A CHANGE OF LEADERSHIPAn unprecedented number of Britain's leading companies are beginning1996 with newly-installed chairmen and chief executives following ayear of boardroom upheaval.Groups such as BAT Industries and Inchcape have new chairmen, whileBritish Telecommunications, BTR, BOC, WH Smith, and electroniccomponents manufacturer Bowthorpe are among those to bring in new chiefexecutives.Their arrival - mostly part of a smooth succession - comes after a yearin which other high-profile directors became boardroom casualties,including Lord Young and Mr James Ross, chairman and chief executiverespectively of Cable & Wireless.Mr Tiny Rowland left Lonrho after losing his long-running battle withMr Dieter Bock, the trading group's chief executive. Other departuresincluded Mr Mick Newmarch, chief executive of Prudential; Mr RichardReynolds, a director of GEC; Mr Howard Robinson, chief executive atCalor Group; and Sir Brian Wolfson, chairman of Wembley.Russell Reynolds, the UK's largest headhunter in revenue terms, saidthe number of arrivals and departures reflected the growing influenceof institutional shareholders and non-executive directors in bringingin new management.'We're seeing a trend that when companies are having a very difficulttime the executives are being brought to account,' said Mr DavidShellard, managing director.He cited the Cadbury committee on corporate governance as one factorbehind the increased turnover among company directors, while addingthat the Greenbury committee on executive remuneration had focusedshareholder attention on performance-related pay.Heidrick & Struggles International, the London-based executiverecruitment agency, said the rash of outside appointments alsosignalled a growing skills shortage at board level. Mr John Viney,chairman, said: 'There are simply too few people to go round. So we'reseeing the best, such as Sir Colin Marshall, taking on two or threeroles.'Sir Colin, chairman of British Airways, yesterday became non-executivechairman of Inchcape, the international marketing and services group.'Inchcape has not been in the best of health,' Mr Viney added. 'Theyknow it's much better to have a top-class person - even if only for oneday a week - than someone less effective,'Among the other new arrivals this month, Lord Cairns, who last yearresigned as chief executive of SG Warburg, the investment bank, becomeschairman of BAT Industries.Mr Ian Strachan succeeds Mr Alan Jackson as chief executive of BTR. SirPeter Bonfield, knighted in the New Year honours, moves from computergroup ICL to be chief executive of BT. Mr Bill Cockburn has becomechief executive at WH Smith.Mr Tim Parker is taking over as chief executive at CJ Clark, theshoemakers. Mr Nicholas Brookes is the new chief executive atBowthorpe. And BOC, the industrial gases group, will mark its annualmeeting later this month with the appointment of Mr David John and MrDanny Rosenkranz as new chairman and chief executive respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:NATIONWIDE LOOKS TO LIFE OPERATION   By ALISON SMITH, Investment CorrespondentNationwide, the UK's second largest building society, is looking to itsnew life assurance and unit trust subsidiaries, which open today, toenable it to reduce its dependence on mortgage-related financialservices.The new operations replace the relationship in life assurance thatNationwide has had with Guardian since the beginning of 1990s.Mr Tom Boardman, managing director of the two new subsidiaries, saidthat whereas in selling Guardian's financial services about four-fifthsof Nationwide's business was mortgage-related, he hoped that within acouple of years this could be reduced to about half.This strategy seems to acknowledge that endowment mortgages arebecoming less popular and that any recovery in the housing market overthe next couple of years is unlikely to match the pace of the 1980s.Nationwide has also set itself the target of winning 70,000 financialservices customers in the first year - about 1 per cent of its total 7mcustomer base.This is more ambitious than the 40,000-plus financial servicescustomers it is thought to have gained each year during the six-yeartie with Guardian.The new life company will sell term assurance, a mortgage endowmentpolicy, a guaranteed equity bond and a personal pension plan. The unittrust operation will sell two unit trusts - a UK growth fund and abalanced fund which includes an element of overseas exposure.Apart from the policies it designs itself, Nationwide Life will alsosell a permanent health insurance policy bought in from PPP, thehealthcare company.This is a smaller and simpler range than the Guardian policies whichNationwide has been offering, but Mr Boardman said the straightforwardnature of the products should help to keep costs down. He believed therange was still broad enough to meet most customers' needs.For Nationwide, as for other mortgage lenders which have set up theirown financial services businesses, a key element will be to marketthese products to the entire customer base - savers as well asborrowers.Initially, Nationwide's salaried financial services sales force will bemade up of about 340 agents and will grow to 380 by the end ofFebruary. Just over half of these will be branch-based, with theremainder available to visit customers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:FRENCH BANK SEEKS SHORT-TERM FINANCE   By ANDREW JACK in Paris   PARISCredit Foncier de France, the specialist French property bank, isconsidering obtaining a substantial short-term bridging loan while itundertakes a wide-ranging restructuring plan.Bank executives are believed to be discussing the idea of seeking aloan from a commercial bank, secured on its assets, which would lastabout three years.Separately, they are holding talks with the government about short-termways to stave off the growing financial crisis triggered by thewithdrawal of its monopoly rights over certain state-backed housingloan schemes.The idea is to provide the bank with time to introduce a restructuringprogramme which could reduce costs by 30 to 40 per cent in as little asthe next two years, including job cuts and the possible sale of some ofits central Paris offices.However, executives want to reduce staffing without any redundancies sothey are likely to extend the length of their programme to at leastthree years.They are also discussing refocusing the bank, possibly by withdrawingfrom activities such as loans to property developers and localauthorities, and concentrating on core activities of loans to low andmiddle-income housing projects.Credit Foncier's ability to raise funds on the capital markets has beentightly restricted recently because its share price has dropped sharplyand its credit rating has fallen.It was dealt a severe blow during December when the French stock marketregulators recommended against it proceeding with a proposed mergerwith its 55 per cent-owned subsidiary, Societe des Immeubles de France.The deal would have provided a much-needed FFr1bn (Dollars 204m) boostto its balance sheet. It is now looking at other ways of achieving arecapitalisation.The bank is also likely to discuss with the French government, in themedium-term, a change to its legal statutes to make it more like itsprivate sector competitors.Although it is a quoted company without any state shareholding, thegovernment appoints its chairman or 'governor'.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:HYUNDAI TO ACCELERATE DECENTRALISATION: SOUTH KOREA'S BIGGESTFAMILY-RUN 'CHAEBOL' IS MOVING WITH THE TIMES, SAYS JOHN BURTONMr Chung Mong-koo, Hyundai's new chairman, is likely to preside overthe gradual break-up of the giant family-owned South Korean industrialgroup his father established in 1947.That, however, is the way Mr Chung Ju-yung, the Hyundai founder, wantsit. In an attempt to avoid a family fight over the Hyundai empire afterhis death, Mr Chung decided several years ago to divide it amongseveral of his sons and nephews by transferring his stock in most ofHyundai's 45 companies to them.The result has been the creation of smaller and decentralised groupswithin Hyundai that amount to a confederation of allied companies.The process is expected to accelerate with the recent formal transferof management control from the elder Mr Chung and his brother ChungSe-yung, who succeeded him as chairman in 1987, to their sons.Hyundai's restructuring, which is expected to benefit the group, couldserve as an example to Korea's other conglomerates, or chaebol. Thechaebol have been widely criticised for being too big and inefficientwhile fierce competition, for example, has led to duplication ofactivity.Government officials have long urged them to abandon many of theirmarginal businesses and concentrate on a few specialised industrialsectors to improve their global competitiveness.Splitting Hyundai into smaller groups is expected to help achieve thesegoals. Each mini-Hyundai group focuses on only a few industries, andthese units are less able to support unprofitable activities than theywere within the old monolithic structure.Under a reorganisation plan announced a year ago, Hyundai was dividedinto six main groups, with almost all now controlled by one of MrChung's sons and nephews.The most ambitious of the new sub-groups is the one controlled by MrChung Mong-koo, the new Hyundai chairman and eldest surviving son ofthe Hyundai founder.In 1977, he established Hyundai Precision & Industry as a cargocontainer company, which became the world's largest. Hyundai Precisionnow produces railway engines and carriages, sports and utilityvehicles, and military equipment. It also plans to enter the aerospacesector, assembling aircraft and satellites.Mong-koo also controls Hyundai's small steel operations, which he wantsto expand by building a large mill that would supply steel to Hyundai'scar and shipbuilding operations.Mr Chung Mong-hun, his brother and the new Hyundai vice-chairman, hasdeveloped Hyundai Electronics into one of the world's biggest producersof computer memory chips in less than a decade. Another brother, MrChung Mong-jun, controls Hyundai's shipbuilding operations, the biggestin Korea.Hyundai Motors, Korea's largest car company and considered the group'scrown jewel, is being taken over by the family of Mr Chung Se-yung, thebrother of the Hyundai founder. His only son, Mong-kyu, has beenappointed as the car company's new chairman at the age of 33.Mr Chung Mong-hyuk, another nephew of the Hyundai founder, has beennamed new president of Hyundai's petrochemical and oil refiningcompanies, another growth area.Other main Hyundai companies, including its trading house andconstruction company, remain under the control of the group founder.A formal break-up of Hyundai is likely to take some time since thegroup is held together by a complex web of cross-holdings. These ties,however, should weaken as the government imposes limits oncross-holding arrangements in attempt to reduce the economic dominanceof the chaebol.Family solidarity is also expected to prevent an early break-up ofHyundai. The Hyundai companies are likely to operate on the same basisthat Mr Chung Ju-yung has established with several of his brothers, whohave created their own small industrial groups that partly depend onHyundai for business.Hyundai Motors, for example, is the biggest customer for the motorvehicle parts company of the Halla group, founded by Mr Chung In-yung.Nonetheless, internal conflict may also increase as rivalry growsbetween the Hyundai companies. Hyundai Precision, for example, ischallenging Hyundai Motors by producing four-wheel drive vehicles andmini-vans.A looser organisational structure may also make it more difficult topush through large projects that were once easily tackled under theautocratic management style of the Hyundai founder.Analysts will also be watching closely to see whether the new Hyundaichairman can gain group support for his projected Dollars 10bn steelmill, which has been criticised by some Hyundai subsidiaries asunnecessary.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:NETSCAPE LEADS THE FASHION FOR US NEW ISSUES: FT WRITERS LOOK AT THEBEST PERFORMING SHARES AROUND THE WORLD IN 1995New issues - if you could lay your hands on them - were the hottestperforming stocks in the US last year, with Netscape Communications,the Internet company, racing to the fore, writes our New York staff.The market for initial public offerings was more active than it hadever been, but the few sceptics that remained claimed this was a sureindication the US market was way out in front of most traditionalvaluations measures.Netscape, which produces a browser for the Internet, was floated inAugust at Dollars 28 a share, and by year-end it was trading at Dollars139, having reached a peak in early December of Dollars 174.Other strongly performing new issues included Pixar, which handled theanimation for Disney's latest hit film Toy Story. It floated at Dollars22 just after the film's opening at Thanksgiving, and quickly reached ahigh of Dollars 49 1/2, although by year-end it had fallen back toaround Dollars 28 7/8.Many of the new issues were in the technology sector, which had led themarket higher for much of the year, although towards the end of theyear many of these stocks faltered as growth in semiconductor salesslowed.The technology sector's performance should not obscure notable gains inother sectors. Lower interest rates and hopes for productivity gainsmade bank and insurance company shares among the best performers.Banks, deep into a round of mergers, recorded gains of more than 50 percent.Steel companies, most of which crawled back into profit only in 1994,managed the dubious distinction of forming the worst-performing stockmarket sector.Another poor performer was the retail sector, which ended anotherdifficult year with a disappointing Christmas.Construction fallsBuilding sites abound in German cities and cranes cover the Frankfurtskyline, but construction shares headed remorselessly downwards in1995, writes Andrew Fisher in Frankfurt. The sector's share performanceslumped by 33 per cent and 1996 is not expected to show much, if any,improvement.By contrast, the electrical and electronics sector had a strong year,adding 34 per cent. Apart from Siemens, reaping the benefits of itsaggressively profit-oriented restructuring, the sector contains SAP,the fast-growing producer of business software. SAP's share performancehas been meteoric in the past two years, though it has slowed recently.Commerzbank, whose own new headquarters is taking shape in Frankfurt,estimates that profits of quoted construction companies will rise amere 2 per cent in 1996 after 6 per cent in 1995. The German commercialand homes building boom is now over, with public sector constructionalso held back by budget constraints.Mr Ingo Mainert, a Commerzbank analyst, says stocks likely to performin line with or better than the overall market this year includemotors, steel, electricals and electronics, and insurance.The bank foresees the DAX index rising to 2,500 or even 2,600 pointsafter it closed on Friday at 2,254, a rise of 7 per cent on the year. Ayear ago, the bank had hoped for 2,400 but the weak dollar and higherthan expected pay rises threw out its calculations.For electrical and electronics companies, Commerzbank expects anoverall profits rise of 21 per cent this year after 22 per cent in1995. Earnings in the steel, engineering, motor and metal industriesshould show steeper rises, it says. Further markets will be coveredover the following days.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:THOMAS LOCKER'S BID FOR PENTRE ATTACKED   By TIM BURTThe largest shareholder in Thomas Locker yesterday claimed theengineering group was seeking a reverse takeover with its proposedPounds 7.5m bid for Pentre, the industrial drums manufacturer.Mr John Carr, who holds 22.6 per cent of Thomas Locker's ordinaryshares, said the purchase price overvalued Pentre: 'The shareholders ofThomas Locker not only get no premium for the very significant valueinherent in the company they own, they are being asked to approve ascheme that will lose them control.'Mr Carr, who acquired his stake in the company last May, urgedshareholders to reject the acquisition, which is being funded by theissue of 8.62m new and 25.9m A ordinary shares. He also condemned asinadequate a proposed 3-for-10 scrip issue of additional ordinaryshares, designed to compensate ordinary shareholders for the loss ofvoting rights.The dissident shareholder, advised by KPMG, said there was no logic forThomas Locker in acquiring Pentre, which he claimed was burdened withPounds 6.9m borrowings.Neither company was available for comment.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:ANXIOUS EYES FOCUS ON COPPERLondon Metal Exchange dealers returning from their festive break todaywill be anxious to ascertain the new year mood of the copper market,which is likely to set the tone for other base metals contracts aswell.Last week's lightly-traded inter-holiday period ended with the coppermarket close to its 1995 low as stocks soared towards the excessivelevel at which they ended 1994. At 296,425 tonnes they were more thandouble the July low.With further rises in stocks expected, analysts and traders werepredicting further falls this week. '(Stop loss selling orders) weretriggered below Dollars 2,665 earlier today,' one trader told theReuters news agency on Friday afternoon, 'and more are likely to belurking below Dollars 2,650. . . copper is back on shaky ground.'Several analysts forecast that copper would drop to Dollars 2,500 inthe medium term as new production capacity came on stream and stockscontinued to accumulate.The steady increase in stocks over recent weeks has been encouraged bybig premiums available for immediate delivery at the LME. As the stockshave risen these premiums - known as 'backwardations' - have narrowed.'If stocks keep rising, and we do expect they will, then the spreadsshould come in even more,' Adam Rowley of Macquarie Equities toldReuters.'At some stage in the first quarter of 1996 we are looking for quite asharp fall in copper prices,' he added.'With February/March at Dollars 80 to Dollars 90 backwardation it looksas if this period will stay tight,' said Wolfgang Becker of IceniCommodities Brokerage. 'Obviously at some stage the whole thing will bereversed, but this sort of stock rise may be a bear trap.'Options traders told Reuters prices could overshoot downside targets ifhedging against large put (selling) positions below the market gatheredpace. 'We are just waiting for copper's resilience to end and when itdoes the market could collapse,' one said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:ASSESSING THE POWER OF MULTINATIONALS: GLOBAL INVESTOR / TONY JACKSONIN NEW YORKA noisy debate has broken out in that quiet retreat for the weekendreader, the book review section of the New York Times. It revives anissue which some might have thought buried: the power of themultinationals. It is also a useful reminder that the triumph of freetrade - an idea implicit in most investment strategies today - cannotbe taken for granted.The opening salvo came in a review by the political theorist Mr FrancisFukuyama of a book called Opposing The System. The book, by a veteranleftist Mr Charles Reich, reportedly argues that the current socialmalaise - poverty, unemployment and so forth - has been engineered bylarge corporations for their own benefit. Therefore, it says, thepowers of government should be increased to control them.Mr Fukuyama regarded this as 1960s claptrap. The remedies proposed byMr Reich, he argued, had got us into this mess in the first place.Poverty and crime were caused not by big companies, but by biggovernment.Enter stage left another 1960s veteran, the consumers' champion MrRalph Nader. Big corporations, he wrote in reply, erode democracy,export jobs, and weaken the legal safeguards for workers, consumers andthe environment. 'Until Mr Fukuyama understands that a society rotsfrom the head down and that corporate power needs analysis, he willnever understand Mr Reich's thesis,' he concluded.So far, so familiar. But the role of the multinationals is becomingpart of a wider issue: that of free trade. If you believe that freetrade is destroying jobs and damaging society, you are bound to blamethe multinationals as its agents.As another book recently put it, global free trade 'will impoverish anddestabilise the industrialised world, while at the same time cruellyravaging the third world.' The author is no 1960s leftist, but theerstwhile corporate raider Sir James Goldsmith.As a blend of right-wing populist and born-again environmentalist, SirJames forms an unlikely bridge between the two wings of protectionism.On the right, he is joined by the US presidential candidate Mr PatBuchanan and by the fellow-billionaire Mr Ross Perot.On the left, he links with those who argue that free trade enables badenvironmental practice to drive out good: that through the agency -again - of the multinationals, production will gravitate to countriesfree from costly environmental controls.Those who feel paranoid about the unholy alliance of free-tradegovernments and big business can point to one central fact. As thechart reminds us, world trade has indeed been growing rapidly inrelation to the world economy since the late 1980s, having previouslygrown in line.But are corporations growing in proportion? The evidence is mixed. Lastyear, the three biggest US companies by revenues, as listed by Fortunemagazine, were General Motors, Ford and Exxon. Their combined sales ofDollars 384bn (Pounds 249.3bn) were equal to 5.7 per cent of US GDP.The figure for the same trio 20 years before was 6.7 per cent.But if US multinationals are not bigger, they may still be morepowerful. Arguably, modern communications and the lowering of tradebarriers give them much more opportunity to arbitrage labour andcapital around the world. Hence the solution of such as Mr Buchanan:put the barriers up again.It might be thought that the impulse to free trade is politicallyunstoppable: and indeed, that in the coming world of the Internet thegenie cannot be put back in the bottle anyway.Not everyone in the investment community agrees. The highly successfulinvestor Mr George Soros, for instance, argues that electronic trade isnot intrinsically different from the old kind, just faster. It would beperfectly feasible to re-impose exchange controls, he says. Singlecountries could not do it, but groups of countries could.Mr Soros is gloomily convinced that the present world order, which heregards as a golden age of capitalism, will ultimately break down. Thelast comparable period, he says, was the end of the 19th century. Inthose days, 'the British Empire was at the heart of the system, and hadan interest in maintaining security. When there was trouble, it sent agunboat. Now there is no chief beneficiary (from stability): certainlynot the US.'Should the average investor worry about all this? Not for the timebeing, perhaps. Both of the likely protagonists in next year's USpresidential elections, Mr Clinton and Mr Robert Dole, are professedfree traders: although both will bear watching for signs of concessionsto their respective outer wings.The point is rather that the case for a prolonged global bull marketcontains an internal contradiction. On the one hand, we are told thatmultinational corporations are enjoying a one-off shift to greaterproductivity and cheaper labour, based largely on the globalisation ofmarkets. On the other, we are told the globalising process does notentail empoverishing one set of workers to the benefit of another. Freetrade means faster growth, so the pie gets bigger.This worked very well for small countries like Taiwan and Korea, whichwere able to develop and open up at their own pace. It is anothermatter, to paraphrase Sir James Goldsmith, when political upheaval,modern communications and the liberalisation of capital movements hurl4bn workers into the world economy in the space of a few years.Hence the internal contradiction. Proponents of the bull market arguethat the shift in power between capital and labour is profound enoughto last for a generation. The question is what that generation willmake of it. If it feels disposed to rebel, global free trade could bethe first casualty.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FEATURES & OPTIONS:TIME TO REWRITE INFLATION TARGET: ECONOMICS NOTEBOOK / ROBERT CHOTEOver the last five years many countries have adopted formal targets forinflation as the centrepiece of their economic policies. But turning avaguely expressed enthusiasm for low inflation into a precise numericalobjective is not as straightforward as it sounds.For one thing, policymakers face a trade-off between the need toestablish credibility and to demonstrate humility. Any target has to bedemanding enough to persuade people that the authorities are seriousabout achieving low inflation; but it cannot be too demanding becausecredibility will then be lost again when the target proves impossibleto hit.In 1992 Britain adopted a formal inflation target comprising threeobjectives: underlying inflation between 1 and 4 per cent until spring1997; between 1 and 2.5 per cent in spring 1997; and below 2 per centin the long term. The most demanding element soon slipped from publicconsciousness, but the first two stayed in place. By last summer,however, the remaining target had to be updated. Interest rate changestake about two years to affect prices, so it was becoming too late todo much about inflation within the target period.Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced therefore in his MansionHouse speech that he would aim for underlying inflation of 2.5 per centor less beyond spring 1997. He predicted this would keep inflationbetween 1 and 4 per cent most of the time, recognising that unexpectedevents might push inflation higher when it was too late forpolicymakers to react.This formulation has caused confusion ever since and influential voiceshave argued that it needs rewriting again. Sir Terry Burns, thepermanent secretary to the Treasury, said shortly before Christmas thatthe government should move away from targeting a range for inflation,concentrating instead on a single figure. Some senior officials at theBank of England agree.The Mansion House speech left many questions unanswered in the minds ofCity and academic economists. Was the new target looser or tighter thanits predecessor? Was the inflation objective 1 to 2.5 per cent, 1 to 4per cent or 2.5 per cent and below?The conduct of interest rate policy in subsequent months only deepenedthe mystery. Mr Eddie George had told the chancellor in May thatinflation was set to exceed 2.5 per cent in two years' time and that heshould therefore raise rates. The chancellor refused because he thoughtinflation would be lower. Economists were unnerved by the disagreement,but at least both sides appeared to agree on the definition of thetarget - 2.5 per cent or below.But in September the Bank muddied the waters. It continued to predictthat inflation would exceed 2.5 per cent in two years' time, butdropped its demand for a rate rise. Shortly afterwards, Mr Mervyn King,its chief economist, argued that the target would be satisfied ifinflation averaged 2.5 per cent or less over a long period. Toobservers who had thought the authorities were supposed to be erring onthe side of caution - keeping inflation below 2.5 per cent except inunavoidable circumstances - this looked like a loosening of policy.But in a sense it was simply a recognition of the inevitablelimitations of inflation targeting. These limitations were demonstratedby Andrew Haldane and Christopher Salmon, from the Bank, in a studypublished last month*. They constructed a model of British inflationsince 1960 and reran history as though the authorities had pursued a2.5 per cent inflation target by setting interest rates on the basis ofa forward-looking forecast.The study suggested inflation would have been lower and less variablehad the authorities followed this policy, as the graphic illustrates.But Haldane and Salmon also used the model to assess the possibleoutcomes for inflation had the economy been buffeted by the whole rangeof unforecastable outside disturbances which was typical of the period.They concluded that even if monetary policy had always been welldirected, the authorities would have had only a one-in-four chance ofhitting a 1 to 4 per cent inflation target: 'Other things equal, theseresults would argue for an inflation target band width at least as wideas that operating in the UK - and possibly much wider.'This study provides further evidence that it may be counter-productiveto express the inflation target as a range at all - be it 1 to 4 percent or 2.5 per cent and below. If the range were wide enough for evena well-intentioned policymaker to be confident of hitting the target,it would have to be so wide as to provide little gain in credibility.Finland has recognised this problem and aims simply for inflation of 2per cent. The Bank of Finland concedes that it would be impossible tohit the target precisely in any given month, except by chance. But itargues nonetheless that a single figure provides a better anchor forprivate-sector expectations than a target range.Mr King's comments and the Bank of England's advice this autumn suggestthat the authorities in the UK may be behaving as though they have apoint target for inflation slightly below 2.5 per cent - even thoughthat is not what the formal statement of the target says. If so, thechancellor would do well to rewrite his target again so that itreflects reality in a rather clearer way. *Targeting Inflation, Bank ofEngland, 1995Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:ZAMBIA'S STOCK MARKET* ZambiaZambia's stock market will struggle to trade for the foreseeable futuredue to a growing crisis in the banking sector, analysts have said,Reuter reports from Lusaka.Several large institutions have been unable to participate in the stockexchange because their money has been tied up in four collapsedfinancial institutions.Four banks collapsed between May and November, leaving 16 in thecountry.A Rothmans of Pall Mall Zambia public offer, which closed on December7, for example, was grossly under subscribed because the pensionschemes and other institutions expected to have participated had theirmoney tied up.* ThailandThe average daily turnover on the Bangkok stock exchange in 1995 fellby 27.5 per cent from Bt8.6bn to Bt6.25bbn.Foreign trading on the SET over that period was Bt804.36bn, accountingfor 26.35 per cent of total trade.Foreign buying was worth Bt425.3bn in the period, while sellingaccounted for Bt379.03bn.* Hong KongThe Hong Kong stock exchange will review regulations on options tradingin the first quarter of 1996 and does not expect to launch new optionsduring the review period.The review would cover the proposal that market makers should be exemptfrom stamp duty when they conducted arbitrage with the spot market tospread risks.The exchange will also study changes to rules governing opening bidsand how to increase the number of market participants, including marketmakersThe exchange began listing individual stock options in September andcurrently trades options on nine stocks.* IndonesiaFurther state asset sales, an updated legal framework and automationcould mean a bright start to the year for the Jakarta stock exchange,brokers and analysts believe.The exchange switched to a fully automated trading system from manualoperations in May, after long delays. This coincided with a move to newpremises in the central business district, and the extension of tradingby 90 minutes each session.Brokers and analysts said the automated system had helped raiseefficiency and transparency and add liquidity. The fully automatedtrading system would also provide a springboard for a planned move tofully scripless trading, expected in the next few years.The government is expected to list many of the more than 200 statecompanies in the next few years.* PhilippinesThe Manila equities market, which languished for much of last year, isexpected to rebound strongly during 1996 as more companies are listed.The authorities expect the creation of a central depository, the startof scripless trading and tighter rules to prevent insider trading toboost sentiment.Some brokers said they expected up to 30 companies to list.However, inflationary pressures in the first quarter could be broughtabout by an impending increase in domestic oil prices.At present, about 200 companies are listed.A central depository would begin operations for treasury bills andgovernment bonds in March before expanding to shares by the thirdquarter of 1996.* Further coverage of emerging markets appears daily on the World StockMarkets page.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:TRADERS PIN HOPES ON DOLLARIf foreign exchange traders have their wishes granted, 1996 will be ayear of volatile markets. Last year was much better than the dismalspectacle of 1994, but the last few months were characterised by the USdollar trading in a very narrow range.There is a fair amount of bullishness among currency forecasters aboutthe outlook for the dollar, though in recent years it has managed toconfound the best intended explanations for why it should rally.Analysts at Lehman Brothers think that the dollar stands to benefit inthe coming months from: perceptions that inflation has becomestructurally lower, a modest improvement in the current account deficitas a proportion of GDP, and resolution of the budget negotiations.They caution, though, that any rally could run into the buffers in thesecond half of the year, which may be dominated by a turn-round inGerman interest rate expectations.Analysts at Goldman Sachs are also bullish about the dollar,forecasting levels of DM1.55 and Y112 in the next six months. Againstthe yen, their thinking is based upon trends in the trade and currentaccount data of both the US and Japan, which suggest that the bigbilateral balances between the countries are turning in the dollar'sfavour.Against the D-Mark, their thinking departs from the premise that theGerman economy is suffering from the mis-alignment of the D-Mark inEurope, and this will require the Bundesbank to ease monetary policy inorder to curb D-Mark strength.Politics will be a key variable. US presidential elections will affectthe dollar, while the progress towards monetary union in Europe willalso be an important determinant of D-Mark and Swiss franc performance.The proximity of elections in the UK, and a possible Labour government,could make life difficult for sterling.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:LOOKING AHEAD TO BRIGHTER PROSPECTS: THE EMERGING INVESTOR / JOHN PITTThe year just ended has not been one that investors in the world'semerging equity markets will care to remember. Far better to look aheadto the brighter prospects that many strategists believe beckon in 1996.But there were some winners during 1995 - a year in which what havebecome known as the 'pre-emerging' markets came into their own.Take Jordan, for example, capitalised at less than Dollars 5bn (comparethis with Mexico's market capitalisation of about Dollars 90bn), and anannual turnover estimated at less than Dollars 1bn. (Mexico has anaverage daily turnover of at least Dollars 100m.)A far sighted investor who took a position in the country's fledglingstock market at the start of last year would have seendollar-denominated assets appreciate by 23 per cent. Compare this witha loss of 35 per cent in both India and Hungary, or 40 per cent in SriLanka.Certainly one of the prominent themes of 1995 has been the growinginterest in these pre-emerging markets: countries which are justbeginning to organise their financial structures, but are endeavouringto do so as quickly as possible.As the main emerging markets of Mexico, South Korea, Taiwan and Turkey,for example, retreated in the face of a flow of funds back into thedeveloped world, so interest turned to lesser known regions. Inparticular, a race began among a number of US and European investmentbanks and brokerages to establish contacts and trading positions inAfrica. It became clear that in this 'new scramble for Africa' returnson investments could, in many cases, far exceed those in the moremature markets. But the risk would also be much greater.This did not deter the launch of a number of African funds during 1995,although most were naturally skewed towards the largest market on thecontinent - South Africa. With an estimated market capitalisation ofDollars 274bn Johannesburg is the world's seventh largest stockexchange.Russia was another growth area and some commentators believe that 1996will see this market come of age, especially after the presidentialelection is out of the way. ING Barings global strategy unit led byMichael Howell, for instance, believes that both eastern Europe andRussia show attractive valuation levels, and thinks fund managers areready to significantly increase their exposure.'Of the Dollars 50bn expected to flow towards emerging equity marketsin 1996, I expect some Dollars 5bn to head towards eastern Europe andRussia,' says Mr Howell. 'This is equivalent to more than 10 per centof existing market capitalisation, and, perhaps, as much as 25 per centof the existing free-float.'Other factors likely to lift investor sentiment in Russia include animprovement in custodial operations, with expectations that anindependent central depository will finally be created.Mr Mark Mobius, president of the Dollars 7bn Templeton Emerging MarketsFund, is another enthusiast for Russia, although he is aware that thecountry's turbulent political climate is likely to get worse before itgets any better.Nevertheless, he is confident that potential for investment is bright,given that the country has embarked on what he calls a 'revolutionary'approach to financial market reforms.But what of the core emerging markets?Mr Arnab Banerji, chief investment officer of Foreign & ColonialEmerging Markets based in London, believes that in spite of adisappointing return on investments in 1995 the outlook remainspositive. He picks South Korea, India, Brazil and Taiwan, among others,as having strong prospects.India, for example, continues to have good compound earnings growth, hesays.He is also among a number of strategists who favour Brazil among LatinAmerican markets.Garantia, a leading Brazilian investment bank, warns that slowereconomic growth during the first half of the year will put a brake onthe stock market's momentum; while for the year as a whole it will bevery much a matter of selecting specific sectors. Garantia favours thefood, beverage, packaging and retail sectors, on the basis that therecent decline in inflation means that many people now have adisposable income for the first time in years.At UBS the emerging markets team is keen on Chile, South Korea andTurkey, all for different reasons. Chile will continue to see animprovement in the economic picture and political problems are forecastto dissipate; South Korea is expected to benefit from an easing inmonetary policy; and Turkey should be able to move forward once againnow that the parliamentary elections are out of the way.Chile will also benefit from the increased weighting - from 1.9 percent to 7.3 per cent - which the equity market will attract in theIFC's investable index which starts this month. Mr Nigel Rendell atJames Capel, who classifies Chile as 'an Asian tiger living in LatinAmerica', forecasts that despite the recent rise in interest rates,corporate earnings will rise by 25 per cent in nominal terms, valuingthe market on a prospective p/e of 16 times.Whether or not this year will see a pick-up in activity among theworld's emerging markets depends on a host of factors, not least themovement in US interest rates. Further easing in US monetary policy,many analysts believe, could trigger a fresh wave of institutionalmoney out of the US and Europe, and into Latin America and the FarEast.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:INVESTORS FACE A DEARTH OF ECONOMIC DATAThanks to the latest Federal government shutdown, US stock marketinvestors start the new year facing a dearth of official economic dataagainst which to judge the economy's performance.The only significant new information this week will be the NationalAssociation of Purchasing Management report for December, due today.The headline NAPM index for the month is expected by most economists tobe around 47.5 - higher than November's 46.5 but still below the50-mark which would point to expectations of manufacturing growth. Thatwould provide a firm backdrop for the bond market, whose recent gainshave underpinned share prices.While keeping one eye on bonds, the stock market will begin to fix itsattention on the corporate earnings season starting later this month.Three months ago, a generally strong set of quarterly results helpedset the stage for the stock market's fourth-quarter rise. This timearound, the figures will be pored over for signs of how the US'seconomic slowdown is affecting earnings growth.Most market followers expect earnings growth to taper off during 1996.But corporate cost-cutting and share repurchases have left plenty ofroom for earnings to come in ahead of expectations. And with USinvestors still buying mutual funds, there seems to be plenty of casharound to chase share prices higher.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:STRATEGY   By MICHAEL MORGANThe start of the new year has brought the usual crop of recommendationsfrom brokers. Spain and Sweden feature among the lists as potentiallygood performers in 1996 while the time may now be ripe to take profitson Switzerland after its strong run last year.Views on Italy are divided, with some analysts thinking the time isright to give the market another chance but others finding thepolitical outlook still unappealing.JP Morgan expects equity markets to remain volatile, with positiveresponses to interest rate cuts probably offset in part by continuingbad news on earnings.Morgan reiterates its underweighting of Paris, saying France isexpected to experience one of the slowest growth rates in Europe nextyear. It is taking profits on a previous upgrade of the Swiss marketand switching the money into Italy, which it believes is discountingthe bad news and could react positively to a relaxation of monetarypolicy.Morgan says the low valuation on its forecasts and scope for interestrate cuts makes the Swedish market look attractive after its recentunderperformance.Lehman Brothers still recommends being overweight in the Spanish,French, Swedish and Dutch markets. It says the first two are cheap,relative to debt, while slower French growth has been more thandiscounted by the market.Sweden looks attractive on a prospective dividend basis, while theDutch market is the cheapest among the core European economies.The UK, Swiss and Italian markets remained relatively expensive.Liquidity flows had helped the first two, but value would come through.In spite of its underperformance, Lehman saw little value in Italy.ABN-Amro Hoare Govett, meanwhile, continues to prefer Germany and theNetherlands in core Europe while Spain is its peripheral market ofchoice. And while Italy's valuations have improved, ABN still does nottrust the politics.TOKYOWith the Year of the Pig ending on a note of slight recovery, somemarket participants are hoping that the Year of the Rat will be a goodone for the Japanese shares, writes Emiko Terazono. Past Years of theRat have seen the market rise by an average of 54.6 per cent, and theanimal is regarded by believers of traditional omens as a favourablesign for investments.Stocks may need all the help they can get since banks and lifeinsurance companies are expected to sell their share holdings ahead ofthe March book-closing. Analysts point out that there has been heavytrading around 21,500 and regard that figure as a strong resistancelevel.HONG KONGFurther gains are expected among equities this week after Friday'syear-end window dressing and solid gains in the futures market, whichtook the Hang Seng index to intra-day and closing highs for 1995.Analysts are concerned, however, that the near-term outlook forrecently active newspaper stocks remains cloudy in view of their weakearnings prospects. They add that the decision to relax conditionsgoverning the pre-sale of uncompleted flats will benefit developers,although it will not have much stimulative effect on the local propertymarket.FRANKFURTThe Bundesbank meets on Thursday, but having cut key rates at its lastmeeting, no action can be expected on the discount or Lombard ratesthis week.James Capel says the Bundesbank Council will wish to assess the impactof the monetary easing on M3 and the real economy over some weeks.The most interesting feature of the meeting was likely to be what thecouncil said about the repo rate.'We would expect a fairly prompt return to a variable repo rate, whichis likely to drift lower over the coming weeks,' says Capel.On the corporate front, analysts are expecting a let-up in the numberof new bourse listings in 1996 after last year's flood, althoughNovember will bring the flotation of Telekom, Germany's telephonemonopoly, which is expected to raise DM15bn.Companies raised a record DM8.5bn in new funds in 1995 from 20 IPOs,including the listing of Merck, the drugs group, that was Germany'slargest post second world war stock offering, which raised DM2.4bn, andthe Adidas placement, which raised DM2.1bn.DUBLINEven after last year's performance, which saw the Irish equity marketclimb by 20 per cent to end among the best performing markets in Europefor the third successive year, Dublin retains its enthusiasts.Mr Robbie Kelleher at Davy Stockbrokers in Dublin says the market hasmore than doubled since the trough of October 1992 but still expectsthe ISEQ to be among the top performing indices in 1996.'Valuations remain low, both by historic and international standards,the Irish economy is likely to be the fastest growing economy in inEurope again in 1996 and the strength of corporate cash flows andbalance sheets is likely to restrict the supply of new equity to aminimum,' he says.How this better relative performance translates into absoluteperformance depends on developments in other markets.Mr Kelleher believes the international equity market rally can besustained in the early part of 1996, on the back of continuing supportfrom low interest rates, low inflation and rising bond prices.Compiled by Michael MorganBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:YEAR EXPECTED TO OPEN ON POSITIVE NOTEThe UK market starts what could be a general election year in a healthyspirit. A base rate cut in December, accompanied by reductions inEuropean and US interest rates, creates a positive background forequities.With most observers expecting base rates to fall further in the earlymonths of 1996, shares could yet set some more all-time highs. Whilethe FT-SE 100 index did well in 1995, it still lagged well behind WallStreet's phenomenal performance.The first test of the year will be the spring results season, not somuch for the figures themselves, but for chairmen's statements abouttrading conditions in early 1996. The market shrugged off some profitswarnings in late 1995, mainly on the hope that UK economic growth waspausing for breath, rather than grinding to a halt.As the year moves on, thoughts will inevitably turn to the date of anelection, and the chances of a Labour government.Concern will probably focus, not on macro-economic policies, but onmicro-economic matters such as the minimum wage or dividend taxation.If Labour maintains its strong lead in the opinion polls, shares maystart to come under pressure.Much went right for the UK stock market in 1995 - takeover activity, astrong Wall Street, falling bond yields and worldwide interest rates.It will be a surprise if all those factors are still as positive in1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:CVRD MANDATE SUGGESTS END OF THE GOLDEN 3% FEE: INTERNATIONAL OFFERINGSThe debate about fees which investment banks charge for arranginginternational equity offerings is set to be a lively one in 1996,judging from the aggressive bids which emerged in the recentcompetition to win Brazil's Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD) mandate.Shortly before Christmas, the Brazilian government said it had chosen aconsortium including Merrill Lynch, NM Rothschild, KPMG and fourBrazilian partners to handle the sale of its 51 per cent stake in CVRD,one of the world's largest exporters of iron ore.The winning consortium is charging a fee of 1.9 per cent to arrangewhat is expected to be one of the most significant international equityofferings of 1996. According to market valuations, the government'sstake is worth about Dollars 5bn but the sale is likely to be spreadover at least two offerings.If the winners' fee looked low, it was by no means the lowest. Bankersinvolved in the bidding said a consortium led by Lehman Brothers hadoffered to do the business for a fee of 1.75 per cent and anotherincluding CS First Boston for 1.9 per cent.It is also believed the fee bid by the consortium including MorganStanley and SBC Warburg (disqualified because the first part of its feeestimate was too far below the average) was in this region.By contrast, Goldman Sachs, which had come top in the technical part ofthe bidding contest, had bid a fee of 3.125 per cent, bankers said.Bankers involved in the consortium which won the CVRD mandate say thelevel of the fee was justified because the sale will be a secondaryoffering and not an initial public offering, which usually commands ahigher fee.Half of the CVRD stock is already traded, making CVRD the mostwidely-held stock after Telebras and Petrobras. As a result, it alreadyhas a wide following among foreign analysts and investors.They also point out that there is a history of low fees in Brazil,where past international equity offerings have been done for fees ofjust over 2 per cent. But the two most important reasons bankers giveto justify the fee are: first, the size of the offering; and second,the importance of being involved in the first of many privatisations inBrazil.Although bankers do not expect the government to sell its CVRD holdingin one go, the arranging banks stand to earn close to Dollars 100m fromthe whole process.On the second point, the bidding highlighted the willingness amonginternational banks to drop their fees in order to be at the forefrontof Brazil's privatisation programme.The government wants CVRD to pave the way for further sell-offs in thecountry's electricity and telecommunications sectors over the next fewyears.The fact that three leading investment banks were willing to arrangethe CVRD sale for a fee of less than 2 per cent, despite the risksassociated with an emerging market such as Brazil, is also a reflectionof the increasingly intense competition in the international equitymarket.Once one of the most lucrative sectors of investment banking, fees forarranging deals, particularly privatisations, have been erodingsteadily over the past two years.This has come about as governments seek to maximise the proceeds ofselling off state assets and new players try to break into the market.The downward pressure on fees has been mainly on privatisations, wherethere is likely to be follow-on business for the banks, and less so oncorporate IPOs or secondary offerings. However, there are signs thatcorporate fees are also coming under pressure.In view of the ever-greater number of privatisations in Europe andelsewhere in the world and the growing number of investment bankswanting a slice of the action, it is inevitable that fee levels havebecome one of the main bargaining tools.With competition set to stiffen further, many bankers now believe thegolden 3 per cent level, once the norm for European privatisations, hasgone for good.Antonia SharpeGoldman Sachs maintained its position as the leading globalco-ordinator of international equity issues in 1995, according to datafrom Euromoney Bondware, Antonia Sharpe writes. Goldman's involvementin Germany's privatisation of Deutsche Telekom, scheduled for November,should ensure it retains the top slot in 1996. However, winning theCVRD mandate in Brazil, which is also set to emerge in the second halfof the year, has increased Merrill Lynch's chances of taking the lead.Although Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, SBC Warburg, CS First Boston,Dresdner Bank-Kleinwort Benson and Lehman Brothers remain among the top10 global co-ordinators for 1995, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Paribas andBNP have been displaced by UBS, ABN-Amro and BZW.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:WHILE THE COUNTRY'S FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONSWhile the country's financial institutions' woes are likely to promptthe Bank of Japan to maintain an accommodating stance in its moneymarket operations, it is expected to push up interest rates on the longend.Banks are expected to step up their profit-taking on bonds and stocksahead of the March book-closing in order to cover losses stemming fromthe write-offs of bad loans.Many of the leading banks have pledged to clear their balance sheets ofbad loans related to jusen, or housing loan companies, and some haveannounced that they may fall into the red for this business year toMarch.Life insurance companies may also want to take profits on their bondholdings due to the decline in insurance premiums. While the leadinginsurers posted healthy rises in their recurring profits for the firsthalf to September, this was largely due profit-taking on theirinvestments.The seasonal repatriation of funds from the US ahead of the Marchbook-closing may briefly put upward pressure on the yen on the foreignexchanges, but this is unlikely to have a lasting impact on bondprices.Lehman Brothers in Tokyo estimates yields on the 10-year governmentbond, which closed the last year at 2.9 per cent, to end at 3.4 percent at the end of the first quarter of this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:A STEP AWAY FROM CITY TRADITION: OPEN GILT REPO TRADING   By PHILIP GAWITH and RICHARD LAPPERThe launch today of the open gilt repo market may be something lessthan a 'second Big Bang', but it does represent a further step awayfrom a City where custom and tradition have played an important role,towards one governed by the more homogenised standards of a globalfinancial services industry.The privileges and arcane idiosyncracies associated with such core Cityinstitutions as gilt edge market makers (GEMMs) and stock exchangemoney brokers (SEMBs) are ebbing away.Already there is evidence of some of the more marginal GEMMs throwingin the towel, while SEMBs will have to cope with the fact that an openrepo market comes in tandem with an open stock-lending market.Ironically, the advent of the gilt repo market is beingenthusiastically welcomed by that other supposed City anachronism - thediscount house. These institutions have, for as long as anyone canremember, served as the intermediaries through which the Bank ofEngland channels liquidity to the commercial banks.Often the butt of ridicule for their quaint practice of havingemployees don top hats every morning in order to do the rounds of theCity's main banks, they have also become increasingly marginalised inrecent years as the clearing banks have gained ascendancy in the moneymarkets.More than 80 per cent of the eligible bills - those which the Bank isprepared to discount in its daily money market operations - are held bythe clearers.As a result, the role of discount houses over the past 10 years hasbeen little more than to serve as brokers on behalf of the clearingbanks.There is a widespread belief, however, that the Bank of England willstart to use the repo as its daily medium of intervention in the moneymarkets (at the moment it conducts repo operations every two weeks, butthe bulk of its daily operations are done through the bill market).This will not be immediate - the Bank will first want to see a depth ofliquidity in the repo market, both in terms of the number ofcounterparties, and the volume going through - but is believed to beinevitable.For its part, the Bank is playing a very straight bat. It said thisweek that 'it did not have plans to change the form of its money marketoperations', but that the development of gilt repo trading 'could makeit sensible to contemplate change later'.The Bank has to tread very carefully, because, in the words of oneobserver, 'any change is a sea change'.A hint that the Bank plans to start using repo alongside eligible billsin its daily operations is sure to be taken as a signal that a move tosole reliance on repo is likely.Some observers believe the Bank will try to run repo and billoperations in tandem.There are two main reasons why such a move is considered likely. First,there is widespread belief that intervening via the repo will be a moreeffective method of managing short-dated interest rates than thecurrent practice of intervening, often three times a day, via the billmarket.Second, it seems most likely to be the modus operandi of a futuresingle European central bank and the UK is unlikely to want to doanything which is at odds with what it might have to do in Europe, ifit participates in monetary union.A study last year by Mr Norbert Schnadt for the London Business Schoolfound that the money market operations of the Banque de France,Bundesbank and Federal Reserve differed from those of the Bank ofEngland in that they were conducted less frequently, utilised onlyrepurchase transactions, and were spread over a very wide range offinancial institutions.It also found that even though the Bank intervened more frequently inthe money markets than the other central banks, sterling rates weremuch more volatile than elsewhere.Recently, however, UK overnight rates have been steadier. Interventionvia repo is also unlikely, in itself, to be sufficient to makeovernight rates more stable.Any shift towards daily use of repo will be welcomed by the discounthouses, because by so doing the Bank will increase the number of activeparticipants in the money markets, diminishing the dominant role of theclearers.The introduction of an open repo market also creates a new tradinginstrument which puts more emphasis on the idea of secured money - ahigh priority in the aftermath of the Barings episode.At the moment, most secured lending and borrowing is done either to thediscount market, or via SEMBs, and through them to GEMMs.Discount houses see an opportunity in this because of their expertisein secured lending.Mr George Blunden, chief executive of Union plc, says: 'Discount houseshave a head start because our job has been secured money markets sincethe beginning of time.' As much as 95 per cent of the discount marketis secured.Mr Ross Jones, chief executive at Gerrard and National plc, adds: 'Thisis the biggest opportunity we have had for years. We see it as apotential new lease of life for the secured sterling money market.'A group like Gerrards has the added advantage of having a SEMB withinthe group, which will be merged with the discount house operations.While the pivotal role of SEMBs will be diminished, stock borrowing andlending will continue, alongside repo, so the relationships they havewill still count.A number of the largest holders of gilts - pension funds andinstitutions - have dealt exclusively with SEMBs, and early indicationsare that they will be happy to continue doing business this way.As new entrants garner market share, institutions will have to widentheir counterparties beyond the small set of SEMBs they havetraditionally dealt with, but loyalty to old relationships looks likelyto be the watchword initially.Discount houses are also confident that if the Bank of England startsto use the repo as an intervention mechanism, it will want a manageableset of counterparties, dedicated to making markets in all conditions.They believe that their chances of playing this role are good.Another development which will encourage the development of the repomarket is the introduction of the European-wide Capital AdequacyDirective, which also takes effect today. CAD encourages a securedmoney market, because the capital requirements for repos are much lowerthan for unsecured ones.Philip Gawith and Richard LapperBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:THE GERMAN BOND MARKETThe German bond market market ended the year quietly but positively,with bund futures generally expected to remain firm.Inflation, now below 2 per cent, is clearly under control and economicgrowth is modest at best. Thus the Bundesbank can sit tight after itspre-Christmas interest rate cuts.With the discount rate now down to 3 per cent, the chances of a furtherreduction are rated as no more than slight by most economists.It has only once fallen below 3 per cent in the last three decades -just after the 1987 stock market crash, when it stayed at 2.5 per centfor six months.Mr Holger Fahrinkrug, an economist at Union Bank of Switzerland, saidthe discount rate was not likely to fall so low in this cycle.'However,' he added, 'this does not mean that monetary easing is over.'The securities repurchase (repo) rate should fall below the current3.75 per cent. Also, the 5 per cent Lombard rate could also be lowered,since the bottom of previous cycles has seen it at 4 or 4.5 per cent.If the money supply remains weak, the Bundesbank could cut interestrates further, said Mr Bill Smyth of BHF Trust. But the 1987 discountcut to 2.5 per cent did not produce a powerful bond rally, he noted.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:ALL EYES IN THE UK GOVERNMENTAll eyes in the UK government bond market this week will be on giltsale and repurchase agreements, or repos, which starts today.'A whole new world of leverage trades, reverse repos, term stock loans,buy/sells, matched books and, hopefully, very little mayhem willtransform the gilt market,' say analysts at HSBC Greenwell.'We are entering a new evolutionary phase in the market. Repos willimpact on pricing, liquidity management, swaps, curve plays andultimately, we suspect, on official intervention in the money market.'But in the near term, trading is unlikely to be heavily affected byrepos and after trading in a narrow range last week, gilts will have tolook elsewhere for life to be breathed back into the market.The data front offers slim pickings, with M0 figures and the purchasingmanagers' report for December scheduled as the only releases this week.'M0 will be viewed with interest for what it reveals about consumerdemand in December - a month which accounts for over one-quarter oftotal annual retail sales,' notes Mr Nigel Richardson of YamaichiInternational. 'The weekly notes in circulation data suggest that therewas a seasonally adjusted increase in M0 of almost 1 per cent on themonth - this would appear to confirm retailers' reports of strong salesin December.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:INVESTORS ASSESS THEIR STRATEGY FOR 1996: GOVERNMENT BONDS   By RICHARD LAPPERThe scale of the rally in international government bonds over the lastsix months surprised the markets and left many investors scrambling toincrease their exposures.In assessing their strategy for this year, investors must weigh up theextent to which benign economic fundamentals, especially for the US andEuropean markets, are already reflected in valuations.At the same time, the markets could be affected by a number ofpolitical uncertainties linked to the US presidential elections and thecreation of European Monetary Union.European bonds provided investors with some of the best returns in 1995- with returns (in local currency terms) to December 15 ranging fromaround 15.3 per cent in France and 15.5 per cent in Germany to 19.3 percent in Sweden.Over the last few weeks there has been a wealth of evidence that thegrowth of core economies such as Germany and France is grinding to ahalt and that inflationary pressures are continuing to ease.Furthermore, at their Madrid summit last month European leaders andfinance ministers reaffirmed their commitment to monetary union,suggesting the reduction of fiscal deficits will remain a priority forgovernments across the continent.'Europe is shaping up for a common currency and that suggestsgovernments will wrestle to bring public finances under control. Theseare developments bond investors will be pleased to see,' says Mr CraigShute, bond analyst at Bear Stearns International in London.Similar 'bond-positive' forces are visible in the US, where Treasuriesprovided investors with total returns of more than 17 per cent in 1995.And the current market rally has very different characteristics to thatof 1993, which gave way to a sell-off early in 1994.During 1993, the markets were expecting further monetary tightening -now by contrast, further cuts in interest rates are expected. Theinflation rate is falling - it was rising in 1993 - and some analystsargue that investors have yet to fully adjust their expectations to theextent of the downward trend in inflation.Mr Nigel Richardson, international bond strategist at YamaichiInternational, says US inflation - as measured by the consumer priceindex - has not been as low as its current level of 2.6 per cent since1972. The present situation 'holds out the possibility that there maybe a permanent return to 1960s-style price increases,' suggests MrRichardson.Yet according to the a survey of economic forecasts by ConsensusEconomics Inc, investors expect US inflation to rise to 3.1 per cent inthe longer term.'They are responding fully to the current inflation background on thegrounds that they appear to doubt it will be maintained. In essence,therefore, the bond market has 1980s style yields against a backgroundof 1960s style inflation,' says Mr Richardson.However, there are also good reasons to be cautious. For a start, thescale of the surge in bond prices in 1995 means much of the good newsis already reflected in valuations.Yields on 30-year Treasury bonds fell by nearly two percentage pointsin 1995, touching 6 per cent by the year end, while in Germany yieldson 10-year bonds had dropped to 6.07 per cent by December 27, a fall ofmore than 1.5 per cent.'With the US and European central banks virtually moving as one to cutinterest rates before year-end, most of the good news for the bondmarkets has been delivered,' says Mr Graham McDevitt, internationalbond strategist at Paribas Capital Markets.Mr McDevitt predicts an increase in volatility, arguing that there is ahigh risk of a correction in the first quarter with bond yields risingby 25 to 50 basis points. Economic slowdown could also createdifficulties by undermining fiscal deficit and debt reduction schemes,in turn putting at risk the achievement of Maastricht criteria formonetary union in some countries.The impact of the slowdown will be most clearly apparent in France,where a fall in tax revenues could impair the government's efforts toreduce its fiscal deficit from the current level of more than 5 percent.The industrial action by French railway workers last month is expectedto have reduced growth in the final quarter of 1995 to 0.1 per cent.Finally, while leverage has been an element of the current bull market,it is not thought to represent as serious a threat to the markets'stability as in 1994, when highly geared trades built up in 1993 weresuddenly unwound, aggravating the extent of the sell-off.A popular geared play last year, according to analysts at BZWSecurities, was to finance purchases of US assets with yen borrowingson the grounds that the 'perceived potential for currency loss is smallrelative to the yield pick-up.'BZW says the leveraging has been concentrated on US more than Europeanbond markets and may well be limited to the short end of the Treasurycurve, though 'the impact will still have percolated along the curve.'Richard LapperBack to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MARKETS:US TREASURIES PASSED A MILESTONEUS Treasuries passed a milestone last week. On Wednesday, the yield onthe benchmark 30-year long bond ended the day below the psychologicallysignificant 6 per cent level for the first time in two years. OnThursday and Friday, it edged down further still, closing the week -and the year - at 5.94 per cent, in marked contrast to the 7.92 percent at which it started the year.The question now is whether yields will fall further still, and WallStreet analysts believe they will. Most indicators point to a weakeningof economic growth in the coming year, further diminishing inflationarypressures.With recession an increasing possibility, analysts confidently expectthe Federal Reserve to continue to reduce the Fed funds rate, with thenext downward movement pencilled in for the Federal Open MarketCommittee meeting of January 30-31.This week, however, could be a quiet one in the bond market, for anyagreement between the president and Congress over a balanced budgetwill almost certainly come too late to allow the flow of governmentdata to resume before the weekend.Most attention is likely to focus on today's publication of theNational Association of Purchasing Managers index for December. This isexpected to show a slight increase from November's 46.5.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:OTHER ECONOMIC NEWSTuesday: The annual rate of growth of UK's M0 money supply is expectedto have risen slightly last month. The US purchasing managers' index isexpected to show a further contraction in manufacturing, although lessthan last month.Wednesday: The UK's purchasing managers' index is expected to record aslowdown in activity in the UK. Most economists think US new home saleswere fewer in November than in October.Thursday: The Bundesbank council holds its first meeting of the newyear. The Danish unemployment rate is expected to have fallen inNovember. US factory orders are expected to have recovered in Novemberafter falling in the previous month.Friday: Italian consumer price inflation is forecast to have fallenback last month. Figures on Italian gross domestic product are expectedto show a rise in the third quarter. US non-farm payroll data shouldshow a smaller rise last month than in November. A raft of Germaneconomic figures are released this week. They should show anacceleration in M3 money supply growth and no change in industrialproduction.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SHORTS:PUBLIC PROCUREMENT DEALPublic sector procurement contracts worth several hundred billiondollars a year were opened to international competition when a newWorld Trade Organisation accord came into force. The 24 signatoriesinclude the 15 members of the European Union, the US, Canada, Japan andSouth Korea.US bill on lobbyingA ban on gifts for politicians in Congress came into force. Senatorscan only accept gifts worth less than Dollars 50, with exemptions forhome-state products and foodstuffs. House of Representatives membersare allowed nothing, although there are 23 exemptions includinghome-state products, T-shirts and baseball caps. Lobbyists mustdisclose full details of their activities.Italy holds EU presidencyItaly assumed the six-month rotating presidency of the European Union,with the prime task of inaugurating the Inter-Governmental Conferences(IGCs) on the future of the EU. The presidency risks being overshadowedby Italy's political instability and a general election.Lamberto Dini, prime minister, has argued strongly that he shouldremain in office to ensure the government is able to concentrate on thepresidency.Britain takes over WEUThe UK took over the presidency of the Western European Union, a10-nation defence club. Britain has pledged to take a pragmaticapproach to upgrading the WEU, with some improvements in its capacityto anticipate and handle crises but with no question of itscompromising Nato's role as Europe's main security institution.EU-Turkey customs unionA customs union between the European Union and Turkey came into effectwith the removal of remaining trade barriers. This followed a vote inthe European parliament in December, in which the move was approved by343 to 149, with 36 abstentions. There had been concern about Turkey'shuman rights record.EU finance directivesThe EU Investment Services Directive, and the accompanying capitaladequacy directive, were both implemented. The directives aim to giveEU investment firms a 'passport' to trade in all member states if theyare authorised in one.The CAD also introduces European Union-wide rules for banks andsecurities firms to set aside capital to cover risks in securitiestrading. These are in addition to international rules covering lendingrisks run by banks.Telecoms competitionCable TV, utility, rail and other 'alternative' networks throughout theEU were allowed to use their infrastructure to offer telecom services.Mobile operators were permitted to build their own networks anddirectly connect to other mobile operators.French income tax riseAn additional 0.5 per cent tax charge was introduced on all revenues inan attempt to correct the country's accumulated social securitydeficit.German tax changesTax cuts and other changes took effect which should leave Germansnearly DM20bn (Dollars 13.8bn) better off this year. Tax-freeallowances were brought into line with poverty-level incomes, more thandoubling the level of income permitted before tax to just over DM12,000a year.Consumers will also benefit from the elimination of the 'coal pfennig',which was previously added to electricity bills to help pay for the useof German coal in power stations. However, these savings - amounting toabout DM27bn this year - will be offset partly by DM7.5bn highercontributions to pensions and insurance funds.Deutsche Telekom tariffsGermany's state-owned telephone company, due for partial privatisationlater this year, introduced changes to bring its tariffs more in linewith market demands. Long-distance calls will become cheaper and localcalls, which have been kept artificially cheap for decades, moreexpensive. Business clients can also choose from three differentdiscounts of up to 24 per cent.British alcohol tax cutThe tax on fortified wine, such as sherry and port, was reduced by 12pfor a typical 75cl bottle.UK copyright extendedCopyright on music and literature was extended from 50 to 70 years,implementing an EU directive of October 1993. Although virtually allmember (and non-member) states adhered to the 50-year rule, the EUfollowed Germany, where royalty payments last 70 years. Britain willnow be out of step with other English-speaking countries, which will beable to produce cheap editions 20 years earlier.The change is retrospective, bringing back into copyright works byartists who died between 1925 and 1945, including the composers EdwardElgar and Gustav Holst, and writers Arthur Conan Doyle, creator ofSherlock Holmes, Kenneth Grahame, author of Wind in the Willows, ThomasHardy, Rudyard Kipling, DH Lawrence, and Beatrix Potter.Income tax back in CubaCuba, which abolished personal taxes as a 'capitalist evil' after the1959 revolution, reintroduced income tax on hard currency earnings. Thegovernment also introduced a tax on boats - whatever their size - androad tolls on two highways leading to tourist centres.Back to Headline List CopyrightTODAY'S FINANCIAL TIMES (LONDON EDITION) via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCE:UK GILT REPO MARKET OPENSAn open market begins in gilt repos, agreements to sell and thenrepurchase government bonds. All players in the gilt market will beallowed to borrow and lend stock, rather than only a select group ofdealers. The reform should provide greater liquidity, make the marketmore attractive to foreign investors and reduce government fundingcosts.Cash for Marcos victimsAbout Dollars 50m (Pounds 32.4m) of money from Swiss bank accountsbelonging to the late Ferdinand Marcos, the former president of thePhilippines, is to be transferred to Hawaii. The move is part of aDollars 100m deal in settlement of a Dollars 2bn claim by about 10,000victims - or their relatives - who were tortured, raped or murderedunder the Marcos regime. The Filipinos filed a lawsuit against Marcos,who died in exile in Hawaii in 1989, after a popular revolt ousted himfrom power in 1986.AT&T targets BritainUK phone-users can expect to find themselves the target of aggressivecampaigns by AT&T, the largest US telecoms operator. AT&T says it willnot compete on price but on quality of service and innovation. BritishTelecom, which has so far brushed off challenges from its 150 or so UKrivals, may have more to fear from the US giant.CricketSouth Africa meet England in the fifth Test in Cape Town (to Jan 6).HolidaysArmenia, Botswana, Canada, Japan, Korea, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Taiwan, Yugoslavia.WEDNESDAY 3Perry in SarajevoWilliam Perry, US defence secretary, arrives in Sarajevo afterinspecting US bases in Italy and Hungary. Mr Perry is touring USmilitary operations to implement the Bosnia peace accord. It is thefirst visit by a high-level US official since the deployment of 20,000American troops began on December 16.On Thursday, Mr Perry travels to Ukraine, where he and his Ukrainianand Russian counterparts will participate in the destruction of anintercontinental ballistic missile silo in accordance with theStrategic Arms Reduction Treaty.Summing up in Maxwell trialThe Maxwell fraud trial resumes following a Christmas break demanded bythe jury. The judge, Lord Justice Phillips, will start his summing up.This is expected to last almost a week, after which the jury will besent out to consider its verdict. Kevin Maxwell, Ian Maxwell and LarryTrachtenberg deny conspiring to defraud the Maxwell pension funds.HolidaysJapan, Taiwan.THURSDAY 4UK's first war crimes trialCommittal hearings start in Dorking, near London, for what could beBritain's first war crimes trial. The accused is 84-year-old SzymonSerafinowicz, a former Nazi paramilitary allegedly involved inatrocities during the second world war.Japan's stock markets openThe Tokyo Stock Exchange and the country's other stock exchanges openthe year's trading session.HolidaysBurma, Zaire.FRIDAY 5Britain's Blair in Far EastTony Blair, leader of the UK's opposition Labour party, makes a two-dayvisit to Japan on the first leg of a Far East tour (to Jan 8) to raisehis party's international profile and persuade foreign investors of thesoundness of Labour economic and financial policies. He will addressthe Keidanren, the main business federation, and meet governmentministers and UK businesses in Japan. He travels on to Singapore.German rail fares riseFares on Deutsche Bahn, Germany's federal railway system, rise anaverage 2.8 per cent in western Germany. Train tickets in easternGermany, which used to be 20 per cent cheaper than in western Germany,will now only be 10 per cent cheaper. The Schones Wochenende ticket,which enables five people to travel unlimited mileage on local trainsfor an entire weekend, will now cost DM35 (Dollars 25), up from DM30.Mastering ManagementThe FT's 20-part series resumes in the UK edition with part nine,following a two-week break. Non-UK readers can take out a subscription.Contact: PO Box 384, Sutton, Surrey, SM1 4XE, UK. Tel: +44 181 7709772, Fax: +44 181 643 7330.HolidaysSri Lanka.SATURDAY 6Rifkind visits Hong KongMalcom Rifkind, UK foreign secretary, arrives in Hong Kong for athree-day visit, his first to the colony as foreign secretary. He willmeet local business and political leaders and receive a briefing fromthe governor, Chris Patten, on the state of Anglo-Chinese relations asthey affect the June 1997 hand-over of the colony. Mr Rifkind travelson to Beijing.SailingThe Cape to Rio yacht race starts from Cape Town, South Africa.Although the event is sponsored by Rothmans cigarettes, one of thefavourites is the Swedish yacht Nicorette - which is named after aproduct that helps smokers give up. Nicorette won the 1995 Fastnetrace.SUNDAY 7Portillo in JapanMichael Portillo, UK defence secretary, in Japan to January 9, willdiscuss co-operation in United Nations peace-keeping operations. Japanis to send troops for monitoring duties in the Golan Heights at the endof this month. An accord is expected on UK-Japan military exercises andexchanges of officers for training.UK rail fares increaseBritish Rail and London Underground fares rise by varying amounts,according to the route and service provider.Rugby unionCardiff meet Toulouse in the final of the European club rugbycompetition in Cardiff. Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Simon Strong.Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-5IA074-000493-B044-243http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb20.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012749 text/html 76436HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:25:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:15 GMTContent-length: 76249Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb20.html Sample Issue Copyright AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNet October 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AHOLD IN 50/50 JOINT VENTURE IN SPAIN (84 words) GRIMMA TO UPGRADE UKRAINIAN SUGAR PLANTS (88 words) SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE TAKES CONTROL OF SOUTH AFRICAN BREWER (107 words) ESTONIAN BREWER SELLS STAKE TO FINNISH GROUP (180 words) FYFFES SELLS STAKE IN BANANA FIRM TO DOLE (112 words) LA MODERNA TO CLINCH DEAL WITH ROYAL VAN NAMEN (200 words) DANISCO LIFTS SALES TURNOVER BY 14% (191 words) ROYAL GREENLAND IN FISH JOINT VENTURE WITH RUSSIAN COMPANY (118 words) BASS CRITICISED FOR HOOPERS HOOCH CAMPAIGN (94 words) SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES ACQUIRES POLISH BEER MAKER (193 words) BONGRAIN REPORTS SLIGHT RISE IN TURNOVER (295 words) BONGRAIN FINALISES ACCORD WITH MAJOR CZECH CHEESE MAKER (112 words) UNILEVER OPENS FIRST SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE IN CHINA (137 words) VRANKEN GROUP BUYS HEIDSIECK CHAMPAGNE FROM SEAGRAM (326 words) DANISH GROUP BUYS PFIZER'S CHY-MAX DAIRY CLOTTING AGENT RANGE (200 words) DANONE TAKES CONTROLLING STAKE IN CHINESE BREWER, DONGXIBU (264 words) AAIR: RESEARCH INTO BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RECYCLED/RE-USED PLASTICS (302 words) BIOTECHNOLOGY: NEW MEANS OF BOOSTING WHEAT PRODUCTION (346 words) RESEARCH PATENTS: NEW EUROPEAN PATENT SEARCH SERVICE WILL HELP AVOID DUPLICATION (534 words) FRENCH RESEARCHERS MAP COFFEE GENOME (327 words) EU/ROMANIA: ECU 10 MILLION FOR AN AGRI-INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME (406 words) RESEARCHER TRAINING: FELLOWSHIPS OFFERED IN IRISH FOOD INDUSTRY (357 words) EU/BULGARIA: ECU 5 MILLION FOR AGRI-INDUSTRY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (407 words) COSMETICS: EU COMMISSION GUARANTEES SAFETY OF RAW MATERIALS USED (841 words) BIOMEDECINE: YEW TREE YIELDS CANCER-FIGHTING PRODUCT (365 words) PYRETHRINS: EU PROJECT SEEKS TO RE-CONQUER NATURAL INSECTICIDE MARKET (555 words) FARM PRODUCT PROMOTION: COMMISSION PLEASED WITH COMPANY POLICY (727 words) BEER: GREEN PAPER ON EXCLUSIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS IMMINENT (706 words) SPIRITS: RUSSIAN AND CHILEAN "PROTECTIONISM" CRITICISED (992 words) COMMISSION FINANCES STUDY OF FOOD PRODUCT MARKET IN KOREA (216 words) EXTRACTION SOLVENTS: COMMISSION PROPOSED TO UPDATE 1988 DIRECTIVE (233 words) INWARD PROCESSING: COOPERATIVES OPPOSE EU COMMISSION PROPOSAL (483 words) CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AHOLD IN 50/50 JOINT VENTURE IN SPAINfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Dutch supermarkets group AHOLD said it had closed a 50/50 joint venture inSpain with Barcelona-based CAPRABO. It said the joint venture, dubbedSTORE 2000, would develop supermarket and hypermarket chains throughoutSpain. Its first activity is the takeover of 10 supermarkets in Madridfrom ALFARO. Caprabo was founded in 1959 and operates 90 supermarkets andhypermarkets with total sales of 85 billion Pesetas and a staff of 3,500.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GRIMMA TO UPGRADE UKRAINIAN SUGAR PLANTSfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Germany's MASCHINEN- UND ANLAGENBAU GRIMMA (MAG) said it was seeking aDM100 million contract to modernise five sugar refineries in Ukraine.Grimma is negotiating with various banks to arrange the necessary creditsto finance the work, but intends only to provide equipment and know-howitself. Ukraine, like other countries in the Commonwealth of IndependentStates, is struggling to revive its run-down industry and wean itself offdependence on bartered sugar imports from Cuba.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE TAKES CONTROL OF SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29One of the largest brewing groups in Britain, SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE, hasbought a 75% stake in niche South African beer maker MITCHELL'S BREWERYfor an undisclosed amount. Mitchell's started operations in Kynsna onSouth Africa's south coast in 1983, adding further small brewingoperations in Cape Town in 1989 and Johannesburg in 1991. The companycurrently produces around 1,500 hectolitres of beer a month, giving it adomestic market share of less than 1%. The South African market isdominated by SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES which has a 97 % market share.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ESTONIAN BREWER SELLS STAKE TO FINNISH GROUPfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Estonian brewer TARTU OLLETEHAS, has agreed to sell 15% of its shares toFinland's OLVI. The Estonian brewer said the deal would boost its exportsby means of Olvi's sales network and become the best brewer in the Balticstates. Olvi is encroaching on a Baltic market which has so far been thepreserve of BALTIC BEVERAGE HOLDING, a joint venture between HARTWALL ANDPRIPPS RINGNES, owned by Norwegian food conglomerate ORKLA and VOLVO, ofSweden. Olvi paid Nkr10 million for the shares. It also said it wanted toput at least a quarter of its shares onto the burgeoning Tallinn stockexchange. Tartu Olletehas had share capital of Nkr7.5 million and turnoverlast year of Nkr175 million. The brewer is owned by MAGNUM KONSUMER, whichis also the main stakeholder in the TALLINN PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY, whichrecently sold 10% of its shares to foreign investors. Both parties haveagreed that next year 25% of Tartu shares will be listed on the Tallinnstock exchange.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FYFFES SELLS STAKE IN BANANA FIRM TO DOLEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Irish fruit wholesaler and distributor FYFFES Plc has sold its 50%shareholding in the BANANA TRADING CORPORATION to a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of DOLE FOOD COMPANY Inc for a total consideration of USD26.3million. Fyffes has also entered into new long-term shipping agreementswith Dole for shipping part of its banana requirements from Latin America.Fyffes said the shipping agreements would be of benefit to Fyffes and Doleand would give both companies significant economies of scale. BananaTrading Corporation owns a Guatemalan banana farming business along withother related assets including certain banana farming assets in Honduara.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996LA MODERNA TO CLINCH DEAL WITH ROYAL VAN NAMENfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Mexican conglomerate EMPRESAS LA MODERNA is close to a deal to buy Dutchfresh produce distributor ROYAL VAN NAMEN. With annual sales of some USD50million, Van Namen is one of Europe's largest produce distributors andwould add to La Moderna's growing network of distribution in the Americas.Produce would be shipped to Europe from the Americas and vice-versa. LaModerna grows and buys fresh produce from Chile to Canada. About 75% ofits production is currently sold in the United States and Canada. Thefragmented fresh produce market - with the largest player capturing only7% of the market - is fertile ground for La Moderna to leverage its vastdistribution capabilities Demand in the US fresh produce market isexpected to grow more than 10% a year. A pure cigarette company just threeyears ago, La Moderna has expanded into agri-biotechnology and packaging.Its agri-biotechnology division consists of a fresh produce division and aseeds company SEMINIS. The group's produce division exported USD250million worth of vegetables last year. Moderna's produce companyBIONOVAJUST merged with Oakland-based DNA PLANT TECHNOLOGY to form DNAPHOLDINGS.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANISCO LIFTS SALES TURNOVER BY 14%from AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Diversified Danish agri-foods group DANISCO has reported a sales turnoverfigure of 16.1 billion Kroner in the 1995/96 financial year ending April30 - up 14% on the previous year. 69% of the total was earned on exportsales. Profits were up 10% at Dkr 1.8 billion. Danisco, whose business isconcentrated on food products and packaging (with eleven divisions),invested a total of Dkr 976 million and devoted 296 million to researchand development. One of its main subsidiaries is Danisco Distillers, whichcontrols all of Denmark's domestic and international wines and spiritsbusiness and has sole ownership over Danisco Distillers Berlin. DaniscoDistillers is also the biggest producer of yeast-based alcohol in Denmark.Three of the group's subsidiaries have concluded commercial representationagreements with several of the big names in the international wines andspirits trade, such as Better Brands, Selected Wines & Spirits, now knownas Allied Domecq Spirits & Wines, and Peter F. Herring. In the financialyear ending April 30, 1996, Danisco Distillers had a net turnover of Dkr1.2 billion.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ROYAL GREENLAND IN FISH JOINT VENTURE WITH RUSSIAN COMPANYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The ROYAL GREENLAND fish products company, based in Nuuk, Greenland, andthe Russian firm JSC SEVRYBA in Murmansk have set up a partnership deal,called ROYAL RIBA, with its headquarters in Aalborg, in order to marketsome 750,000 tonnes of Russian fish a year. With an annual sales turnoverof 2.6 billion Danish Kroner, Royal Greenland is one of the biggest fishprocessing concerns in the world. It sells a whole range of fish products,although concentrates mainly on shrimps, which account for 51% of itsturnover. Royal Greenland has three factories in Denmark and in Julybought the Wilhelmshaven, Germany-based company, JADEFOOD.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BASS CRITICISED FOR HOOPERS HOOCH CAMPAIGNfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The advertising campaign launched by British brewer BASS to promote its"Hoopers Hooch" low-alcohol fizzy drink has drawn criticism inprofessional circles and from authorities worried about the temptation ofalcohol for young consumers. For similar reasons, Carlsberg Tetley wasrecently forced to change the labelling on its "Tchickhead" brand andWhitbread has been censured by Alcohol Concern for the implicit incitationto violence and the anti-social behaviour that its "Lemon Jag" and"Vanilla Heist" beers inspire amongst youngsters..Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES ACQUIRES POLISH BEER MAKERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES, together with EURO AGRO CENTRUM, has acquired 52%of the capital of the Polish brewery group TYSKIE in Tychy. SAB, which hasmade enormous strides on overseas markets since 1993, has thus moved upinto fourth place on the world brewers' league, with a total productioncapacity of 38 million hectolitres, behind ANHEUSER BUSCH (107 millionhectolitres), HEINEKEN (64 million hectolitres.) and MILLER, a subsidiaryof the US Philip Morris group (54 million hectolitres). With the Tychybrewery, as well as the Lech brewery in Poznan, in which they already hada controlling stake, SAB and EAC now hold 20% of the Polish beer market.Elsewhere in Eastern Europe, SAB is now the biggest brewery group inHungary and is set to become Romania's number one too. In the 1995/96 year(ending March 31), SAB turned out 24.6 million hectolitres of beer inSouth Africa and 11.4 million hectolitres abroad. SAB has just made a loanissue on the international capital market for USD300 million, in order toraise funds to reinforce its long-term strategy.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BONGRAIN REPORTS SLIGHT RISE IN TURNOVERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Back home in France, Bongrain has just published its latest half-yearlyresults, which show a slight increase in sales turnover to 5.055 billionFrench Francs, up from FF 4.935 billion at end-June 1995. Sales were badlyaffected by poor weather conditions in June, but picked up sharply inJuly, which will help lift second half 1996 figures. Bongrain's turnoveralso progressed at international level.The French group's operating profits, which in the first half of 1995 hadreached FF 312.2 million, fell back to FF 250.3 million, as a result ofseveral different factors. For a start, manufacturers have not been ableto offset the increase in the price of milk paid to producers in relationto its cheese-making quality by a rise in retail prices from Autumn 1995onwards. And at the same time, by-products and surpluses have lost a lotof their value (-20% in the case of lactoserum, for example) - somethingwhich accounted for nearly half the drop in operating profits.Bongrain has meanwhile continued to invest in the main brand names and inadvertising at European and international level. The group has alsomanaged to reinforce its presence on new markets.Bongrain's overall profit in the first half of this year works out at FF148.1 million (FF 184 million in the previous six-monthly period), and netgroup profits at FF 129.5 million compared with 164.6 million for thefirst six months of 1995.Although no forecasts were made for the year as a whole, Bongrain isexpecting a difficult year. The company is nonetheless pressing on withits innovation strategy, with several major launches on the cards for itssubsidiaries.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BONGRAIN FINALISES ACCORD WITH MAJOR CZECH CHEESE MAKERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French food group BONGRAIN, which already has a foothold in the CzechRepublic via its PRIBINA subsidiary, is busy finalising an agreement totake over the Povltavske Mlekarny cheese-making concern, to the South Eastof Prague. The Czech firm, one of the biggest in the dairy sector,produces soft cheese and fresh cheese, as well as other dairy products. Ithas an annual turnover of more than 100 million French Francs and employs275 people. Thanks to this latest transaction, Bongrain will become soleowner of the Hermelin soft cheese brand sold by Pribina and PvltavskeMlekarny.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996UNILEVER OPENS FIRST SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE IN CHINAfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The Anglo-Dutch agri-foods and consumer products group UNILEVER opened onOctober 7 its first scientific research centre in China, which is to serveas a starting point for a successful partnership between the food industryand academia in the country. Set up in Shanghai's Institute of organicchemicals, the new research centre will help Unilever to draw on thestrength of the local Chinese scientific world and, at the same time,steer the locals towards developing the most suitable technologies. Theresearch centre will use its scientific know-how to help match consumerpreferences with Unilever's branded products as a means of boosting salesin China, and particularly the business of the twelve joint ventures theAnglo-Dutch group already has in the country.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996VRANKEN GROUP BUYS HEIDSIECK CHAMPAGNE FROM SEAGRAMfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Canadian drinks group SEAGRAM announced on October 14 that it had signed adeal to sell its famous champagne Heidsieck Monopole to Vranken. Thesell-off covers not only the brand name, but also the business premisesand stocks - some 4.5 million bottles or more than three years of sales -and roughly 130 hectares of vineyards. Heidsieck Monopole's 70-strongworkforce will also be taken on by the Vranken group and no redundanciesare foreseen. The price tag on the transaction was not revealed, but it isestimated in professional circles to be in excess of USD400 million.Paul-Francois Vranken, a Belgian businessman who set foot in the Champagneregion just 20 years ago, has become, through successive acquisitions andlaunches of new brands like Charles Lafitte and La Demoiselle, the fifthbiggest champagne trader, producing some 8.5 million bottles in 1995 andwith a sales turnover of more than 600 million French Francs. Untilrecently, Mr Vranken was still short of a big brand name - a gap that hewill now try to fill by relaunching the Heidsieck Monopole.To start with, he launched the Charles Lafitte and La Demoiselle brands ofchampagne. Then, in 1994, he brought his company into a new phase ofexternal growth by taking over the Barancourt house which has a salesturnover of more than two million bottles of champagne a year, and thenthrough the acquisition of Champagnes Charbaut (with sales of 1.2 millionbottles). These acquisitions enabled the Vranken group to sell more than8.5 million bottles of champagne this year and post a turnover of nearlyFF 700 million.Last year, Heidsieck Monopole sold 1.2 million bottles of champagne,three-quarters if which were intended for the export market. FromSeagram's point of view, this transaction is a follow-up to therestructuring plan its champagne branch launched last Spring.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANISH GROUP BUYS PFIZER'S CHY-MAX DAIRY CLOTTING AGENT RANGEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The Danish group CHR. HANSEN has strengthened its position as marketleader in the field of dairy clotting agents by acquiring from PFIZER ofthe United States the CHY-MAX range, along with all patents and relatedrights. A production contract has just been signed with the Americancompany, which will continue to manufacture the CHY-MAX range of clottingagents at its Indiana factory in the US. Last year, the CHY-MAX productrange's worldwide turnover was nearly USUSD14 million, according to acommunique, which did not, however, reveal the price tag on thetransaction with HANSEN. CHY-MAX is a range of dairy clotting agentsproduced via fermentation and used in cheese-making. Chr. Hansen alreadyowned a similar range of products called CHYMOGEN. The Danish company,better known as a major supplier of food ingredients, is a subsidiary ofChr. Hansen Holding A/S, a firm specialised in biotechnology applicationsfor food ingredients, anti-allergy treatment and for technologicalservices for agriculture. The holding company has a workforce of about2,000 in 30 different countries, and, for the 1994/1995 financial year,reported a turnover of 1.8 billion Danish Kroner.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANONE TAKES CONTROLLING STAKE IN CHINESE BREWER, DONGXIBUfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French agri-foods group DANONE has strengthened its foothold in therapidly-growing Chinese beer market, by taking a 60% stake in the WUHANDONGXIHU BEER COMPANY, the fifth biggest brewer in China. Thanks to thisacquisition, the French group has moved up to fourth place on the Chinesebeer market, according to Danone, although it did not reveal the price tagon its latest investment. The Chinese market, which is now as big as 160million hectolitres of beer, is still very fragmented. Dongxinu is fifthin the league table, with a production figure of 2.9 million hectolitresof beer a year. Situated in Wuhan, in the Hubei province (in centralChina), Dongxihu holds 40% of the market in the province, which is home to60 million people.Last January, Danone had announced plans for a joint venture with Haomen,the tenth biggest beer maker in China, based in the Beijing region. Chinaitself has the second largest market for beer in the world, behind theUnited States. And the market is expanding rapidly. It is set to cross the200 million hectolitre mark by the year 2000, making it the biggest marketin the world.Last year, the Danone group turned out 25 million hectolitres of beer(Kronenbourg). It is the leading brewer in France, Italy and Spain and thesecond biggest in Europe. In China, Danone is also present on the marketfor biscuits, fresh dairy products (Danone brand), Chinese milk-baseddrinks (Wahaha) and sauces (Amoy).Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AAIR: RESEARCH INTO BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RECYCLED/RE-USED PLASTICSfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The December 1994 Directive on packaging and packaging waste setsambitious targets for recovery and states that recycling and re-use mustcontribute an important part of recovery. Recycling of plastics can giverise to concern about the migration of contaminants from the recycledplastic into a packaged food. One component of a research projectcurrently being carried out in the United Kingdom under the EU-sponsoredAgriculture and Agro-Industry R&D programme (AAIR) is studying theeffectiveness of a virgin layer of plastic (PET) (polyethyleneterephthalate) in limiting the migration of chemicals from recycled PET,i.e. three-layer plastic bottles (for soft drinks) were made with a buriedlayer of either virgin PET or PET contaminated deliberately withchemicals, and migration levels were measured in parts per million (ppm).The results of research work undertaken so far show that even with a highlevel of deliberate contamination of the middle layer of the 3-layerbottles, with hightly mobile model contaminants, migration was notdetectable after the standard conditions of 10 days at 40 degrees C or even after 6 months at room temperature.This has brought the research workers to the conclusion that an intact PETlayer represents an efficient functional barrier against migration fromcontaminants encapsulated in a recycled PET material under normalconditions of use for soft drinks. The results also allow the conclusionthat the 25% recycled material employed in this test could be increased toany technically feasible percentage provided that the characteristics ofthe functional barrier layer remained unchanged.For more information : Contact Dr Laurence Castle, Ministry of AgricultureFisheries and Food, CSL Food Science Laboratory, Colney, Norwich NR 7UQ,United Kingdom. Tel: (+44) 01603/259-350 - Fax: (+44) 01603/501-123;E-mail: 1.castleCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BIOTECHNOLOGY: NEW MEANS OF BOOSTING WHEAT PRODUCTIONfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The use of modern biotechnology processes is the best way of raising worldproduction of wheat and meeting growing demand for this staple food,concludes a study published on October 18 by the International Centre forthe Improvement of Wheat and Maize. The Mexico-based research centreemploys scientists from some 40 different countries, including two giantwheat and corn producer nations - the United States and France.Thanks to biotechnology, more wheat can be harvested from the same surfacearea using the same amount of water for irrigation and the same quantityof fertilizers; it can also help keep the impact on the environment to aminimum, pointed out Matt Reynolds, the main author of the study. Othermeans of boosting production - expanding the sown surface area or wideruse of fertilizers - are not viable in the long term, argues thescientist. "We can use biotechnology to identify the geneticcharacteristics of adaptation and resistance to insects and diseases",said Mr Reynolds, adding that the size of the grains and the taste ofwheat were equally important.The development of a new prototype wheat crop and the idea of leaving theears to develop over a longer period of time are among the other solutionssuggested by the study to the problem of meeting rising world demand forcereals. The Mexican research centre's study also recommends the use of"hybrid" crops, which are more hardy and resistant to disease, insects andparasites than older generations of crops, even though they are not fitfor reproduction. The authors of the study point out that a possiblestagnation of wheat yields would further aggravate the problems of povertyand famine in the world, since wheat is "the staple food of humanity"."While the world population is growing at a rate of 2.5% a year, wheatyields are increasing by only 1% a year", pointed out Timothy Reeves,Director of the International Centre for the Improvement of Wheat andMaize.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RESEARCH PATENTS: NEW EUROPEAN PATENT SEARCH SERVICE WILL HELP AVOIDDUPLICATIONfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29For the last few months, European scientists have been able to draw on anew European patent search service called QUICK SCAN, which the EuropeanCommission would like to promote among a wider user base. It is targetingsmall and medium-sized enterprises in particular, because this new service- one of the various support measures offered under the Community'sspecific programme for the dissemination and exploitation of the resultsof research and technological development activities (INNOVATION) - canhelp avoid duplication of research effort and unnecessary expense oninvestment.According to the European Commission's estimates, up to ECU 25 billion iswasted every year in the EU in duplicating research and development workalready carried out elsewhere. This problem is of particular relevance tosmall and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) which are less likely to haveaccess to the patent information system (a study carried out by theEuropean Patent Office last year showed that over 60% of European SMEs donot have access to the system). In this context, the aim of the QUICK SCANactivity is two-fold: it not only helps avoid duplication of research andthus promote more efficient use of funding resources, but it can alsoraise awareness of the patent information system.The Commission has sought to keep the methodology of the new service assimple as possible. It falls under the "Technology Validation andTechnology Transfer" action line of the INNOVATION programme and projectsare subjected to a "novelty check" by the search division of the EuropeanPatent Office (EPO). This check compares the technical developmentsproposed by the project with the existing state-of-the-art in thatparticular area thus enabling a well-informed evaluation of the innovativecharacter of the proposal.During the months of April and May 1996, no less than 100 projectproposals selected for the definition phase under the INNOVATION programmewere submitted for assessment. 13% of these were not suitable for scanningby the EPO for reasons of either form or content. Following the scan, 30%of all projects submitted were classified as being "novel". In 57% ofcases, however, the novelty of the project, or parts of it, was questioned.In at least two cases, the QUICK SCAN search results led to a completeredirection of the project due to the discovery of information on existingresearch not known to the consortium carrying out the research project. Ina few other cases, QUICK SCAN provided valuable information on possiblecompetitors, pointed towards interesting prior R&D work or possible endusers of a new technology.In the eyes of the European Commission, this first exercise has clearlydemonstrated the cost effectiveness of the QUICK SCAN activity. Generallyspeaking, it estimates that the costs of the scan itself amounted to onlyone-tenth of the funding that has been directly saved as a result of thescan.For further information, please contact:European CommissionDG XIII - Telecommunications, Information Market and Exploitation ofResearchMr M. Schmiemann - Unit D/1rue Alcide de Gasperi (EUFO 21/65)L-2920 LuxembourgFax: (+352) 4301-32073Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FRENCH RESEARCHERS MAP COFFEE GENOMEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Researchers at the ORSTOM Institute in Montpellier have succeeded inmapping the coffee genome, break-through that is expected to improve plantselection. Launched at the beginning of the 1990s, research into the genestructure of coffee was carried out by the Laboratory for geneticresources and the improvement of tropical plants (LRGAPT) attached toORSTOM (the French Institute of scientific research for development andcooperation) in collaboration with the Nestle research centre in Tours.The map was drawn up through the molecular analysis of plant materialprovided by researchers at the Man coffee genetics station in the IvoryCoast, where several thousand varieties collected across Africa have beennurtured and studied for almost thirty years. The map is of Coffeacanephora, more commonly known as the Robusta variety, which is grown inWest Africa, Brazil, Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam. It may, however,also be used for other varieties, notably the more widespread Arabica.Using molecular markers, it is possible with a genetic map to identify andlocate the genes carried by the chromosomes, enabling scientists toidentify genes of agronomic interest at an early stage of development:disease resistance, yield, bean size, caffeine content, etc. The map willmake the selection of coffee plants more rapid and effective. It has untilnow taken ten years to assess the potential of new strains. Moreover,selection has traditionally been a very expensive process, because of thelarge areas needed for trials and the array of tests to assess the qualityof a coffee variety. In the longer term, the map may be used ingenetically modifying coffee plants. LRGATP researchers will soon applytheir map in the context of a programme in Kenya to control the transferof a diseases resistance gene identified in Robusta to the Arabicavariety. Joint projects have also been launched in the Ivory Coast andCosta Rica.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/ROMANIA: ECU 10 MILLION FOR AN AGRI-INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMMEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29In the framework of the European Commission-coordinated PHARE programme ofassistance for economic reforms in Central and East Europe, the 1996Agricultural Programme for Romania was approved at the end of November1995. The European Union is to contribute up to a maximum of ECU 10million to this programme of technical assistance in the field ofagriculture and agri-industry, which must be fully contracted by the endof 1997. The main components of the programme cover technical andfinancial assistance to newly-established agri-foods industries andcompanies.Breakdown of actions.- Technical assistance worth ECU 3,500,000 to help pay for advisoryservices, training equipment for development of national extensionservice, demonstration farms and producer groups, and for a strategicreview of agricultural and rural knowledge/information systems andproviders in Romania.- Technical and capital assistance of ECU 1 million for a commercial cropinformation service. The funds will help update a remote sensing data baseand establish private companies with minority state participationproviding crop and related information to industry and public sector as acommercial service- Financial assistance for investment to the tune of ECU 4,000,000 will bemade available to the Romanian agri-industry and farm sector via equitycapital placed through banks and under the 1992 PHARE Agricultural CreditGuarantee Fund project. Back-up technical assistance will also be providedto establish new forms of equity and financial support meeting the needsof newly-created industries and agri-foods enterprises.- Technical assistance worth ECU 1.5 million will help the Romanians tointegrate their policies and standards with the EU's own stock oflegislation and norms (the acquis communautaire). EU experts will alsohelp the Romanians with their reforms and the development of decentralisedrural development initiatives and institutional implementationcapabilities, as well as providing policy advice and technical support forthe Ministry of Agriculture and Food's reform and development.For further information about this programme, please contact:PHARE PMU in Ministry of Agriculture and Food,17 Boulevard Carol ler, Sector 2,RO-Bucharest,Romania.Tel: (+40) 1/312 40 31/614 28 42Fax: (+40) 1/312 40 29.orEuropean Commission,DGIA, B-4, SC27 02/23,200 rue de la Loi,B-1049, Brussels,BelgiumTel: (+32) 2/296 56 78Fax: (+32) 2/299 16 66Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RESEARCHER TRAINING: FELLOWSHIPS OFFERED IN IRISH FOOD INDUSTRYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Under the European Community's specific programme for the training andmobility of researchers (TMR), which supports the mobility of researchersacross Europe, the TMR Information Centre in Dublin has singled outseveral big Irish agri-foods companies which are willing to receive TMRfellows from other EU Member States. Any post-doctoral researchers who maybe interested in working with these companies, will receive financialsupport from the TMR programme budget.For reasons of confidentiality, the names of the companies volunteering tohost research fellows have not been revealed by the Irish TMR InformationCentre. There are three companies in the agri-foods industry offering totake in research workers:* Company C:A major food producer with strong links to University College, Cork andTeagasc (the Irish Agricultural Research Agency). The research workinvolved, which would be carried out in collaboration with theseorganisations, would cover:- spreadability of fats and butter;- stabilisation of fresh dairy products with dairy ingredients andhydrocolloids;- fermentation of fresh dairy products.* Company D:A manufacturer of veterinary and human pharmaceuticals interested inlocating researchers with a pharmacy background and experience in newproduct formulation and drug delivery systems.* Company E:A company in the consumer food and drink area seeking:- a molecular biologist to work on the development of novel yeast strains;- an organic chemist with experience of GC, GC-sniff and MS to work on thecharacterisation of volatile heterocyclic compounds significant in flavour;- a GC/MS researcher w ith good practical experience of statisticalanalysis and a knowledge of sensors to work on the development of patternrecognition algorithms for process control in beverage production;- a physicist or chemical/biochemical engineer with a knowledge ofinstrumentation to help develop an instrumental technique forcharacterising bubble collapse in low density foams.For further information on these fellowships, please contact: TMRInformation CentreForbairt, GlasnevinDublin 11,IrelandFax: (+353) 1/8370172E-mail: MobilityCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/BULGARIA: ECU 5 MILLION FOR AGRI-INDUSTRY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29In the framework of the PHARE programme of assistance for economic reformsin Central and East Europe, the European Commission last year approved the1996 Agricultural Programme for Bulgaria, under which the European Unionis to contribute up to ECU 5 million for technical assistance in the fieldof agriculture and agri-industry, by the end of 1997. With most of thetechnical work now out of the way, the main components of the programmecover technical assistance to training, agriculture policy formation andquality control of food products.Main components of the assistance programme.- Technical assistance worth ECU 2 million to help the National VeterinaryService, National Service for Plant Protection, Quarantine andAgrochemicals, National Inspection Laboratories for Grain and GrainForages and for Field Testing and Seed Control align progressively with EUstandards.- ECU 600,000 will be devoted to advice and training for BulgarianMinistry officials and others responsible for key policies foragricultural reform and European integration.- ECU 1.8 million will be provided for technical assistance to helpnational implementation of the Land Information System piloted in 1995; tofurther strengthen the National Advisory Service; and develop marketinformation and other supporting systems to help private farmers marketproduce more effectively, develop marketing channels and meet exportquality standards.- Another ECU 600,000 will be provided to pay for technical assistance andsupport for the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry to implement theprogramme in accordance with the European Commission's objectives andprocedures.The contracting authority for all these components of the programme is:PHARE PMU in Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry55 Christo Botov Blv.BG-1000 Sofia,BulgariaTel: (+359) 2/981 61 63Fax: (+359) 2/54 32 62.Further information about the programme can also be obtained from theEuropean Commission, DG IA - PHARE,Fax: (+32) 2/299 17 77or from the PHARE Internet service at:http://europa.eu.int/en/comm/dgla/phare.htmL(this service will update information on the programme regularly);directly from the implementing authorities or, for non-Internet users, onrequest from the DGIA Information Unit - Phare, which can be reached byfacsimile onNo expression of interest should be prepared at this stage. Advancewarnings of tenders will be published in the Phare Internet service at:http://europa.eu.int/en/comm/dg1a/phare.htmlCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COSMETICS: EU COMMISSION GUARANTEES SAFETY OF RAW MATERIALS USEDfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The safety of cosmetics and their ingredients in the European Union issubject to strict regulation. The conditions in which cosmetic productscan be marketed without posing any risk for consumers are lid down by EUCouncil Directive 76/768/EEC - the so-called Cosmetics Directive - whichhas been amended on several occasions, pointed out EU Consumer PolicyCommissioner Emma Bonino in response to a written question from GermanGreen Member of the European Parliament Hiltrud Breyer. Worried about the"mad cow disease" scare in the United Kingdom, the MEP was asking ifcosmetics users ran any risk of infection through broken skin, and, moreparticularly, if the UK still used beef derivatives as raw materials incosmetic and was taking the same safety precautions as in Germany andother EU Member States.Permanently reinforced safety standards.In reply to the German MEP's first query, Mrs Bonino simply said that theCommission's services had no knowledge of any study that had assessed therisk of infection through the use of cosmetics on a cut or broken skinsurface.As for any risks related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), theCommissioner recalled that Council Directive 93/35/EEC amending theCosmetics Directive for the sixth time, had tightened up safety standardsfor cosmetic products. This Directive requires cosmetics manufacturers orimporters in the European Union to provide the national authorities, ormonitoring purposes, with an information file, giving data notably on thequalitative and quantitative aspects of the product, as well as thephysical, chemical and microbiological specifications of both the rawmaterials used and the finished product, purity criteria and conditionsfor microbiological control of cosmetic products, the method ofproduction, and an evaluation of the safety of the end product from thehuman health point of view.As for the risks posed by BSE, the Commissioner recalled that, at thebeginning of the 1990s, the World Health Organisation and various nationaland EU scientific and veterinary committees concerned by the mad cowscare, including the EU Scientific Committee for Cosmetics, recommendedthat manufacturers used only beef derivatives from countries free frombovine spongiform encephalopathy. The European cosmetic toiletry andperfumery association (Colipa) has made quite clear that it hasscrupulously followed the experts' recommendations.Thus specified beef offal supplied to cosmetics producers must beaccompanied by a certificate of origin. Colipa also confirmed earlier thisyear that beef cattle offal most likely to pose a risk of contamination,such as brain, spinal cord and eyes were "not used in the manufacture ofcosmetic products in the Community".At the EU level, legislation adopted since the early days of the BSEepidemic has been largely of a veterinary nature. After the BritishGovernment admitted there was a potential risk of BSE transmission tohumans last Spring, the European Commission imposed a blanket ban on UKexports of beef, beef products and derivatives. Directive 96/239/EC ofMarch 27, 1996 prohibited British exports of any products originating fromcattle slaughtered in the UK intended for medical, cosmetic orpharmaceutical use. Decision 96/362/EC of June 11, 1996 stipulates thatthe UK may only allow production of such products in plants under officialveterinary control which have proved that they respect the necessaryconditions. This measure states that rules governing products from the UKalso apply to production of medicines, cosmetics etc. for the domesticmarket. But with this piece of legislation, the Commission also gave thego-ahead for a partial lifting of the embargo on gelatine and tallow. Theembargo is being relaxed gradually, insofar as strict conditions laid downby law are respected. For its part, the United Kingdom has taken a wholehost of measures since 1988, including steps to keep specified beef offaloff the market.Tallow is mainly used for making soaps. Among the other beef extracts thatcan be used in the manufacture of cosmetic products, some, such asgelatine, are taken from various cattle tissue (bones, skin etc.) and areused in different types of products (shampoo, soap, hair care products).Other derivatives are extracted from specific organs such as the placentaor the thymus and are only used for making a very limited range ofcosmetic products. The Commission nonetheless recalled that:- beef derivatives are not used in cosmetics in their natural state, butfirst have to undergo various chemical treatments;- in most cases, raw materials of animal origin only account for a verysmall percentage of the make-up of the end cosmetic product.Under the sixth amendment to Directive 93/35/EEC, the list of ingredientsthat may be incorporated into cosmetics has to be given on the label ofthe product. In the case of beef derivatives, listed in arecently-published inventory of ingredients used in the manufacture ofcosmetics, the organ from which they are obtained will also be mentionedif it is a clearly-defined organ such as the placenta or spleen.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BIOMEDECINE: YEW TREE YIELDS CANCER-FIGHTING PRODUCTfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29An Italian company based in Milan, Indena, has developed a new medicinethat can used to treat cancer - taxol - which is made from raw materialsderived from the yew tree. The raw materials are supplied by Bioagrico, acompany based in Beert-Pepingen in Belgium, which prunes and trims yewtrees (Taxus baccata) free of charge, recovers the leaves and branches andpacks them up for delivery to Italy where they are processed.The yew tree, a conifer that is easily pruned, is well known in theEuropean countryside. It can also be deadly if just a few score or hundredgrammes are ingested. Horses and sheep are particularly at risk (they candie only a few hours after eating just 200 grammes of yew tree leaves).The yew tree's pine needles and berries are also highly toxic.The basic substance used for making taxol is baccatin, a substanceextracted from yew tree pine needles and which can be used in treatmentsagainst several different types of cancer. Some twenty years ago, it wasextracted from the bark, but this endangered the survival of the treesthemselves. The substance can also be extracted from pruning or clippingwaste. In Belgium, Bioagrico has been awarded a contract to supply yewtree clippings up to the year 2007, unless in the meantime another, moreeffective substance is found to combat cancer. Currently, Bioagrico prunesyew trees owned by 4,200 private citizens, with each cropping bringing inabout 50 kilogrammes. In season, several teams are busy working at thesame time on private yew trees, while gardeners may also send theircuttings to Bioagrico. The "harvest" is then dried before being dispatchedto Italy. The Belgium-based company prunes yew trees in all regions of thecountry and is seeking to expand its expertise to other Member States ofthe European Union.For further information, contact:Indena99 via Ripamonti20141 MilanItalyTel: (+39) 2- 574961 / fax: (+39) 2 - 574046orBioagricoBeert-PepingenBelgiumTel: (+32) 2/361.03.66Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996PYRETHRINS: EU PROJECT SEEKS TO RE-CONQUER NATURAL INSECTICIDE MARKETfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29A non-food research project seeking to improve and develop cultivation ofpyrethrins (natural insecticides) in Mediterranean Europe has justreceived the backing of the European Commission. Bringing togetheragronomists, chemists and biologists from various Member States of theEuropean Union, this project is being coordinated by the French firmSanofi Chimie and will benefit from EU financial assistance to the tune ofECU 1.231 million for three years. Known in Europe since antiquity, butabandoned for the last few decades, pyrethrin growing could allow thecultivation of up to 5,000 hectares of poor and arid soil in southernEurope, thanks to this research project.Australian offensive.Natural pyrethrins were the first insecticides used by man. Known fromtime immemorial, cultivation of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefoium, from whichthey are extracted developed in Europe from the Middle Ages onwards andwere widely used until the appearance of the first synthetic insecticidesin the middle of the 20th century. Today, because of their totalharmlessness to man and domestic animals as well as their excellentbiodegradability, they remain the reference point as active materials inthe field of domestic use, body hygiene (anti-lice products), animalhealth (for keeping insects out of livestock farm buildings) andbiological agriculture, etc... All these are fields where the consumer andEU regulations encourage the use of "clean", rather than synthetic,insecticides, preferably of "natural" origin.Although use of natural pyrethrins is still significant and evenexpanding, cultivation of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium historicallydeserted Europe after the Second World War, shifting to Africa on a widescale (notably Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania). Today, these Africancultivations are threatened either because of the political instability ofthe region, or because of inadequate productivity. An important market isthus up for grabs. Europe, for its part, although a high user of thesenatural insecticides (with 20% of the world market) is at the momentlagging behind, for it is the Australians who are taking over from theAfricans and developing vast areas of mechanised cultivation in Tasmania.If improved varieties similar to or better than those being grown inAustralia - and adapted, as in Tasmania to intensive, mechanisedcultivation - can be developed, a whole new market could no doubt bere-conquered by European farmers, by growing a high added value crop thatis perfectly suited to fallow land and poor and arid land too.The research project that has just got off the ground has the followingmain aims:- to study the action of natural pyrethrins, an especially the comparativeactivity of the various active principles identified in the plant, as wellas the possibilities of biological synergies;- to implement a genetic selection process designed to obtain varietieswith maximum active principle content- to develop an optimised cultivation technique which is economicallyadapted to European farms, notably through mechanisation.More specifically, the project involves crop improvement work (evaluationof germ plasma in the field, study of yield factors of the leaves,isolation of different isomers, modes and sites of action of the differentisomers among insects), techniques such as interpolating cultivation andhybridation, diseases, crop maintenance, climatisation and fieldtransfers, harvesting etc. and studies into the extraction/purificationprocess.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FARM PRODUCT PROMOTION: COMMISSION PLEASED WITH COMPANY POLICYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Food product promotion campaigns sponsored or run by the European Unionhave taken on much greater importance in recent years and have evenqualified to have their own unit within the European Commission inBrussels Unveiling at the Paris food show in early October the promotioncampaign for grape juice contracted out to Sopexa (a French company forpromoting sales of farm and food products), Sergio Ventura, who runs theAgricultural Product Promotion Unit of the Commission'sDirectorate-General for Agriculture (DG VI), recalled that there hadoriginally been no general legal base for promotional measures financed bythe EU. However, some specific sectors had their own legal base allowingEU-sponsored promotion campaigns for a few products like milk, textilefibres, olive oil, etc.). Later on, the necessary legal foundations weregradually laid to enable the use of Community funds for promoting otherproducts. And, from 1991 onwards, a specific division was created tomanage all the product promotion schemes. With the recent reorganisationof DG VI's structure, the existence of the Promotion Unit has injected abit more coherence into this field of marketing.Grape juice consumption boosted by 70%.His trip to Paris gave Mr Ventura the chance to explain to Sopexa'smanagers that there is still a wide variety of promotional actions,ranging from direct actions 100% managed by the European Commission, whichputs out calls for tender via specialised public relations agencies, toactions delegated to the Member States themselves. Even in this lattercase, the Commission is still responsible for ensuring the follow-up fromthe conception stage to follow-on operations, including the choice ofagencies proposing to organise the promotional measures. And some are 100%financed by the European Union, while other actions involve jointparticipation in the costs by associations or producer groups benefitingfrom the promotion campaigns.Mr Ventura illustrated his explanation with the long-running grape juicepromotion campaign as an example. Launched in 1986 at a meagre cost ofonly ECU 4.6 million to the farm budget of the European AgriculturalGuidance and Guarantee Fun (EAGGF), the campaign has helped boost sales ofgrape juice in France, Germany and Spain (Belgium and Italy had originallytaken part, but have since dropped out). In the case of France (whichaccounts for 50% of EU production of grape juice), for example, the EUfunds are channelled through the national interprofessional wine officeOnivins, which in turn gives Sopexa a budget of eleven million FrenchFrancs. The advantages of promoting consumption of grape juice are ofcourse linked to the high costs of intervention and distillation in thetable wine sector. Grape juice is also sold on a highly competitivemarket, dominated traditionally by citrus fruit juices, but it hasbenefited from the strong growth of the fruit juice market worldwide.In terms of product image, the overall impact of the advertising andpromotional actions carried out in France over the last ten years has beenquite clear: grape juice has come to be seen in the eyes of consumers as amore modern, more original and party-type drink, according to a marketresearch study undertaken last year. Moreover, grape juice could count onthe support of nutritionists, just as wine could draw on the support ofthe medical world for the famous "French paradox" (namely that regular,but moderate, consumption of wine can help avoid cardio-vascularillnesses).The numbers show very positive results too, points out the Commission. Forinstance, consumption of grape juice in France has risen by nearly 70% inthe space of ten years, with household purchases rising from 220,000hectolitres to 374,000 hl in 1995. On a fruit juice market which, lastyear, began to see a slow-down in its growth rate (+11%), sales of grapejuice continued to expand strongly, both in volume terms (+16%) and invalue (+15%). This expansion was evident in all the main regions ofFrance: sales progressed in the West, the South East and the Paris region,which all had previously recorded below-average consumption of grapejuice, while the North remained well above average. And two and a halfmillion more homes have been converted to grape juice since 1987 - anincrease of 60% in ten years (+12% for 1995 alone).Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BEER: GREEN PAPER ON EXCLUSIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS IMMINENTfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Already a year late, the European Commission is expected to publish aGreen Paper on selective distribution and exclusive purchasing agreementsin the beer sector - authorised since 1967 under an exemption to Communitycompetition rules - but probably not until the end of this year or thebeginning of next. EU Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert isconsidering extending until 1999 block exemption Regulations based onArticle 85.3 of the EU Treaty for beer sector agreements. The Commissionsaid on October 16 that the proposal was to avoid a "legal vacuum" thatmay occur if the block exemptions from EU competition rules were to expirebefore the consultations on the Commission's Green Paper for theirreplacement had been concluded. Requested by Member of the EuropeanParliament David Thomas (PES, UK) to comment on consultations with beerproducers and distributors, the Commission indicated that no formalmeetings had as yet taken place.The first derogation to the general ban on agreements laid down by theTreaty of Rome dates back to 1967 (Regulation 1967/67). This regime wasextended for 15 years in 1983 by virtue of two separate block exemptionRegulations, one covering selective distributions (1983/83), the otherexclusive purchasing (1984/83). The latter text, general in scope,required more specific provisions for particular sectors, includingbrewing, and notably the British beer industry, where the breweries holdbeer-supply contacts with pubs owned by them. The Regulations now covertens of thousands of agreements by which a supplier, on the one hand,appoints a reseller as his exclusive distributor in a given area(Regulation 1983/83), and on the other hand, a reseller agrees to buy allhis products from one supplier only (Regulation 1984/83).At the time of their adoption, the Commission was acting on the assumptionthat exclusive purchasing contracts in this sector required a majorinvestment by the supplier and a long-term commitment by the seller andtherefore justified exclusive contracts. The Commission therefore decidedto make special allowances for beer-sector agreements. The maximum lengthof an exclusive contract was set at five years for beer and other drinksand from five to ten years for beer exclusively. Specific clauses coveredsituations where the supplier and seller had also signed a lease forpoints of sale. It was agreed that the length of the purchasing contractcould correspond to that of the lease, even if the latter was for a periodof more than ten years.The British way of life.Under pressure from the breweries, British MEPs have visited Brussels toask Mr Van Miert for an extension of the exemptions for a minimum of 15years. An EU source said the Commissioner was not unsympathetic to thelegal uncertainty for breweries caused by the possible review of theexemptions, and that he had also understood the "tied tenancy" pub-supplyagreements were "part of the British way of life". The Commissioner hasalso been lobbied hard by British all-party MEPs who are strongly insupport of an extension to the exemptions. One solution which may be putforward in the Green Paper would be to carry on with sectorial blockexemptions. Another would be to base exemptions on the market share of thecompany operating the restrictive agreements. In the meantime, when Mr VanMiert makes a formal proposal for the extension of the rules, his decisionmust be approved by the full team of Commissioners.Threat to "real ale"?Meanwhile, a meeting in Brussels on October 11 between Commissionofficials and the European brewers' lobby group, the Confederation desBrasseurs du Marche Commun, failed to make much progress towards solving adispute over tied tenancy rules allowing pubs tied to national brewers tosell a beer from another, i.e. foreign, brewer only if it has beenproduced by traditional "real ale"-making methods. The Commission isworried that this discriminates against beer imported from other EUcountries, where beer is rarely cask-conditioned. But the UK is nowthreatening to drop the "guest beer" provision altogether if it is forcedunder Community law to include continental European lagers in thedefinition of a "guest beer".Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SPIRITS: RUSSIAN AND CHILEAN "PROTECTIONISM" CRITICISEDfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29New Russian plans to limit vodka and ethyl alcohol imports from thebeginning of 1997 have sent a tremor through Brussels. The hangover fromthe measures announced by Moscow could mean a serious drop in EU sales in1997 - 50 million litres instead of the 200 million litres exported in1995. EU officials thought they were seeing double when they learnt ofthese new Russian plans, since negotiations were in theory still under wayon current limits on vodka imports following Commissioner van den Broek'strip to Russia in March. There is no justification for introducing newunilateral safeguard measures, the Commission said on October 9. Thethreat to outlets in Russia is not the only thing worrying EU spiritsproducers, who are still voicing loud complaints about discriminatorytaxes applied to alcoholic drinks in Chile.Russian unilateralism.Negotiations on a possible ceiling for EU (and Belgian, in particular)exports of vodka to Russia started back in March following a visit by EUExternal Relations Commissioner Hans van den Broek. Following the Russianannouncement of import restrictions, the Commission said that, until ithad received more information, consultations would continue between EU andRussian negotiators in the framework of the Interim trade Agreementbetween the two sides, which came into force on February 1, 1996. TheCommission reckons that imports of ethyl alcohol in 1995 and 1996 did notharm Russian domestic interests at all and thus there was no justificationfor the unilateral introduction of safeguard measures. Besides, protectivemeasures of this kind go against the letter and the spirit of the InterimAgreement. Brussels has now asked the Russian authorities to continueconsultations on the issue and - pending their outcome - to suspend thesafeguard measures.This is not the first time the EU has had to remind the Russians of theirobligations under the Interim Agreement. Under a unilateral trade ruleimposed by the Russian authorities on March 13, EU exporters of vodka wererequired to sell into Russia at a minimum price of USD8.2 per litre,putting them at an obvious competitive disadvantage to vodka exporters inthe Commonwealth of Independent States, who are subject to a minimum priceof USD3.8 per litre. The new rule not only hit EU vodka suppliers andtheir estimated ECU 200 million trade with Russia; it also dealt anotherblow to EU confidence in the reliability of the Russian signatures on thetrade pact with the EU.In 1994, the EU Member States exported ECU 266 million worth of alcoholicdrinks to Russia (including ECU 167 million worth of vodka). This figurewas almost reached in the first eight months of 1995, when EU sales ofalcohol to Russia were worth ECU 240 million (including 150 milliongenerated from vodka sales).Discriminatory Chilean taxes.Having seen their long-running campaign against Japan's alcohol taxesvindicated in the World Trade Organisation, European spirit producers arenow turning their attention to Chile's taxes which, they say, discriminateagainst foreign spirit imports. The Confederation of European SpiritsProducers (CEPS) welcomed the recent decision by the WTO's Appellate Bodyto uphold an earlier ruling by the Dispute Settlement Body, that Japan'stax regime discriminated against foreign imports. But CEPS PresidentChristian Delclaux warned on October 8 that similar rules were beingplanned in Chile. "Given the WTO ruling, we are amazed at reports that theChilean administration is now proposing to submit GATT-inconsistentlegislation to the Congress", he said.Mr Delclaux says although the new proposals address Chile's currentdiscrimination, they would still maintain differences in taxes."Maintaining such a wide variation in the levels of taxation isdiscriminatory - and the WTO has just affirmed this fact", he pointed out."If Chile believes this is an acceptable solution, it is sadly mistaken.Indeed, I am certain that if producers and exporters of Chilean wines weretreated in a similar discriminatory manner in, for example, the UnitedKingdom - their second largest export market - they would feel likewise."Chile - and, to a certain extent, South Korea - the alcohol tax regimebears remarkable similarities to that of Japan. Under current Chilean law,whisky is taxed at a rate of 70% ad valorem at wholesale. Other spiritsare taxed at 30%, while pisco, the country's top selling local brew, istaxed at 25%. Mr Delclaux says that the current differentials should beremoved by applying a uniform tax rate, based on alcohol content, for allspirits.EU producers set out trade objectivesEuropean spirits producers have meanwhile welcomed EU External RelationsCommissioner Sir Leon Brittan's support for their tariff and otherobjectives for the WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore in December andthe subsequent work programme. Much of what the European spirits industryis seeking is very close to the Commissioner's own thinking for Singaporeand the WTO's work in coming years, according to the CEPS. Sir Leon hasalso said the Commission will continue to work closely with the industryto promote the shared objective of improving market access for Europeanexporters throughout the world. "Given that the value of EU spiritsexports to markets outside Europe totals nearly 4,000 million ECU, theCommissioner's personal endorsement of our WTO objectives, especiallyimproved market access for distilled spirits in world markets, is mostwelcome", said CEPS President Christian Delclaux on October 17.CEPS is urging the Commission to help secure at the Singapore Ministerial"substantial reductions" in the import tariffs applied to distilledspirits beyond those agreed in the Uruguay Round in 1994. This includesexpansion of the 'zero for zero' import tariff phasing-out arrangementsfor brown spirits, e.g. Cognac and Scotch Whisky (agreed by the EU,Canada, Japan and the United States) to encompass all spirits and liqueursand extension of the arrangements to other WTO signatories.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMMISSION FINANCES STUDY OF FOOD PRODUCT MARKET IN KOREAfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The European Commission has signed a contract for a study of thefood-products market in Korea with a French company, Sofres S.A. and itssubsidiary in Seoul. Of the thirteen firms that offered their services inreply to the Commission's call for tenders, the Directorate-General forExternal Relations (Commercial Policy and Relations with North America,the Far East, Australia and New Zealand, Unit China, Korea, Hong Kong,Macau, Taiwan) selected the French firm on the basis of a number ofcriteria such as the fee proposed for the study, professionalqualifications and experience of the personnel, the number of peopleworking on the market study etc. Sofres S.A. will receive ECU 125,345(excluding travel and subsistence expenses) for carrying out the marketstudy covering a number of sectors of the food products market in theRepublic of Korea.For further information, please contact:European Commission,Directorate-General for External Relations B-28, 6/191,rue de la Loi 200,B-1049 Brussels,BelgiumorSofres SA,16, rue Barbs,F-91129 Montrouge Cedex,France,and its subsidiary Frank Small & Associates,Samwhan Comus Building,Yoido-dong Youngdeungpo-ku,KR-Seoul 150-010KoreaCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EXTRACTION SOLVENTS: COMMISSION PROPOSED TO UPDATE 1988 DIRECTIVEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29To take account of scientific and technical progress, the EuropeanCommission is proposing to amend for the third time Directive 88/344/EECon the approximation of the laws of the Member States on extractionsolvents used in the production of foodstuffs and food ingredients. Theproposed changes concern mainly the use of certain solvents, theirconditions of use and maximum residue limits in food. The EuropeanParliament has just given its stamp of approval to the proposal during itsOctober 23 plenary session in Strasbourg.According to the draft Directive, the Annex to Directive 88/344/EEC wouldbe amended as follows:In Part I, the substance butyl acetate is deleted (as it is no longer usedin agri-industry).In Part II:The entry for hexane is modified.In Part III, the substance methyl-propanol-1 is deleted and in its place1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane is added with a maximum residue limit of 0.02mg/kg in the foodstuff due to the use of extraction solvents in thepreparation of flavourings from natural flavouring materials.The Member States must amend their laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions so as to authorise trade in products complying with thisDirective by July 1, 1997 at the latest, and must ban trade in productsnot complying with this Directive from January 1, 1998 onwards.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996INWARD PROCESSING: COOPERATIVES OPPOSE EU COMMISSION PROPOSALfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French agricultural cooperatives - whether involved in upstream farmproduction or downstream in the agri-food processing industry - are up inarms about a draft proposal from the European Commission that seeks toamend arrangements for access to international trade. The cooperatives areparticularly critical of the proposed changes to the inward processingregime which attracts a wide range of agricultural products. The draft hasalso been given a cautious welcome by European agri-food industryspecialists. But there may be room for improvement as, according to somesources, it appears that the future rules for the system of inwardprocessing traffic have not yet been finalised within the Commission'sDirectorate-General XXI (Customs and Indirect Taxation).The inward processing regime is a system that enables goods to be importedinto EU customs territory for processing - without having to pay customsduties. The only condition required of these goods is that they areimmediately re-exported outside the EU after processing, other wise theywill be liable for normal customs duties. In their position paper, theFrench farm cooperatives, who are supported in their quest by cooperativesin other EU Member States, reckon that this system cannot provide anadequate response to the new, liberal regime ushered in by the GATTUruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture and can only be regarded as anexceptional regime.Widening its scope, say the cooperatives, would "not be compatible withglobal respect for  Community preference". Not can it provide analternative to the traditional, unsatisfactory, policy of exportrestitutions.They also feel the Commission's draft proposal will risk encouragingproduction of agricultural raw materials to move elsewhere: since the"substitutability" of foodstuffs cannot rely solely on volume and priceequivalents. The farmers say what is needed is a "material yield"equivalent, enabling a qualitative differentiation to be made on the basisof raw material accounting. The processing stage between import and exportof a food product must be visible through the use of two different customstariffs, one on the way in and one on the way out. The French cooperativesreckon that the proposed reform goes against the policy guidelinesrequested by the farming industry itself.The European Commission's draft proposal assumes that the GATT Agreementon Agriculture has restored world market prices for agricultural productsto normal. But this hypothesis, according to the cooperatives, needs to begiven more in-depth consideration because there is still considerablespeculation son markets that are supposed to be better governed nowadays.To sum up, the French farm cooperatives really want to see a simpler,clearer and less expensive system. Above all, they cite the principle ofacceleration and greater transparency of the system, the need for fasterclearance of the backlog of requests for licences and recourse tocomputerised means of transmission.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List WT02-B40-6IA074-000493-B045-27http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012819 text/html 81202HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:26:10 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:21 GMTContent-length: 81015Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb21.html Sample Issue Copyright AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet October 31, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES RURAL DEVELOPMENT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT CALLS FOR RURAL CHARTER (1456 words) COMMISSION PROPOSES TO ALLOW MORE WAXES FOR USE ON FRUIT (223 words) EU MAKES NEW ATTEMPT TO LEGISLATE ON FOOD IRRADIATION (325 words) DAIRY POLICY: MEMBER STATES' "INCOMPATIBLE OBJECTIVES" FOR MILK SECTOR (1338 words) UK MEAT PLANT THROUGHPUT DIPS 7% IN FIRST 8 MONTHS OF 1996 (235 words) SAUDI ARABIA RE-OPENS FOR IRISH BEEF (154 words) MAD COW DISEASE: MIXED SIGNALS FROM COMMISSION ON "PROVEN" BSE/CJD LINK (1178 words) BEEF CRISIS: MINISTERS URGED TO SWALLOW THE MEDICINE (1740 words) POTATOES: EU MARKET REGIME PROPOSALS SOON TO BE BURIED AGAIN (909 words) PROGRESS ON FRENCH APPLE EXPORTS TO JAPAN (313 words) DURUM WHEAT: COMMISSION SECTOR REFORM PROPOSALS BOGGED DOWN (658 words) TUNISIA ANTICIPATES ABUNDANT OLIVE HARVEST (314 words) WHEAT PRICES RISE AS MAIZE AND SOYA FALL (243 words) CEREALS: INTERNATIONAL GRAINS COUNCIL RAISES 1996/97 CROP FORECASTS (381 words) NETHERLANDS JOINS INTERNATIONAL PLANT VARIETY CONVENTION (318 words) VIETNAM JOINS INTERNATIONAL COFFEE ORGANISATION (492 words) CGIAR: PLANET HAS THE RESOURCES TO FEED 8 BILLION IN 2025 (473 words) OECD: EXPORT FRUIT BOOM FROM THE SOUTH A THREAT FOR THE North? (477 words) BANANA PRODUCERS' FORUM OPENS IN SANTO DOMINGO (180 words) MAJOR AGRICULTURAL EVENTS IN NOVEMBER 1996 (418 words) CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996RURAL DEVELOPMENT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT CALLS FOR RURAL CHARTERfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The EU's Common Agricultural Policy should be subsumed under a widerEuropean rural policy which will include objectives such as help to ruralcommunities and other measures which are complementary to agriculturalpolicy goals. This idea is part of a report from Irish MEP Liam Hylandofficially adopted by a plenary session of the European Parliament inStrasbourg on October 25. Mr Hyland's report argues that sensible use ofthe rural environment is the basis for all good spatial and resourceplanning and calls for an EU "Rural Charter" to be drawn up forthwith.Enlargement of EU "rural" areas.Mr Hyland points out that following the accession of Sweden, Finland andAustria approximately one quarter of the Union's population now live inrural communities, and that rural areas account for almost 85% of thesurface area of the European Union. As the European Union expands over thenext decade to take in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, whosefarming conditions are very different, it "makes sense to review thepresent arrangements, and to adapt and amplify them where necessary with aview to achieving a strengthened and mutually consistent body of measureswhich allows the mobilisation of a maximum of synergies and leadsprogressively to an integrated rural policy," says the EuropeanCommission's November 1995 White Paper on "Future Strategies for the CAP".However, Mr Hyland points out that there is not even a definition of theword "rural" on which all Member States agree. A number of Member Statesuse a population threshold (France, Spain, Italy, Ireland, Germany)although the population threshold used differs. Other countries use aplanning-based approach (Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg and theUnited Kingdom). The OECD uses a definition based on a population of lessthan 150 per km2; Eurostat uses 100 inhabitants per km2. The proposedCouncil of Europe Charter avoids using a precise figure, defining an areaof the countryside as rural when the "main part" is used for agriculture,forestry, aquaculture and fisheries, for the economic and culturalactivities of country-dwellers, for non-urban recreation and leisure andfor other purposes such as housing. Mr Hyland wants a single cleardefinition agreed that can be used in all discussions on rural affairs.The problems of rural areas.In the Commission paper on "The Future of Rural Society", problems ofrural areas are analysed under three categories:- areas "suffering from the pressures of modern life", near towns andcities in areas of heavy population, particularly in the centre-north ofthe Community and in many coastal regions.- areas suffering from "rural decline", such as several regions in Greece,the Mezzogiorno, inland Spain and Portugal, and the island of Ireland.Here agriculture is still important but farms are often so small that theycan barely provide a living for one person and the absence of alternativeemployment lead to a drift from the land, especially among the young.-"remote areas", e.g. mountain regionsMr Hyland identifies two common misconceptions. Although there are someparts of the EU where rural areas have been abandoned and depopulated,this is not universal. The decline in numbers of farmers during the 1970sand 1980s is often cited as an important effect on rural areas, but thisdecline has been replaced in very many parts of the Community with aninflow of population from elsewhere. Nevertheless, the "drift from theland" persists in Greece, Ireland, some parts of Italy, Spain and Portugaland in some areas of France, the Scottish Highlands, many islands, higherparts of the Alps and Pyrenees, the Massif Central, the West of Ireland,and some mountain areas in Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal. Therapporteur also sees the need for a fourth category since the accession ofthe Member States having Nordic regions, which are characterised by a verylow population density.Secondly, contrary to general belief, overall unemployment in the ruralareas of the Community is not greater than in urban areas, andunemployment for males is generally lower in rural areas. Within thisoverall picture, however, there are sharp differences. Rural unemploymentis largely a matter of agricultural under-employment: the Commissionestimates that almost one third of all farmers in the Community areunderemployed - i.e. they work less than 50% of a normal working year ontheir farm and have no other gainful employment. However, the problem offemale unemployment in rural areas is one which warrants specialattention. Precise EU data on this is not currently available, a pointwhich the Commission ought to remedy soon, reckons Liam Hyland.The Community role.The share of the Structural Fund budget for 1989-1993 devoted to ruraldevelopment will double from the present approximately 15 billion ECU toapproximately 30 billion ECU in 1994-1999.The rapporteur believes we cannot simply establish a rural policy in theway we have established agricultural policy - dealing with specificmarket, with specific mechanisms, and finance. This is true partly due tothe the principle of subsidiarity - it is the Member States who currentlypropose programmes to the Commission, which are then negotiated inpartnership to establish broad framework policies and objectives, andwhich the Community co-finances (50% in most cases, 65% in Objective 1cases). National and regional authorities have primary responsibility fordealing with rural affairs through their policies on land, taxation,development, training, administration etc. "Community action can only bepart of the total, and, being realistic, only a small part", says LiamHyland. However, the rapporteur believes the development of an integratedrural policy, based on the principles of a European Rural Charter, willenable the "rural dimension" to be taken into consideration in theelaboration of these various policies, both nationally and at EU level,which is not the case at the moment.Principles of Rural Development.Rural development must enshrine the right of all sectors of rural societyto participate in economic activity, stresses the report, setting out fivecentral areas of policy concern which have to be addressed; it is thecombination of these actions that will lead toward the principal objectiveof maintaining viable rural communities, which in turn depends on tacklingthe most fundamental problem of rural areas, which is unemployment, saysLiam Hyland. The five areas are:Agricultural adjustment to new world trends - increasing world competitionand increasing mobility of capital and labour- by continuing to adaptagriculture to the needs of the market place, while investing in newdevelopments such as planned forestry, organic production and the creationof non-food energy sources. Farmers should also be encouraged to maintainan attractive, diverse and ecologically rich rural environment, whichincludes organic production. Such support should facilitate land mobilitythrough schemes for young farmers.Industry and enterprise. Growth in rural employment will not come fromagriculture alone, or from forestry, but will be replaced by the growth ofalternative economic sectors such as tourism or development based on newtechnologies and telecommunication, in which the rural areas will provideadvantages over urban areas for the development of service industries.Environmental sustainability and cultural preservation. Farmers have animportant role as guardians of the countryside, and that as such theyought to be paid for that role. We have to secure and sustain acountryside which is clean, attractive and rich in wildlife, historicalfeatures, preserving the rich traditions of culture built up overthousands of years, while developing recreational opportunities, says thereport.Rural communities. One of the most important issues for rural communitiesis the shortage of rural housing. One of the problems in this respect hasbeen the environment: any approach to develop new land for building isoften resisted on environmental grounds. Local authorities must have apositive housing programme for rural areas, which should include theupgrading and preservation of existing housing stock.Planning and land use. It is important to overcome the popular belief thatthe countryside is under constant threat, because this leads to the '`nodevelopment" ethic that is damaging to rural economies and ruralsocieties, says Liam Hyland. What is needed is a land use policy which istailored to specific areas and needs, and which allows for the properintegrated use of land for agriculture, forestry, leisure, tourism,industrial development and housing. It is better to consider the use ofgood quality land for development where it might have greater economic oramenity use than as setaside land on which nothing is done, environmentaldegradation takes place, and costs increase yearly, stresses therapporteur.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996COMMISSION PROPOSES TO ALLOW MORE WAXES FOR USE ON FRUITfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Under pressure from the fruit trade, represented by the European Union ofthe Fruit and Vegetable Wholesale, Import and Export Trade (EUCOFEL), theEuropean Commission has proposed to allow three more waxes to be used onfruit in the EU. The proposal to extend the list of waxes allowed for useon fruit forms part of a proposal for a European Parliament and CouncilDirective to amend the basic Directive on food additives other thancolours and sweeteners that the Commission tabled earlier this Autumn.According to the new proposal, the following waxes will be allowed forsurface treatment only on fresh avocados, mangoes, papayas and melons:E905 Microcrystalline wax (maximum level permitted: 140 mg/kg)E912 Montanic acid esters: (quantum satis*)E914 O oxidized polyethylene wax: (quantum satis)The proposal has been sent to the European Parliament and the Council ofMinisters for approval, but the legislative process may take months, ifnot years.* The quantum satis principle means that no maximum level is specified,but additives, such as waxes, may be used in accordance with goodmanufacturing practice, at a level not higher than is necessary to achievethe intended purpose and provided that the consumer is not misled.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996EU MAKES NEW ATTEMPT TO LEGISLATE ON FOOD IRRADIATIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450After the failed attempts by successive Council Presidencies in the late1980s, early 1990s to get a Community Directive on irradiation offoodstuffs adopted, mainly because of strong opposition from Germany andLuxembourg to the very principle, the European Commission is havinganother go now. It recently sent the Council of Ministers two draftDirectives which it hopes the Irish Presidency can steer through thelegislative process.The first proposal is for a general framework Directive laying downgeneral rules on the conditions applicable to food irradiation, and thesecond is an implementing Directive, establishing a positive list offoodstuffs for which irradiation would be authorised throughout the EU.If the Council adopts the proposals, Member States would no longer be ableto ban the marketing of irradiated foodstuffs, if these meet therequirements laid down in the framework Directive. So far, the proposalonly allows irradiation for herbs, spices and vegetable seasonings. Onthis point, the Commission is treading cautiously after its earlierproposals for a much wider range of food products were watered down tocover only herbs and spices. International organisations like the UN Foodand Agriculture Organisation, the International Atomic Energy Agency andthe World Health Organisation have issued a number of studies andstatements showing no risk to human health from correct use of irradiationtechniques.On the whole, Member States seem to accept this new approach, according totrade sources, but differences of opinion remain as regards the need forlabelling of irradiated foodstuffs, and the need to continue nationalauthorisations to irradiate certain types of food.The draft framework Directive says that irradiation may only be authorisedwhen there is a clear benefit for the consumer. Moreover, it stresses thatlabelling to inform the customer that irradiation treatment has been usedis necessary in almost all cases.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996DAIRY POLICY: MEMBER STATES' "INCOMPATIBLE OBJECTIVES" FOR MILK SECTORfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Some EU Member States want to cut back dairy quotas in order to maintainprices, some would be happy to see Community prices fall to world levels,accompanied by an across-the-board increase in production quotas tomaintain income, others are clamouring for milk production rights to be"more fairly" redistributed, a few countries place the emphasis onexpanding exports to the world market, while others again are moreinterested in social protection for their dairy farmers. This is thesituation facing European Commission sector experts as they wrestle withdraft proposals designed to take the Community milk industry into the nextcentury. The proposals, which will seek to define options for an EUstrategy towards the world trade talks at the turn of the century tocontinue the reforms agreed under the GATT Uruguay Round, is due to betabled by EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler in the early part of 1997.Recent discussions within the Council's Special Committee on Agricultureindicate however that progress on the dossier may not be swift.Trade liberalism and East Europe.EU dairy production is destined to be one of the next farm sectors toundergo upheavals as part of the continuing reform of the CommonAgricultural Policy (CAP). The Netherlands, which takes over the rotatingEU Council Presidency on January 1, has announced its intention ofaddressing the subject at the informal Farm Council in May 1997. The nextround of multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the WorldTrade Organisation (WTO) are likely to have a more radical impact on farmtrade liberalisation than the ones concluded under the GATT Uruguay Roundin 1994 and not just because they are largely intended to continue thereform process begun with the GATT Agreement on Agriculture. Not only isthe free market philosophy gaining strength around the world, but radicalsolutions may have to be found if the emerging economies of the Centraland East European countries (CEECs) are to be incorporated into theEuropean Union and the international trade scene in general.EU the world's N #  1.The European Union currently has around 21 million head of dairy cattle,producing some 110 million tonnes of milk annually, out of a world totalfluctuating around 520 million tonnes. EU exporters hold more than 40% ofthe world market, way ahead of nearest rivals New Zealand (16%) andAustralia (9%). The Community sets an annual intervention price at whichpublic authorities are obliged to buy in milk and butter of the requiredquality, and also pays export refunds to bridge the gap between EU andworld prices.Prices set to fall.Under the GATT Agreement on Agriculture, which brought the farm sectorinto the international trade framework for the first time, the initialtariff levels designed to replace trade barriers were set so high that themandatory phased reductions are currently having little effect on themarket. However, further tariff cuts would almost certainly force producerprices down. A report drawn up by Professor S.J Sheehy of UniversityCollege Dublin* sees prices falling by as much as 5% per year towards2010, whether or not the EU decides to maintain its production quotasystem. The report assumes the EU will make arrangements to compensatefarmers for the drop in income they will suffer in the early part of the21st century, as was the case following the "MacSharry" reform of the CAPin 1992. Under the GATT Agreement, direct income payments to farmers areexempt from the obligation to reduce aggregate levels of support, and theCommunity will come under increasing pressure from the US and othertrading partners to further decouple aid payments from prices.The main options.Professor Sheehy argues it will be impossible to maintain both the presentquota system, whereby each Member State is allocated a maximum quantity ofmilk it may produce, alongside the high prices the EU has been at pains tomaintain through its aid and intervention scheme. If tariffs are cutfurther, prices are certain to fall. A "fortress Europe" approach,rejecting international calls for reduced tariffs but agreeing to trimexport subsidies instead, would imply buying back some 10% of farmers'production rights to bring supply and demand into balance, says the report.CEEC accession.However, this approach would pose serious questions for the integration ofthe CEEC candidates into the European Union. Maintaining quotas whileallowing prices to gravitate downwards towards international market levelsmight solve this problem, provided a long-enough transition period forCEEC accession is agreed, reckons the Irish Professor. A more radicaloption would be to abolish quotas altogether ahead of, or just after, thenext WTO accord. In the short term, this would place an enormous burden onthe EU farm budget, as dairy producers would have to be compensated forsharply-falling prices, but it would quickly align Community productionwith the world market, and have the advantage that the thorny question ofquota allocation and compensation payments to the new CEEC Member Stateswould not arise.The Sheehy report has brought plaudits from free-trade supporters Denmark,Sweden and the UK, who welcome the chance to view the EU dairy regime inthe wider context of world trade. However, a majority of the Member Statesfeel that the quota system should be determined in the light of theCommunity's internal policy aims, rather than merely commercial aspects.The French in particular have described the document as "too biasedtowards trade liberalisation". France is the EU's second largest dairyproducer, with a guaranteed quantity around 24 million tonnes of milk ayear.Quotas needed to preserve farming?Germany, the EU's leading dairy producer, Austria, Portugal andLuxembourg, believe the quota system is the only sensible way of limitingproduction and stabilising the market, and should be extended beyond thedeadline of 2001. Bonn would like to see a 5% cut in quotas to firm upprices, while Vienna argues that farming would die out in some mountainousand other less-favoured regions without a structured system of dairyproduction. Portugal would reluctantly accept quota cuts as a necessaryevil to maintain prices.Dual pricing system.Belgium, Ireland, and the Netherlands are unconvinced of the need to acturgently. They believe gradual price cuts towards world levels in themedium term will obviate any potential problems with CEEC accession, andthat there is no need to abolish quotas. Meanwhile the French are pressingthe case for a dual pricing system to balance the internal and externalneeds of the Community, and the Danes, who reluctantly admit thatabolishing quotas may be politically unfeasible, have suggested theintroduction of "A" and "B" quotas along the lines of the sugar regime(see separate article on sugar). "B" quota milk could be exported withoutrefunds, they argue, without the risk of forcing down world prices.Export vocation vital.In spite of their conflicting views on practical strategies, France,Ireland, the Netherlands and Denmark all agree on one basic point: it isvital that EU dairymen are able to go on exporting to the worldmarketplace. The Irish and Dutch also back the UK view that compensationpaid to farmers should be granted on the basis of uniform economiccriteria. They argue that other Community objectives such as help forsmall farmers, young farmers, less-favoured areas, etc ought to be dealtwith through separate instruments. Member States opposed to this hardstance reckon that some modulation should be envisaged in order to targetsupport where it is most needed. A senior Commission official tasked withthe dossier lamented recently that so far the debate had done no more thanreveal the Member States' "incompatible objectives".* Milk Quotas to be Abolished in 2001?", available in English only fromthe European Commission Secretariat-General, rue de la Loi 200, Brussels,Belgium.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996UK MEAT PLANT THROUGHPUT DIPS 7% IN FIRST 8 MONTHS OF 1996from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450During the first eight months of 1996, meat plant throughput in the UnitedKingdom declined by 7% on corresponding 1995 levels to just under 22million head, according to the Irish Food Board's Market Monitor bulletin.Cattle throughput was 32% lower than last year at 1.5 million head. Sheepsupplies at 11.2 million head were 6% lower while pig throughput declinedby 3% to 9.3 million head.Steer throughput up to the end of August was 28% lower than last year at569,000 head. Heifer supplies declined by 25% while cow throughput was 64%lower at 186,000 head. The reason for this decline is that since April anaverage of 30,000 cattle per week have been removed from the food chainthrough the over-30-month culling programme to help combat "mad cowdisease" (BSE). Young bull throughput over the period increased by 3% on1995 levels to 269,000 head.Lamb throughput up to the end of August at 9.7 million head was 6% belowcorresponding 1995 levels. Cull ewe supplies declined by 5% to 1.5 millionhead, according to the Irish Food Board, An Bord Bia.Supplies of fattening pigs were 3% lower during the first eight months of1996 at 9.1 million head. Sow throughput over the period fell by 11% tototal 216,000 head.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996SAUDI ARABIA RE-OPENS FOR IRISH BEEFfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Saudi Arabian Ministry for Foreign Affairs has announced that it islifting its temporary ban on imports from Ireland of frozen and chilledbeef and veal, milk and milk products from cattle, beef gelatine, foodproducts containing milk and gelatine products derived from cattle andbovine products used in veterinary and medical preparations, cosmetics anddrugs. All these products neverthelss have to be accompanied by acertificate stating they are BSE free.These products are allowed entry to Saudi Arabia through the ports of theNetherlands and Belgium, on condition that they stay on the same vesselfor the duration of the journey and are not unloaded in other ports whichthey may pass through.The Saudis have also agreed to lift the ban on imports from Switzerlandand France for the same products.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996MAD COW DISEASE: MIXED SIGNALS FROM COMMISSION ON "PROVEN" BSE/CJD LINKfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The European Commission sent out mixed signals on October 24 to news thatUK scientists may have proved a direct link between bovine spongiformencephalopathy (BSE) and a new variant of the human brain conditionCreutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (dubbed by experts "vCJD"). Speaking at a pressconference in Paris, EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler said he thoughtin the light of the new findings, the European Union ought to bring instricter legislation on consumption of animal offal, and stressed that theUK authorities should now proceed with the planned targeted cull of some150,000 cattle, suspended by the Major Government in mid-September.Meanwhile back in Brussels, a Fischler aide spoke of both positive andnegative aspects of the scientific discovery. The negative side, he said,was the obvious public health risk, now shown to be very real, that eatersof infected beef tissue may have contracted brain disease. The positiveelement consisted in the fact that the new discovery would make it easierto trace animals incubating the disease, he stressed.BSE and vCJD prions "match".The British scientific journal Nature carried a report on October 23 of anew technique developed by Dr John Collinge and his colleagues in thePrion disease Group at Imperial College School of Medicine, London, fortracing the "molecular marker" of the prion protein which causes the braintissue of sufferers to degenerate into a spongy mass. "The biochemicalsignature of prions in patients who died from new variant CJD matches thatof prions in mice and macaque monkeys experimentally infected with BSE,but differs from that of prions in human patients with acquired orsporadic CJD", says the Nature report. This finding "greatly strengthensthe conclusion that vCJD is a consequence of the BSE epidemic in Britishcattle", it goes on. The new technique is likely to form the basis of arapid diagnostic test for spongiform encephalopathies, say the experts.Further safety precautions?Reacting to the news, a European Commission spokesman stressed that the EUexecutive had been proceeding on the assumption of a BSE/CJD link for sometime and that all necessary measures to protect the public were already inplace. The new study would go to the EU scientific committees forexamination, and any necessary new proposals would be made on the basis oftheir recommendations, the spokesman explained. However, from Paris, FranzFischler indicated to the press that he would be re-tabling to the FarmCouncil on October 28 proposals to completely exclude from the food chainthose cattle and sheep tissues found most likely to transmit the BSE agent.Harmonisation needed.The legal situation regarding use of brain, eyes, spinal cord, nervoustissues, spleen and lymph glands (shown to be capable of transmitting thefatal prions) from cattle and sheep varies across the European Union. Theonly EU-wide statute on the subject relates to UK bovine tissues, whichare banned from export. Also, ruminant waste may not be fed to cattle andsheep, but does constitute an important ingredient in the meat and bonemeal still fed to pigs, chickens and other farm animals. The Frenchauthorities paved the way towards tighter rules in June, when they bannedfrom both human foodstuffs and all animal feeds the tissues in question,from cattle aged over 6 months and sheep and goats aged over one year.Ireland and the UK have brought in similar regulations. Mr Fischlerbelieves Member States' rules should now be harmonised on the Frenchmodel. However, a proposal to that effect he tabled to the Council in Julymet with little enthusiasm from the EU Standing Veterinary Committee.The French Agriculture Ministry gave a favourable reaction on October 25to an announcement by the Bonn authorities of a new national legislativeBill that would, in line with French law, ban all imports from France ofthe sensitive tissues. The Ministry welcomed the move, as likely to fosterEU-wide harmonisation of measures. The German Government has since Julymaintained a unilateral ban on all products containing beef tissues fromthe UK and Switzerland, the two main centres of the BSE epidemic in Europe.Confusion over "regional approach".Meanwhile confusing messages emerged from Luxembourg on October 28regarding the UK's strategy for eradicating BSE and ending the embargo onBritish beef products. UK Agriculture Minister Douglas Hogg, in town forthe EU Farm Council, told the press corps he was not pressing for aregional approach to lifting the ban, but would be trying to make progresstowards resumption of beef exports "from certified herds". These would bepedigree grass-fed herds whose owners can prove they have never used thesuspect mammalian meat and bone meal (MBM) blamed for spreading thedisease to feed their livestock.However, the presence of Scottish Secretary Michael Forsyth in the UKdelegation sent out a different signal. Both Scotland and the UK provinceof Northern Ireland have a large number of such herds. Earlier, the FarmCouncil President-in-Office Ivan Yates told the press corps that aregional proposal "could be considered", provided the agreed targeted cullof cattle most at risk from BSE were implemented in that region. "Aspecial case can be made for Northen Ireland because of their animalidentification system and that they are surrounded by water", said theIrish Agriculture Minister. However, Douglas Hogg rejected the idea ofdestroying cattle from herds already certified free of mad cow disease as"irrelevant".The implicit rejection of Mr Yates' support may be for UK domesticconsumption rather than for Mr Hogg's EU partners. Indeed the UKauthorities now appear to have given up hope of having the export embargo- imposed on March 27 after the risk of human beings contractingspongiform brain disease from BSE-infected cattle tissues came to light -lifted for the whole of the country in the near future. The MajorGovernment decided in mid-September to suspend the selective cattle cull,agreed as part of the "Florence framework" for gradually ending the ban,and has now changed strategy in favour of the "certified herds" approach.French MBM figures "correct".However, the Irish Farm Minister was able to offer some relief toPierre-Mathieu Duhamel, the beleaguered Director of the French CustomsService. Mr Duhamel's team has been widely accused in the French press oflaxity in tracing potentially infected MBM imported from the UK between1993 and 1995 and fraudulently labelled as of Irish origin. Ivan Yatesconfirmed on October 21 that the French figure of 59,873 tonnes for IrishMBM exports to France during the period in question now appeared to be"accurate". Dublin had originally declared a figure of just 25,815 tonnes,leading to French fears that large quantities of suspect MBM had enteredthe country illegally. The discrepancy appears to have arisen becauseUK-based brokers continued to ship to France consignments of MBM whichthey had purchased in Ireland, Mr Yates explained.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996BEEF CRISIS: MINISTERS URGED TO SWALLOW THE MEDICINEfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450As Agri-Service International went to press in the afternoon of October30, EU Farm Ministers meeting in Council in Luxembourg were well intotheir third day of talks on proposed support and restructuring measuresfor the beleaguered beef sector. A second compromise paper tabled by theIrish Presidency to take account of the more strident objections from theMember States delegations had secured the backing of EU AgricultureCommissioner Franz Fischler, and Ministers were being urged by bothPresidency and Commission to swallow unpalatable measures in order tofinalise a deal. Among the most significant changes being proposed to theoriginal Commission document, the new draft includes a commitment to findECU 500 million for short-term support for farmers, an option for MemberStates to encourage early marketing of both male and female beef cattleinstead of destroying them at birth, and a call for restrictions on importof calves from Eastern Europe. However deciding on the ratio fordistribution of aid top-ups among the Member States remained the biggeststumbling block to agreement.The Fischler beef package.A package of three linked proposals tabled by Farm Commissioner FranzFischler on July 30 calls for reductions in arable aid payments and cutsin investment support to pay for higher beef intervention buying and othershort-term measures designed to absorb surplus EU beef production,estimated at 1.2 million tonnes per year since consumption has fallen inthe wake of the "mad cow" crisis. Parliament used its urgency procedure tovote an Opinion on the first part of the package - the purely beef sectormeasures - on September 20, but refused to do the same for thecontroversial arable aid cuts. The Commissioner has always expressedreluctance to see the three elements split up. If measures costing overECU1 billion are to be agreed, then the Ministers should decide at thesame time where the money is coming from, insisted a Fischler aide.However, a majority of Member States are in any case against the proposedarable cuts.Emergency measures already taken.In fact, going into Council, Franz Fischler had already given away animportant bargaining chip in agreeing to raise the Community beefintervention ceiling from 400,000 to 460,000 tonnes for 1996, and endorsepublic buying-in of lighter cattle ("weanlings") under 300 kilogrammes inweight. These decisions, voted through on a Commission proposal byMinisters at the Fisheries Council on October 14, took some of the urgencyout of the issue, and the Member States' delegations were more inclined tohold out for better terms for their farmers in the overall package. Themore intensive farming countries such as Germany, the Netherlands andBelgium are opposed to moves to lower the regional stocking ceilings usedfor calculating eligibility for special beef premium payments to farmersand reduce the stocking levels for eligibility to the "extensificationpremium". The Netherlands and Italy are unwilling to introduce thenew-born calf slaughter option, which they feel will outrage publicopinion, France wants to see premiums payable on suckler cows raised,while Portugal is still fighting to maintain the second premium payable onits older, extensively-raised, bulls.Immediate cash commitment.The most significant addition to the Fischler beef package is thecommitment to find ECU 500 million somewhere in the 1997 EU AgricultureBudget to top up cattle farmers incomes for the second time since the BSEcrisis hit demand in April. In June, the Ministers agreed to provide ECU850 million, with an added provision for Member States to match thisfigure out of national funds. Earlier, the Farm Commissioner had suggestedthere was no justification for further short-term support of this kind. Areport from the Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (DGVI),whose publication was temporarily blocked by French Commissioner EdithCresson on October 23, estimates beef producers' aggregate losses due tothe BSE crisis at ECU 1.277 billion (calculated per animal at ECU 65 formales and ECU 45/ head for suckler cows) or at ECU 1.02 billion on aproduction basis. Nevertheless, French calf producers are said to belosing up to ECU 100 per head in the current depressed market for beefanimals.Exports booming.On October 25 the EU Beef and Veal Management Committee accepted a further31,000 tonnes of prime beef, plus 180 tonnes of weanlings, intointervention, bringing to 396,000 tonnes the total amount of beef carcasesnow in public storage. The Commission spokesman stressed that 1996intervention would not now approach the 720,000 tonnes foreseen in earlypessimistic scenarios at the height of the crisis. Exports from the Unionare now running well over 22,000 tonnes per week and some 100,000 tonnesahead of schedule for the year 1996/97, as foreign demand has picked upagain. However, the GATT Agreement on Agriculture limit on export ofsubsidised EU beef is likely to be reached before June 1997, when theproblem will flare up again, he warned.Finding the ECU 500 million.All sides now agree that the manoeuvre of postponing until after October15, 1997 part of the oilseeds advance payments for next year is the rightway of freeing up the necessary ECU 1.2 billion or so for intervention andproduction-curtailment measures for 1997. However, uncertainty stillsurrounds the question of just where the ECU 500 million extra top-up isto be found. Following an agreement struck in Killarney in September,Member States have made early disbursements totalling some ECU 230 millionon suckler cow premium payments and the EU Budget Authority will now beasked to authorise the use of an equivalent amount from the 1997 budget.That would leave ECU 270 million to be financed over the next twelvemonths from savings on other expenditure items within the Farm Budget.A further bone of contention is just which farmers will receive the agreedaid top-up. Germany, alongside France one of the two major cattlecountries in the Community, received only 14% of the June package, whilethe French producers carried off some 30% of the cash, stressedAgriculture Minister Jochen Borchert. Hence Mr Borchert, backed by theIrish delegation, wants a new "distribution key" to be worked out.Compromise details.Based on the July 30 proposals from EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler,the Presidency compromise makes the following adjustments:-the calf-processing premium ("Herod premium") designed to encouragefarmers to reduce future beef supplies by slaughtering new-born calveswould be compulsorily offered for dairy herds only; an early marketingpremium suggested by the German delegation would be available for bothmale and female calves up to average slaughter weight less 20%. The EUManagement Committee would set the premium and the implementation rulesbut the objective is to remove 1 million calves from production next year.-intervention buying of weanlings, introduced on October 14 for 1996, tobe maintained only as an emergency measure for Autumn 1997-the regional ceilings for the special beef premiums for both 1997 and1998 to be cut back to current levels for Greece (to 140,130 head),Austria (423,400), Portugal (154,897) and the UK (1,419,811). Spain to beallowed a higher ceiling than under present arrangements- a single premium to be set for bull headage payments at ECU130, whichrepresents a 19.6% increase on the present level of ECU 108.68 as againstthe Commission proposal for a 14% increase to ECU 123.90- the 1996 intervention ceiling to be raised to just 550,000, instead ofthe 720,000 originally proposed, which would leave a capacity of a further90,000 tonnes for this year- an additional ECU 36/head for farmers who bring their cattle stockinglevel under 1.4 livestock units per hectare and ECU 52 per head for levelsless than 1LU/ha.Link with dairy reform?In addition the Commission is asked to draft a proposal to changelegislation so that the East German Lander derogation on the 90-head herdlimit continues to apply until end 1998 and to draw up proposals for longterm measures by June 30, which would link beef sector structural measureswith plans for dairy reform. A number of delegations are unhappy howeverto link these two distinct sectors.CEEC imports attacked.Following strong calls from a number of delegations to renegotiatepreferential cattle import arrangements with Central and East Europeancountries (CEEC), the compromise text calls on the Foreign Affairs Councilto take action along these lines. The Commission warns however that theCEEC will justifiably demand compensation in other trade areas.Beef for food aid?Mr Yates also revealed on October 21 his ideas for shipping unmarketableEU beef as food aid to the Third World. The Irish Agriculture Ministersaid he would be making a proposal to this effect at the World FoodSummit, scheduled to take place in Rome from November 13 to 17. Since theBSE crisis arose in March, public intervention stocks of Community beefhave risen from almost zero to just under 400,000 tonnes. This figurecould rise to 700,000 tonnes when pre-Winter selling gets under way,reckons the European Commission. These quantities of meat are unlikely tofind a market abroad, given the continuous flow of new supplies, say theexperts. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation estimatesthat some 800 million people in the world currently suffer fromunder-nutrition.Identification and labelling.The Council also took its first look at Commission proposals for cattleidentification and beef labelling rules. The idea is that all EU cattleshould be identified by means of an eartag and personal passport. Asregards labelling, individual producers and organisations would beauthorised to put in place voluntary schemes for providing the customerwith detailed information on their beef products. The draft Regulationlays down what information may appear on a label (for details see lastissue of Agri-Service International ), and lays down rules for verifyingthe truth of any claims made. The Commission hopes this scheme will be upand running by January 1997, but the European Parliament will need toregister its Opinion before the Council can go ahead and adopt thelegislation. Meanwhile Ministers have sent the dossier to the Committee ofMember States' Permanent Representatives to the EU (COREPER) for furtherwork.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996POTATOES: EU MARKET REGIME PROPOSALS SOON TO BE BURIED AGAINfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Despite renewed pressure from farmers' organisations, MEPs and theauthorities of a number of EU Member States for a formal Community marketregime to be established for potatoes, it now appears unlikely that thiswill be achieved in the foreseeable future. The Irish Presidency of the EUCouncil of Ministers has so far been unable to secure sufficient consensuson the existing Commission proposals to justify bringing them back to theCouncil table, while the Dutch, due to take over the Council chair onJanuary 1, are not convinced of the need to institute a Common MarketOrganisation (CMO) in this sector. Meanwhile, the absence of any formalCommunity-wide structure for potatoes leaves the market subject to sharpfluctuations, allows individual Member States a free hand on allocatingnational aid, and renders EU farmers vulnerable to low-priced imports fromthird countries.New calls for a CMO.As hopes rose recently that the potato dossier might make progress underthe Irish Presidency of the EU, Spanish Socialist Members of the EuropeanParliament Jesus Cabezon Alonso and Juan Colino Salamanca raised aparliamentary question with the Council of Ministers, the basic thrust ofwhich is to press for detailed regulation of the market "in order toachieve better market balance, guarantee producers' incomes and preventdistortions of competition (...)". Meanwhile COPA and COGECA, the EUfarmers' and farm cooperatives organisations, have issued a 6-point planfor an EU potato regime. The plan, which insists on the need for an EUAdvisory Committee on Potatoes to assist the European Commission, callsfor:- a common methodology to determine potato quality and to establish aminimum quality standard to protect consumers from sub-standard ordiseased potatoes;- a common methodology for the collection, analysis and distribution ofstatistics;- a modest fund for the setting-up of potato groups and industryorganisations in those Member States where such structures are weak;- an occasional fund for the generic promotion of potatoes in high yieldyears;- funding for research and development into the safe use of moderntechnology for growing, storing and presenting potatoes;- potatoes to be brought within the general safeguard measures applicableto all other crops to protect EU markets from subsidised or state-aidedimports from third countries."Light" regime proposed.Proposals drafted by the European Commission as long ago as 1992 call forthe establishment of a "light" Community potato marketing regimerecognising and providing aid for setting up producer organisations whichwould take responsibility for selling all the produce of their members.The producer groups would also organise research and development of betterstrains and run generic promotion campaigns for potatoes. Qualitystandards would also be established under Management Committee procedures,and the Commission empowered to take action against excessive imports, byrequiring import licences.No consensus.Consensus within the Council's Special Committee on Agriculture has provedhard to achieve, however. Southern Member States such as Italy, Spain andPortugal are in favour of formal regulation of the market, but wouldprefer to see potatoes included in the fruit and vegetables CMO, whichalso provides for aided withdrawal of surpluses and other marketinterventions of a "heavier" nature. France and the UK have been urgingIvan Yates, the President-in-Office of the Farm Council, to push thedossier forward, but London is categorically opposed to aided withdrawalsof surplus produce from the market, and wants potatoes kept strictlyseparate from other, more perishable, fruit and vegetables.Like the UK, the Netherlands, Germany and Belgium have their own nationalpotato marketing bodies, and are thus allied with the Swedes and Danes,who are basically against instituting new sector regimes. Under EUlegislation, the state aid rules laid down in Articles 92-94 of the Treatydo not apply to farm sectors not governed by a CMO."Illogical" absence of regulation.A sector expert from the COPA/COGECA tandem described the situation as an"illogical" gap in the completion of the Single Market. Potatoes are oneof the most important farm products for which no market organisation hasso far been established. With a total cultivated area of 1,334,000hectares, potatoes constitute a substantial crop in the European Union.They are grown in all the Member States, although because of climatic andsoil conditions, they are more widely grown in Northern regions. The Unionis in fact self-sufficient in potatoes, with the exception of earlyvarieties, which are imported in Winter and early Spring fromMediterranean countries when limited Community production is available.The main suppliers are Egypt, Morocco and Cyprus. During the past fewyears an annual average of some 400,000 tonnes of early potatoes have beenimported from third countries.However, the potato market is highly weather-dependent and is notoriouslycharacterised by wide fluctuations in crop yields from year to year.Growers' incomes are highly uncertain. Farmers react quickly to risingprices during shortages by planting extra acreage for the followingharvest, which in turn drives the price sharply down again. In 1994 forexample, when drought affected both quantity and quality, prices rosesteeply, only to fall back again during 1995, when the harvest was muchbetter. The sector is also vulnerable to speculation, as potatoes can bestored for a much longer period than many other vegetables.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996PROGRESS ON FRENCH APPLE EXPORTS TO JAPANfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Great strides have been made in the long-running negotiations on Frenchapple exports to Japan, to the extent that a date for the start of Frenchshipments can now be envisaged. French diplomatic sources have revealedthat considerable progress has been made over the last year on thetechnical level, with only a few details blocking a final agreement. Parisis anxious to tie up the ends of the technical dossier and agree a "startdate" to be announced during President Jacques Chirac's state visit toJapan beginning on November 17.Japan recently appointed experts in France to examine how French farmersare combating insect parasites which are endemic to apples in Europe butunknown in Japan. Concerns over plant health are generally regarded as theprincipal obstacle to the sale of foreign apples in the archipelago.Quoting unidentified Japanese Government sources, the English-languagedaily the Japan Times has suggested the ban on the import of French applesmay be lifted by next Summer, provided no serious problems come to lightduring testing in Japan.French sources have been reluctant to confirm the Summer of 1997 as astarting date for apple exports to Japan, pointing out that a date canonly be set following the results of public inquiry that has still to becarried out. If all goes well, France, the world's leading exporter ofapples, will become the fourth country authorised to sell its fruit toJapan after New Zealand, the United States and South Korea. However, itremains to be seen whether French Golden Delicious apples will sell inJapan, where consumers are partial to very large and attractive fruit. In1995, imported apples accounted for less than 1% of the Japanese marketdespite costing infinitely less than domestic apples.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996DURUM WHEAT: COMMISSION SECTOR REFORM PROPOSALS BOGGED DOWNfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450European Commission plans to reform the management of the EU durum wheatsector have run into opposition from Member States' negotiators in theCouncil's Special Committee on Agriculture (SCA), and the new regime isnow unlikely to take effect in the coming marketing year. Although thebasic proposal to institute a Maximum Guaranteed Area for durum wheatproduction and promote supplies of quality grains to the market wouldrally a qualified majority in Council, the main producer Member States arestill squabbling over allocation of the 3-4 million hectares traditionallysown to this crop in the Community, while some of the other countries wantofficial recognition of the "non-traditional" acreage on which theirfarmers grow up to 400,000 hectares of hard wheat per year. If allrequests were to be granted, an extra million hectares of Community-aideddurum wheat would be added to the Commission draft, costing the CAP budgeta further ECU 280 million a year.Injecting more flexibility into the durum sector.The Commission's July 30 proposals are designed to loosen up what hasbecome a highly rigidified system and bring the sector into line with bothmarket disciplines and current farming structures. Younger farmers arehaving particular difficulty in obtaining growing rights, which are tiedto the land, and the practice of "producing for aid" rather than for themarket, has become rife among some farmers, the Commission points out.Meanwhile the EU processing industry has been importing heavily to ensuresupplies.Under the present regime, aid is paid on an individual basis to producersin the "traditional" growing areas whose acreage, calculated as thehighest area for which production aid was paid in one of the referenceyears from 1988 to 1991, is listed in a register. This aid currentlyamounts to ECU 358.6/tonne, based on the production aid paid before the1992 CAP reform, plus the difference between the current interventionprice (aligned on that of other cereals) and the higher pre-reformintervention price.A 3 million hectare ceiling.The Commission's solution to the imbalance which has developed, while atthe same time keeping a grip on budgetary expenditure, is to abolishproduction registers and establish a Maximum Guaranteed Area (MGA) fordurum wheat, distributed according to traditional production totals.However, the EU executive is proposing to base the MGA on aid applicationspaid since the 1992 reform, for a total of 3 million ha, ranging from1,610,000 ha for Italy to 35,000 for Portugal (see Agri-ServiceInternational N 446 for full details), while registered acreages actuallyamount to over 4 million ha.Widening the scope.Most delegations to the SCA support the Commission's general aim ofpromoting adequate supply of quality durum wheat to the processingindustry by abolishing traditional monopolies on production rights andgranting aid only to those farmers who sow specified seed-types and growtheir crop through to maturity. However, producers have been lobbyingtheir governments to ensure they do not lose out proportionally to rivalsin other EU countries. Thus arguments within the SCA have aligned theMember States into three groups: those with allocated MGAs are demandinglarger areas; those countries, including Austria, who have hithertobenefited from "non-traditional" aid payments (amounting to someECU138.9/ha - i.e. half that payable on "traditional" areas) want theirproduction to be included in the scope of the new regime; some countrieswho have never drawn aid in either category, such as Germany and the UK,are insisting they too should be allocated a small "non-traditional" durumacreage.Faced with these extra demands, the major producers have countered bydemanding an allocation of non-traditional acreage on top of theirtraditional area. The aggregate of all these requests would bring an added550,000 ha of traditional and 400,000 ha of non-traditional durumproduction within the aided regime.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996TUNISIA ANTICIPATES ABUNDANT OLIVE HARVESTfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Official estimates suggest olive oil production in Tunisia will exceed200,000 tonnes in 1996/97, drawing a line under two years of poorharvests. With crops ravaged by drought in 1994/95 and 1995/96, olive oilproduction plummeted to 70,000 and 60,000 tonnes. Agriculture MinisterMohamed Ben Rejeb has indicated that abundant production over theforthcoming season, beginning in November, should result in a substantialincrease in olive oil exports and a resumption of normal supplies to localmarkets that have been faced with shortages for more than a year.Sales abroad were restricted last year to 26,000 tonnes, a little lessthan half of the authorised quota for exports to the European Union,Tunisia's principal customer. Under the terms of the Association Agreementwith the European Union signed in July 1995, Tunisia will enjoypreferential conditions on the sale of 46,000 tonnes of olive oil per yearon the European market, up to the year 2000. According to the Assabahdaily, Mr Ben Rejeb is currently negotiating an increase in the Europeanquota to 60,000 tones per year.The Minister is also reported to have warned exporters of a possible slumpin prices, particularly over the next three months. A floor price forexports has been set at 2,900 Dinars per tonne, and storage capacity hasbeen raised this year to 250,000 tonnes. Olive oil is also expected toreturn to the menu in Tunisian households, with the Minister forecasting afall in prices on the domestic market. The Tunisians, who traditionallyconsume about 50,000 tonnes of olive oil per year, have been forced oflate to turn to cheaper imported and state subsidised vegetable oils.Tunisia's leading agricultural export, olive oil earned the country anaverage of USD200 million a year between 1991 and 1994.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996WHEAT PRICES RISE AS MAIZE AND SOYA FALLfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The price of wheat on the Chicago futures market is rising as rates formaize and soya fall, although gains will be limited by the favourablerains that have watered freshly-planted crops of Winter wheat in theUnited States. Pressure on maize and soya prices was already building upbefore the rains that have hampered harvesting in the Midwest. JasonRoose, an analyst with US Commodities, has blamed the fall on hedging byproducers and storage companies.Soya prices in particular have declined two weeks before the publicationof new production estimates by the United States Department of Agriculture(USDA) which may raise forecasts, according to Mr Roose. With pricessliding to USD6.97 per bushel at the end of morning trading on October 29,speculation on whether soya should be trading above USD8 per bushel hasbeen replaced by conjecture as to whether prices should have fallen belowUSD7.In a separate development, analysts have yet to react to the decision bythe American tax authorities to ban farmers from deferring tax payments bycollecting revenue on current sales in January. American producers havepreviously able to sell harvests at this stage of the year but deferpayment until January, so as to withhold payment of tax on these salesuntil the following year. Under the new regulation, these sales will bedirectly taxable.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996CEREALS: INTERNATIONAL GRAINS COUNCIL RAISES 1996/97 CROP FORECASTSfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The world cereals harvest for 1996/97 (July to June) should prove moreabundant that previously forecast, reckons the International GrainsCouncil (IGC), whose monthly report, out on October 24, raises productionestimates to 573 million tonnes for wheat and 875 million tonnes forcoarse grains (corn, barley, rye, sorghum, oats). The London-basedinter-governmental organisation has raised forecasts sharply to takeaccount of bumper harvests in the European Union, China and Australia.Likewise, the United States maize harvest has exceeded expectations. Theincrease in production in some regions has more than compensated for thedisappointing wheat harvests in Kazakhstan, Russia and the United States.Last month, the IGC forecast harvests of 571 million tonnes for wheat and869 million tonnes for coarse grains.Stocks set to rise.Following the mediocre crops of recent years, these plentiful wheat andcorn harvests should be reflected in an increase in world grain reserves.World stocks of wheat are expected to rise to 104 million tonnes(unchanged on the September estimate, see Table 17 below), an increase of10 million tonnes in a single year. The estimate for reserves of coarsegrains has been raised from 100 to 105 million tonnes, 21 million tonnesmore than last year. The IGC has also increased its estimate for globalwheat consumption, which totalled 558 million tonnes in 1995/96, from 561to 563 million tonnes.Grain trade volume shrinks.World trade in wheat is now put at 89 million tonnes, compared with aSeptember estimate of 88 million, still slightly less than the 90 milliontonnes bought and sold internationally in the 1995/96 marketing year. Asregards coarse grains, the IGC has reduced its September consumptionestimate of 856 million tonnes to 854 million, still a considerableincrease on the 831 million tonnes consumed in 1995/96. World trade inthese cereals, which amounted to 93 million tonnes in 1995/96, is expectedto fall back to 89 million tonnes. A fall in imports to South Korea has,according to the IGC, been largely offset by rising sales to Saudi Arabia.National grain policy.Meanwhile a number of countries have announced changes in their nationalcereals trade policies.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996NETHERLANDS JOINS INTERNATIONAL PLANT VARIETY CONVENTIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Dutch Government deposited its instrument of acceptance of the 1991Act of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties ofPlants on October 14. The Geneva-based UPOV is an inter-governmentalorganisation which cooperates in administrative matters with the WorldIntellectual Property Organisation (WIPO). It runs the InternationalConvention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants with a view torecognising and ensuring intellectual property rights to breeders of newplant varieties. The member states of UPOV grant such a right inaccordance with the provisions of the Convention, under their nationallegislation.The Netherlands, which is already a member state of UPOV, is the thirdcountry to ratify the 1991 Act of the UPOV Convention. From the point ofview of international treaty law, the 1991 Act will not enter into forcefor the Netherlands until one month after two additional states havedeposited instruments of adherence to the 1991 Act. But from the point ofview of national law, the Netherlands has now effectively adapted itslegislation to the 1991 Act. A number of other states also have laws whichconform with the 1991 Act and can be expected to sign up in the comingmonths, UPOV said in a statement.The 1991 Act of the Convention makes the protection of all species ofplants mandatory for member states after the expiration of a transitionalperiod and strengthens the protection afforded to plant breeders. It does,however, leave protected varieties available, as at present, for use as asource of variation for the development of other varieties. "Thestrengthened protection for plant breeders will increase the incentiveprovided by the Convention for plant breeding and will lessen the threatto breeders from piracy of protected plant varieties and plagiaristicbreeding activities", according to UPOV.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996VIETNAM JOINS INTERNATIONAL COFFEE ORGANISATIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Executive Director of the International Coffee Organisation (ICO),Celsius A. Lodder, said on October 15 that the London-based Organisationhad just received notification from the United Nations that Vietnam haddeposited its instrument of accession to the 1994 International CoffeeAgreement the day before. Vietnam exported some 3.5 million 60-kg bags ofcoffee in 1996, making it the world's sixth biggest coffee exporter byvolume. Vietnam's arrival brings the ICO's membership up to 60, comprising42 exporting and 18 importing member countries. Exporting members accountfor nearly 95% of world coffee exports. Eight of these also belong to theAfrican coffee producers' organisation, OAMCAF (Cameroon, Central AfricanRepublic, Congo, the Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Madagascar andTogo).ICO member countries as at October 16, 1996:Exporting members: Angola, Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, CentralAfrican Republic, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba,Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,Rwanda, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Venezuela,Vietnam, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe.Importing members: Austria, Belgium/Luxembourg, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland,France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway,Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, as well asthe European Union.3rd Asia International Coffee Conference.One of Vietnam's first major functions as a new ICO member will be to hostthe Third Asia International Coffee Conference (AICC '97), to be held inHo Chi Minh City from January 14 to 18, 1997. The ICO Executive Directivewill be among the key speakers, along with Vietnam's Vice-Ministers fromthe Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and the Ministry ofTrade. Organised under the auspices of the Vietnam National CoffeeCorporation (VINACAFE) and the Vietnam Coffee and Cocoa Association(VICOFA) and sponsored by the ICO and Coffee Board of India, theconference will put Vietnam's coffee industry in the spotlight andconsider whether the country will "maintain and grow in status as a majorplayer in the world coffee arena". In the last ten years, Vietnam has seenphenomenal success in producing coffee, with output rising from just467,000 bags in 1985/86 to close to 3 million bags in 1995/96. This rapidgrowth, together with market expectations of a further rise in capacityand the fact that Vietnam exports more than 80% of its production, has theworld coffee industry monitoring closely developments in the country.Other key issues to be addressed at the conference include internationalprice and cost competitiveness; quality concerns and issues; internationalmarketing and access into the international coffee world; Arabicaproduction prospects for Vietnam.For further information, contact: V. Subramanian, AICC '97 ConferenceManager at IBC Asia Limited, 268 Orchard Road, Appt 18-02, Singapore238856. Tel: (+65) 732 1970 - Fax: (+65) 733 5087Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996CGIAR: PLANET HAS THE RESOURCES TO FEED 8 BILLION IN 2025from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Our planet has the necessary resources to feed a world population of 8billion in 2025, provided agricultural research is pursued and Governmentsadopt appropriate policies, according to the Consultative Group onInternational Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Celebrating its 25thanniversary, CGIAR published a statement on October 27, highlighting howan additional billion individuals have been fed since 1971 as a directresults of its research, and underlining the need to continue funding suchresearch.Established in 1971, and made up of representatives of 52 governments andinternational organisations, CGIAR endeavours through agriculturalresearch, to contribute to guaranteeing adequate food supplies to thepopulations of developing countries. The Group is financed by the WorldBank, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), and theUnited Nations Development and Environment Programmes (UNDP & UNEP).Agricultural production in 10 large developing countries has risen by 74%since the beginning of the seventies, with the increase in yields achievedthrough the introduction of new technologies accounting for 70% of thisimprovement, according to CGIAR. However, official government aid toagriculture has fallen from 2O% of total aid in 1980 to 14% in 1990.Support programmes for international agricultural research now account forless that 0.05% of this aid. CGIAR has an annual research budget of 300million dollars.CGIAR Chairman Ismail Seragedin claims "a mere increase in yields will notbe sufficient to feed the whole world in 30 years". He emphasises theimportance of "increasing the revenue of the poor, adopting appropriatepolicies, and above all, ensuring that research responds to real needs".To this end, the Group has developed specially adapted farm machinery forsmall holdings which can help farmers without replacing them. Scientistslinked to CGIAR, have for example developed a mini-machine for removingrice husks, carrying out a tedious task previously done by hand. Otherscientists have launched the micro-nutrients project, developing newvarieties of mineral-enriched cereals that may hit the markets within 6 to10 years. CGIAR claims the diet of more than two billion people isdeficient in iron and other minerals such as zinc, with 1.2 billionsuffering from anaemia caused by these deficiencies. About 225 millionchildren suffer from a serious lack of vitamin A which proves fatal in 28%of cases.The international centre for the improvement of wheat and corn, alsolinked to CGIAR, has developed six varieties of corn that prosper on acidsoil previously regarded as unfit for agriculture. Varieties of parasiteresistant crops have also been developed to reduce the use of pesticides.Finally, CGIAR scientists have focused considerable attention on waterconservation techniques and irrigation, developing methods of collectingwater from torrential downpours and "tapping" water that condenses duringthe night.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996OECD: EXPORT FRUIT BOOM FROM THE SOUTH A THREAT FOR THE North?from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450There has been strong growth in global trade of temperate-climate fruit inthe past decade. Progress in preserving and transporting fresh fruit hasenabled the Southern Hemisphere countries - especially Chile, Argentina,New Zealand and South Africa - to rapidly expand their fruit exports,driving up world trade in apples, pears, peaches, plums, apricots, grapesand kiwis by some 30%. Although this export boom from the South is a majortrade development of the decade, a new study from the Organisation forEconomic Cooperation and Development, entitled "Export Fruit Boom From theSouth: A Threat for the North?" foresees global trade in fresh fruitdeveloping differently in the years ahead:Rising demand will stimulate an even larger volume of trade intemperate-climate fruit, but the major source of demand growth will shiftfrom the OECD to the non-OECD region, predicts the report. Trade flows areexpected to shift significantly: there will be greaterinternationalisation of trade, with larger numbers of exporting countriesand more varied destinations; the Northern Hemisphere will import morefrom the Asian region and export less in favour of Southern Hemisphereexporters; intra-hemisphere trade flows will also change, with intra-Asiantrade of apples increasing in the Northern Hemisphere, intra-Europeantrade in apples, pears, table grapes and kiwifruit expanding, andintra-Central and South American trade also growing.Export competition will increase for virtually all markets, meaning thatcountries must hone their international competitiveness if they are tocontinue to successfully market their exports: they will have to developastute international market strategies, improve their market research anddevelopment, and achieve greater marketing efficiencies. At the nationallevel, policies that ensure safe reliable supplies and an environmentallysound production of fresh temperate-climate fruit will become increasinglyimportant.The OECD study explains this medium-term evolution of the internationalmarket, and the likely increase in trade volumes, by:- the general increase in consumer disposable income, especially in theAsian region;- shifts in consumer preferences toward a reliable year-round supply ofgood quality, fresh temperate-climate fruit;- improved marketing efficiencies and market development in exportingcountries that take advantage of non-seasonal demand;- technical progress in sea-borne shipping and storage;- technical progress in plant breeding and biotechnology, with shortergrowth periods, better-tasting fruit, and more varieties available toconsumers;- greater market access, smaller volumes of subsidised exports, and moreefficient phytosanitary rules thanks to the Uruguay Round Agreement onAgriculture;- greater bilateral and plurilateral cooperation between countries throughregional trading arrangements and customs-free zones."Export Fruit Boom from the South. A Threat for the North", 96 pages,OECD, Paris 1996, ISBN 92-64-14898-1 (51 96 05 1). Price: France only:FF100, all other countries: FF130; USUSD26; DM38Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996BANANA PRODUCERS' FORUM OPENS IN SANTO DOMINGOfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The 12th Forum of Latin American banana producers opened in Santo Domingo,capital of the Dominican Republic, on October 28, in the presence of 800public and private sector delegates from around the world. The Forum isintended to promote the regular development of the international bananaeconomy. Expobanana 96, a specialised fair for the promotion of theproduct, its derivatives and associated services, was running in parallelto the Forum.The gathering has given Latin American and Caribbean banana growers anopportunity to keep abreast of the latest technical progress andplant-health developments, as well as market organisation policiesworldwide, through a programme of eight conferences and round tablesaddressing specific sectors and issues. Banana-producing countries in theregion are still demanding better conditions of access to the EuropeanUnion market, regulated for the last three years by quotas and dutieswhich vary for Dollar zone producers (the Latin Americans) and forAfrican, Caribbean and Pacific signatories of the Lome Convention.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996MAJOR AGRICULTURAL EVENTS IN NOVEMBER 1996from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 4502-4 OTTAWA (Canada) International Festival of wine and foods4-5 NOORDWIJKERKOUT (Netherlands) European Conference on the environmentalimpact of biomass for energy, organised by the Centre for Agriculture &Environment with the support of the European Commission.5-9 BEIJING (China) China brew and beverage 96, 2nd international brewingand beverage fair5-9 COLOGNE (Germany) ANUGA-FOODTEC International food technology fair6-10 AALSMEER (Netherlands) International floriculture trade fair6-17 GENEVA (Switzerland) International flower show7 PARIS (France) "Community financed research networks", conferenceorganised by the Association nationale de la recherche technique (ANRT)7-10 BARCELONA (Spain) International poultry farming techniques andlivestock show8 BRUSSELS (Belgium) COPA (Committee of Agricultural Organisations in theEuropean Community) : presidium8-12 MILAN (Italy) EXPO FOOD International food and drinks fair9-12 DON BENITO (Spain) International fair9-13 BOLOGNA (Italy) EIMA International exhibition of farm machinery andequipment9- 13 SALZBURG (Austria) International hostelry and gastronomy fair11-15 NIJNI NOVGOROD (Russia) Agriculture and agri-foods fair12-14 PARIS (France) Food Ingredient Europe12-15 HANOVER (Germany) International intensive livestock rearing show12-16 PARIS-NORD (France) International packaging fair VILLEPINTE13 REIMS (France) SAF (Societe des Agriculteurs de France) Conference :"The Euro, a currency for Europe"13-15 NUREMBERG (Germany) BRAU 96 Beer and drinks industry fair13-17 ROME (Italy World Food Summit - renewing the global commitmentagainst famine - FAO Colloquium 13-14 Nov)14-18 VALENCIA (Spain) International timber industry products fair16-17 SAN REMO (Italy) FLORITEC New plants fair, floriculture equipment18 BRUSSELS (Belgium) Council of European Union Agriculture Ministers18-20 HOUSTON (USA) INTERBEV 96 1st international beverage fair18-20 AMSTERDAM (Netherlands) CFCE (Centre Francais du Commerce exterieur): Fresh fruit and vegetables seminar Brussels (Belgium)19-23 NICE (France) French Society for plant pathology: 4th congress20-23 BUDAPEST (Hungary) Agri-foods fair21-22 DIJON (France) International Congress Timber and forests21-23 CAVAILLON (France) Mediterranean fruit, flowers and vegetables tradefair22 BRUSSELS (Belgium) Council of European Union Fisheries Ministers23-28 LONGARONA (Italy) International ice-cream fair26 LYONS (France) "Choice of food products: evolution of consumerbehaviour", organised by the Pole europeen agro-alimentaire and the centrefrancais de diffusion des resultats de la recherche communautaire28 Brussels (Belgium) COPA (Committee of Agricultural Organisations in theEuropean Union): general experts' meeting.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List WT02-B40-7IA074-000493-B045-46http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122012904 text/html 41343HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:26:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:35 GMTContent-length: 41156Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb11.html Sample Issue Copyright AGWEEK via NewsNet January 02, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDIBLE BEAN MARKET COLUMN (203 words) BEAN PRODUCTION UP, BUT SUNFLOWER CROP DIPS FOR YEAR (596 words) DAKOTA FARMER'S AGRIDATA INC. CREATES FIELD INFORMATION SYSTEM (584 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDITORIAL: OPENING THE DOORS (657 words) MEAT PRODUCTION SWELLED IN 1995 (600 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE JUAN MIGUEL PEDRAZA COLUMN (628 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE PEOPLE COLUMN (572 words) PORK PRODUCERS HAVE RECORD YEAR IN '95 (542 words) SOYBEAN PRICES STAGE YEAR-END RALLY (424 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE COWBOY LOGIC COLUMN (564 words) USDA CONSERVATION ALLOCATIONS DISAPPOINT NORTHERN PLAINS FARMERS (318 words) WEATHER HAMPERED FALL POTATO HARVEST IN PARTS OF MINNESOTA, NORTH DAKOTA (418 words) CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDIBLE BEAN MARKET COLUMNBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--HIGHLIGHTS: The edible bean market remained in the holiday doldrumslast week, with Minnesota and North Dakota dealers quoting pinto prices of $14per cwt. and navy prices of $15 per cwt. Looking ahead to the new crop, there were contracts of $18 per cwt. for naviesand $16 per cwt. for pintos available. DEMAND: On the demand side, the devalued peso continues to make it tough tosell pinto beans to Mexico. In February, the country will issue permits to companies to buy pintos. Under NAFTA, Mexican buyers can purchase up to 1.2 million cwt. of beans, duty-free. If Mexico's economic situation improves and the country is able to purchasethe beans, it would help clean up the supply of U.S. pintos on hand, says Tim Courneya, executive vice president of the Northarvest Bean Growers Association. With pinto and navy beans at inexpensive levels, the United States should alsocontinue to move out beans through the U.S. government's Food for Peace Program, Courneya says. However, there may be competition with green peas and lentils for exports because those legumes are even cheaper than navies and pintos. END          Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996BEAN PRODUCTION UP, BUT SUNFLOWER CROP DIPS FOR YEARBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--One thing edible bean growers can pretty much count on is that themarket is cyclical: If prices are high one year, farmers are likely to plantmore beans the next year, and prices will drop. The cycle continued this year when U.S. farmers increased their navy bean production by 2.1 million cwt. to 7.3 million. Prices in the region dropped from $26-$27 per cwt. a year ago to $14 per cwt. this year. North Dakota farmers harvested 149,000 navy acres this year, up 129,000 acresfrom last year when flooding and frost destroyed some acres, according toUSDA. Harvested acreage in Minnesota increased by 20,000 acres to 61,200, the agency says. N.D. navy production was 2 million cwt. this year, up from 1.5 million from ayear ago. Minnesota farmers produced 845,000 cwt. of navies, up from 678,000last year. U.S. pinto bean acreage, meanwhile, dropped from last year. Farmers harvested760,000 acres of pintos nationwide, about 70,000 fewer than last year. But inNorth Dakota and Minnesota, acreage was higher than last year. Farmersharvested 362,000 acres, a 35,000 acre increase over last year. Minnesotafarmers harvested 35,000 acres, 10,400 more than last year. Nationwide, U.S. pinto bean production was 11 million cwt. this year, down 1.6million cwt. from last year. North Dakota farmers produced 4.7 million cwt. ofpintos, 424,000 cwt. more than last year, USDA says. Minnesota pintoproduction increased 138,000 cwt. to 433,000. Pinto bean prices in the region, at about $15 per cwt. are similar to lastyear. Adverse weather conditions hurt Northern Plains sunflower production this year.USDA projects that North Dakota's average yields of both oil and nonoil sunflowers will be 1,360 pounds per acre, down 75 pounds per acre from last year. Total North Dakota "all sunflower" production is pegged at 2 million pounds, down from 2.2 million last year. Final figures for the year aren't available yet, but the National SunflowerAssociation anticipates that North Dakota's oil yields will be lower thanUSDA's projections, says Jay Hesley, marketing director of the NationalSunflower Association. Late planting, a shorter growing season and poor harvest conditions contributed to lower yields, he says. Some of this year's crop was planted a week to 10 days later than normal. In Minnesota, a wet growing sseason that spawned crop diseases reduced yields.Hesley expects yields will be lower than the five-year average of 1,480 poundsper acre. USDA projects average yields of both non-oil and oil sunflowers inMinnesota to be 1,250 pounds per acre this year, down 13 pounds per acre fromlast year. Total production in Minnesota is pegged at 558,750 pounds, down41,250 pounds from last year. In South Dakota, USDA projects average yields of 1,380 per acre for both non-oil and oil sunflowers. That's a decline of 171 pounds per acre from last year. USDA projects total South Dakota production at 1.3 million pounds, down from 1.4 million last year. Total U.S. production of non-oil and oil sunflowers will be 4.6 million pounds,down from 4.8 million last year, USDA projects. While yields are lower than last year, prices are higher. Prices are near 11cents a pound, nearly 2 cents higher than last year. Hesley says the reason istwofold: Farmers are reluctant sellers and buyers are trying to give farmersan incentive to plant sunflowers this spring. Sunflowers will have to competewith other commodities for acreage, Hesley says. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996DAKOTA FARMER'S AGRIDATA INC. CREATES FIELD INFORMATION SYSTEMBy Jayson Menke, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--David Hagert wanted to find an easier way to keep field information.So he designed a management information system. Hagert, who farms 2,700 acresof wheat, barley, soybeans and edible beans with his brother, Curtis Jr., nearEmerado, N.D., started working on a model in his basement in the winter of1991, and moved to his current location at 2600 Demers Ave. in Grand Forks,N.D, in May. Since going into business, AgriData Inc., has branched out into more than justfield records, it now focusus on all areas of precision farming. The business assists farmers with precision farming techniques by utiliziationof an improved field recordkeeping system that integrates computer analysis,automated data entry, mapping, field monitoring and Differential GlobalPositioning Satellite technology. "By broadening our horizons we are able to provide customers with the lastestequipment, software and information in one convenient location," Hagert says. Hagert has incorporated tillage, fertilizer, pesticide, planting, conservationdetermination, weather, harvest, irrigation and soil nutrient data and mapsinto two pages of information for one field for one year. "In the past you would have about eight pages of printed out data per field.What we're doing is simplifying and tying everything together," Hagert says. Hagert's goal was to develop an easy-to-use computer system that would serviceall aspects of farming. In the early stages of development he used speadsheets to post his farm records. His new software program, Field Facts, will be available in the mid- January. Farmers can purchase Field Facts from AgriData and receive training on thesoftware or they can gather the data and AgriData will process the informationand print it out for the farmer. Hagert says that precision farming endorses site specific application of cropinputs. According to Hagert the goal of precision farming is to improve profits byputting money spent on crop inputs exactly where it will do the most good. "The main focus is establishing patterns that are determined by yield monitoring equipment, satellite imagery and soil types," Hagert says. Hagert says the premise is that fields have varying patterns of soil types,nutrient levels, and ultimately, varying yield levels through out a givenfield. By recording and analyzing this data, crop inputs can be adjustedthrough out a field to maximize yeilds and reduce total cost of inputs. That is, a constant rate of application over an entire field results in overapplication in some spots and under application in others. By varying theappliation rate of applications, costs can be reduced and yeilds increased. Hagert started keeping track of records on ACSC maps and began charting moreintensely in 1988 and designed the first prototype in 1991. "The main emphasis is on collecting data," Hagert says. He and his brotherused a yield monitor in 1994 and last year added a correctional signal whichenables the farmer to pinpoint spots in field through differential globalpositioning system. "Now we can produce yield maps and look at it with satellite imagery and lookfor patterns." AgriData will offer record keeping support, mapping, satellite imagery, software sales and support and consultation on hardware. AGRIDATA INC. Owner: David Hagert Address: 2600 Demers Ave., Grand Forks, N.D.Year started: 1991. Employees: 4. Main line of work: Precision farmingmanagement system. Motto: Bringing precision farming down to earth. Information: (701) 746-8580. END         Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDITORIAL: OPENING THE DOORSAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News A WORLD OF OPPORTUNITY AWAITS PRAIRIE AGRICULTURE Jan. 1--Whirlpool, aleading maker of home appliances based in Benton Harbor, Mich., is one of anumber of Midwest manufacturers that has set its sights on the global marketeveryone in agriculture is talking about. As Prairie farmers grapple with the challenges of more economically liberalfarm policy, and tackle the business world through processing and marketingventures, a look at Whirlpool's global adventure suggests that strategicplanning and focused energy can be bountifully rewarded. In its transformation from a domestic supplier into a world-class competitor,Whirlpool evolved from a $4 billion company into an $8 billion company. In arecent interview with Suzanne Cosgrove at Knight-Ridder Financial News,Whirlpool CEO David Whitwam recalled that the company was devoted almostexclusively to the U.S. marketplace in 1987 when he took his current position. While solidly successful, Whirlpool faced a mature environment, with only slownatural growth -- based on population growth -- seen for the coming decade.Whitwam concluded that the only reason it was a slow-growth industry was thatit was limited to domestic markets. It was time to go global. Whirlpool recognized that, while a fridge is a fridge is a fridge, you don't just export American-style appliances to Brazil and expect to reap a fortune. Today, Whirlpool is the No. 3 appliance supplier in Europe, and the No. 1 supplier in both North and Latin America. Now it's on to Asia. Whitwam figures the Asian market will be twice the sizeof U.S. market within 10 years -- as big as Europe and the United States combined. When asked what new language he would learn if he had time, Whitwam was quick to answer: "Mandarin." There are ample lessons for Prairie farmers in this stellar example. Stovesaren't soybeans, but the principles of marketing and competing in new marketsare. The most important factor is focus, or "stick to your knitting." In other words, if you're selling processed flour products into the Chinese market, don't spin you wheels trying to sell tractor tires. Unlike appliances, foodstuffs are a much more fractured and diverse market. Somarket research is essential. That includes building relationships thateventually turn into deals. But where some folks look at market research asdaunting, successful ventures don't go adrift into the information sea withouta plan. First, know your own products, your own production potential and your own reserves of creativity. Second, have your money lined up -- nothing quite limits business opportunities as failing to meet contracted output quotas because you run out of cash. Third, have fun. The world market is exciting, interesting and challenging.Prairie farmers have an unbeatable combination of a highly productive resourcebase, a solid experience pool from which to draw, a lively economicdevelopment sector, and the drive to create new business models for the nextcentury. There are those individuals who would have looked at the refrigerator marketand said, "I guess we'll have to make do with what we've got." But innovatorslike Whitwam looked farther afield and saw a chance to build on their base. The world market wants good food. China is hungry, Russia is hungry, all ofAsia is hungry. And they're all building to a standard of living that we inthe United States saw before World War II. That means opportunity. This is theyear for Prairie farmers to look beyond their borders, to scan the global horizon for opportunities and to build relationships that will guarantee our future prosperity. It's time, in Whitwam's words, to learn Mandarin. EDITOR'S NOTE: Agweekeditorials are developed by an editorial board consisting of Mike Jacobs,editor of the Grand Forks Herald (Agweek's parent publication), Agweek editorJulie Copeland and senior correspondent Juan Miguel Pedraza. Pedraza wrotethis week's editorial. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MEAT PRODUCTION SWELLED IN 1995By Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--Livestock producers know only too well what this year's hot grain markets mean: fatter feed and forage costs, leaner margins. The rise in corn prices, which has encouraged increased oilseed meal production, has not triggered a major selloff. Instead, meat production swelled in 1995. There's not shortage of meat these days. In fact, from the cattleman's standpoint, notes a Market Watch For Beef from the National Cattlemen's Assocation, supplies are burdensome. Increased beef production has led to record U.S. per capita meat consumption,but it hasn't been enough to turn the cattle market around from its yearlongslump. NCA economists say lower retail prices continue to encourage consumption, but the bad news is a cyclical increase in cattle and beef production will keep pressure on prices. However, though prices on the hoof are still $10 to $20 per cwt. below levels seen in 1993 and 1994, the market this fall has started to rebound. "Fed cattle supplies tightened considerably during early fall and pushed fedcattle prices into the upper $60 per cwt. by late November," notes James Mintert, a livestock economist at Kansas State University-Manhattan. Although cattle slaughter is expected to remain above last year's level through the endof the year, it looks like slaughter supplies will remain tight enough throughthe end of 1995 to support fed cattle prices in the mid- to upper- $60s. Mintert notes that breakeven prices for the last quarter of 1995 for 750- pound steers and 650-pound heifers are projected at $68.50 to $69.50, $2 to $4per cwt. more than live cattle are fetching at key terminal markets such asthe Texas Panhandle. The rise in average breakeven is due almost exclusivelyto this year's rapid runup in grain, oilseed meal and hay prices. Each $10 perton change in hay prices, Mintert says, changes feeding cost of gain by 55cents per cwt. As of Nov. 30, there were 8.7 million cattle on feed in the top seven producing states, up from the year-ago level of 8.63 million head, and still ahead of the five-year Nov. 30 average of 8.64 million head. On-feed inventories peaked in April at 8.99 million head, according to USDA. The government notes its quarterly view that the number of cattle on feed inthe top 13 states as of Oct. 31 was up 2 percent from a year earlier and isthe second largest for that date since 1975. Feedlot placement in Septemberrose sharply before declining slightly in October, but are likely to remainabove year-ago levels. Marketings are expected to continue to remain aboveyear-ago levels into 1996. USDA estimates 1995 total U.S. beef production at 25.124 billion pounds, upfrom 24.358 billion last year. A surge in beef exports will continue, which is a major positive influence onU.S. beef prices. U.S. beef exports this year hit a record 1.88 billion pounds,17 percent more than last year. More beef entering the domestic market would keep pushing prices down. Averageretail beef prices dropped 2 percent in 1995, according to USDA, and coulddrop another 2 percent in 1996. The average retail beef price in 1995 checkedin at $2.60 per pound, with sale prices averaging $2.40 per pound. Most cow-calf producers this year experienced their first sizable losses since1986, according to the National Cattlemen's Association. Most operators willbe unprofitable for another two or three years, and some will leave the business, the group says. END       Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE JUAN MIGUEL PEDRAZA COLUMNBy Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News RURAL STATES MUST INVEST IN AG RESEARCH, MARKETING Jan. 1--When she takesover as head of the Northern Crops Institute Jan. 15, Patricia Berglund has agood dea what she's getting into. The North Dakota State University scientistsees big times ahead for NCI and other research and marketing organizations ina post-farm bill world. There's no doubt about it -- as governments worldwide ratchet back farm spending, farm income will increasingly depend on the markets. What does that mean exactly and where do NCI and similar organizations fit in? Eventually every penny you earn from every bushel you grow will come from theprice you get at the elevator. Two things come to mind: One, the elevator cannot be your sole source of income. Two, to make more money on what you grow,you'll have to add value to it. On a community level, that means capturingmore of the market's dollars and retaining them at home, rather than exportingthat value to someone who'll cash it all in down the line in Minneapolis orChicago. NEW STATE OF MIND: As we shift our thinking from farm policy debates into thereal world of business and finance, the ag community must refocus its effortsat home. That means substantially more local support for organizations likeNCI, Minnesota's Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute and KansasState University's international grains institute. Here's where the going might get rough. Though we appreciate the efforts ofpolicy research groups like congressionally funded Food and Agriculture PolicyResearch Institute, in the real world where every dollar of profit must besweated from the market, their work will be increasingly marginalized. In other words, we're looking for real-world products and marketing ideas, notlong-range forecasts. The tough decision will come in apportioning a shrinkingpot of dollars among policy-oriented and market-oriented research facilities.As we look to our bottom lines, the market-oriented organizations shouldlikely win the lion's share of that money. BREAD AND BUTTER PRACTICALITY: We need economists to give us some sense aboutwhat we're doing, but the fact is over the past 50 years -- since economicforecasting first became popular in the post-Keynesian world -- economistshave racked up a dismal record for accuracy. When you're looking to butteryour bread, you need less think-tanking about policy and a lot more practicalideas about where the bread and butter are. That's great news for Berglund and NCI, and their colleagues at other market-oriented research and promotion organizations. But they won't get theirmeal tickets without a fight. Whatever else she's got on her plate, Berglund and other NCI-type leaders will have to set aside a significant chunkof time and energy to lobby local legislatures, farm groups and developmentauthorities to make sure that they can continue their vital work. After all, in a free market, everyone has to compete. And unless you can proveyou've got what it takes to make money, you're not likely to get much money. From our vantage point here, we see tremendous potential for NCI, for Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute, for the land grant colleges in our area, to materially contribute to the future success of the many agribusiness ventures that have yet to sprout. Whatever else we do with our money, we need to assure that Berglund and her colleagues nationwide get what they need to help us succeed. EDITOR'S NOTE: The opinions expressed in this column are those of the writer.They are not necessarily the views of Agweek, the Grand Forks Herald orKnight-Ridder. We welcome responses, comments, suggestions and letters to theeditor regarding Agweek columns. END           Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE PEOPLE COLUMNAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News FARGO, N.D.--Jan. 1--Nick Sinner, Fargo, N.D., was elected as the new president of the Red River Valley Sugarbeet Growers Association at their annual meeting in Fargo, N.D. Sinner farms in a family partnership near Casselton, N.D., and has served onthe board of directors since 1990. He succeeds Buzz Baldwin of St. Thomas, N.D., who served the maximum four years. Craig Halfmann, Stephen, Minn., was elected vice president. In addition tofarming, he owns a machinery manufacturing business and has served on the board of directors since 1990. Bruce Newhouse, Fisher, Minn., was elected secretary and Paul Mathiason, GrandForks, N.D., was elected treasurer. Mark Weber, Casselton, N.D., was re-elected executive director. Jamestown, N.D.John Broste and Karl Limvere were recently honored at the North Dakota Farmers Union convention. Broste is retiring from the Cenex board of directors, while Limvere is closingout his career as a longtime member of the NDFU staff. Limvere has worked for NDFU since 1968. He has served as senior policy analyst,radio director "The Family Farmer" radio show, as editor of the "Union Farmer"newspaper, legislative director and state secretary. Broste, a Wilton, N.D., farmer, was first elected to the NDFU board in 1966.Broste farms 960 acres on his farm north of Bismarck. FARGO, N.D. -- David Hilde, a longtime general agronomist at American CrystalSugar Co., has received the 1995 Distinguished Service Award from the RedRiver Valley Sugarbeet Growers, Minn-Dak Farmers Cooperative and Southern Minnesota Beet Sugar Cooperative's Research and Education Committee. The annual award goes to those persons who have made an outstanding life- longcontribution in agricultural research or general education on behalf of thesugar beet industry in the Red River Valley. Hilde has been an employee of American Crystal Sugar Co. for more than 30 years. Hilde's work in nitrogen management has increased sugar beet yields and improved quality. PROSEED HIRES ASSISTANT MANAGER: Stephen Keller, Harvey, N.D., will be representing Proseed of Harvey as an assistant district manager. Keller will team up with the Harvey Farmers Elevator to sell sunflowers and canola in the Harvey Farmers trade area and will assist the district sales manager for northwest North Dakota. AGRI-BUSINESS AWARD WINNERS: Honeymead Corp., Mankato, Minn., and the Minnesota affiliate of the American Heart Association were presented agribusiness awards at the Minnesota Soybean EXPO in Willmar. Honeymead has provided support and assistance, hosted visiting trade teams, helped develop new industrial uses and conducted soybean research and the American Heart Association of Minnesota affiliate has promoted the health benefits of soybeans. FCS ANNOUNCES PROMOTION: Randy Skjerven has been promoted to regional managerof the southern region of Farm Credit Services of Grand Forks, N.D. Asregional manager, he supervises the extension of agricultural financing andfinancial services in Grand Forks, Nelson, Trail, Steel, and Griggs countiesin North Dakota and Polk County in Minnesota, through offices in Grand Forks,Cooperstown, N.D., and Crookston, Minn. RAPESEED/CANOLA PRESIDENT ELECTED: Steve Keil, Conrad, Mont., was elected to aone-year term as president of the Pacific Northwest Rapeseed/Canola Association. Paul Tyler, Moore, Mont., was elected vice president. Re-elected to the board and representing Montana growers were: Jim Habernicht, Seedtec International Inc. in Bozeman, Mont.; and Steve Chambers of Montana Vegetable Oil and Feed in Great Falls, Mont. -- Agweek Staff and Wire Reports END          Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996PORK PRODUCERS HAVE RECORD YEAR IN '95By Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--America's pork producers cranked out a record 17.86 billion poundsthis year, a bit more than last year's 17.7, but well below the 18.5 billionpounds projected earlier this year. The numbers reflect lower market hog inventories this year, connected in partto the rapid inflation in feed costs. Cash break-even prices are projected toaverage in the low $40s per cwt. and are likely to continue rising this winter,according to USDA economist Steve Reed. But despite rising grain prices, Reed says, producers are on gradually expanding their herds again. The number sows farrowing from September through next February is projected to be about the same as a year earlier. However, a larger pig crop is likely during this period since more pigs are being saved per litter. The good news for pork, like in beef, is exports. Record pork exports lastyear had a significant impact on the industry's bottom line. Export sales of U.S. pork and pork variety meats in 1994 accounted foir about6 percent of the wholesale value of total U.S. pork production, up from 5.3percent in the early 1990s and six times what exports meant to pork industry'sbottom line a decade ago, according to the U.S. Meat Export Federation. A USMEF-sponsored study shows that hog prices in the United States benefitsubstantially from increased overseas demand for U.S. pork. Total export salesof pork last year added $3.32 per cwt. to the value of slaughter hogs, up froma 79-cent contribution 10 years ago. U.S. pork exports last year totaled a record 284,000 metric tons, or 626 million pounds, and are expected to stay on track this year. The industry's growth in foreign markets is just beginning, says USMEF's Philip Seng. "We see potential for U.S. pork export sales of more than $1.2 billion in theyear 2001, and that's just around the corner," he says. That foreign demand for pork has kept hog prices steady through the traditional early winter market decline, according to the S.D. Pork Producers Council. Top market hogs sold for up to $46.75 a cwt. in Sioux Falls last week,the highest price since October. It was more than $18 higher than the late-November drop in 1994 when top hogs in Sioux Falls sold for $28.50. "Historically, right after Thanksgiving is pretty much the seasonal low in ourmarkets," says Hurley farmer Steve Schmeichel, president of the South DakotaPork Producers Council. "The good news is that's been here and past." Schmeichel says an active export market and increased slaughter capacity atpacking houses helped keep pork moving at good prices. For the first time inmore than 40 years, the United States was a net exporter of pork this year. And pork exports should continue to increase along with the world population,said Tom Farnsworth of Madison, executive secretary of the pork producers. "When you look outside the United States, pork is the meat of choice," Farnsworth says. "We expect our pork exports to triple in the next three to four years." Editor's note: This story contains material from Agweek wire services. END!A$5?AW-PORK Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SOYBEAN PRICES STAGE YEAR-END RALLYBy Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--The soybean market is traditionally the most volatile of all the agcommodities except maybe pork bellies. This year, beans were the laggards, with production numbers limiting the rally. Eventually, though, the market caught up with the reality in field: U.S. output was shortened by moisture, though not as badly as other crops. USDA hasestimated the U.S. 1995 soybean harvest at 2.183 billion bushels, down 13 percent from 2.731 billion the previous year. That redution, not as dramatic as the plunge in corn output, set the stage fora big year-end rally linked to drought in Brazil, the world's No. 2 soybeanexporter. The result is that farmers are feeling bullish, holding onto whatthey've got and forcing the market to push bids up to pry loose availablesupplies. Some merchants believe farmers have set a near-term goal of $7.50 a bushel forsoybeans, with handful of diehard bulls calling for double-digit dollarfigures for soybeans by spring. Soybeans have traded above $10 a bushel onlyonce this century, following the discovery in the 1972 to '73 season of thePacific Ocean current warming system known as El Nino. USDA economists aren't that optimistic, but they do argue that strong domesticdemand and energetic overseas buying are supporting U.S. soybean prices.USDA's November supply-demand report pushed the average farmgate price ofsoybeans for 1995 to '96 at $6.30 to $7.30 per bushel, up from $5.45 perbushel last season and an average of $6.40 in 1993. The action in soybeans has pushed up prices all across the oilseed front, with sunflowers, safflower and canola all enjoying rallies this year. World vegetable oil prices continued relatively strong this year, though thecrush for meal following sharply increased feed grain prices has caused a short-term glut of vegoil in many markets. USDA says soymeal prices will average $197.50 to $222.50 per short ton (10cents to 11 cents per pound), well ahead of year-ago levels. Still, becausethe soymeal-to-corn price ratio remains favorable, and because livestock(especially pork and poultry) output is rising, the government sees modestgrowth in demand for meal. On the oil side, the equation is not as good largely because China, the bigbuyer in 1995, has sharply curtailed purchases this year. The Chinese haveplanted and harvested high-oil content crops, including soybeans, peanuts andsunflowers and they still have stocks left over from last year's vegoil importbinge, USDA says. END         Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE COWBOY LOGIC COLUMNBy Ryan M. Taylor, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News NEW YEAR'S FORTUNE: SAVINGS AND SATISFACTION AHEAD TOWNER, N.D.--Jan. 1--Iwas a little worried about my financial future after tallying up my year endpluses and minuses. The bottom of my tally sheet had a pretty sizable numberinside a pair of brackets -- brackets mean a big fat minus and denote red inkfor those of us without a color printer. But then I got a letter in the mail and all my financial fretting flew rightout the window. The folks at Fortune magazine were ready to lend me a hand andextend to me the tools necessary to make 1996 a banner year for both me and mybanker. I had no fear that this might be a letter they'd send to just any over- extended rancher in Smokey Lake (N.D.) Township. The letter said, "We're conducting a nationwide search to attract leading business professionals and key decision-makers, and your name was referred to us from the Towner City (N.D.) area." Wow! All those leading business professional to choose from in the entire U.S.of A. and little ol' me was referred by the Towner (population 669) City area!It's not often that us Towner suburbanites in Smokey Lake Township get referrals from the big wigs in the Towner City area. Not for everybody This offer definitely wasn't for just any Jack out in the countryside. Theenvelope said, "The enclosed Professional Discount Voucher is for the expressuse of the person named herein and is nontransferable." The publisher had authorized Brian Wolfe, consumer marketing director, to giveme 74 percent off the newsstand price, send me a free guide full of breakthrough ideas and unconventional tactics, and guarantee my satisfaction because of my "status as a business professional" (in the Towner City area). I could see that making that kind of offer to the general public would probably lose fortune's for Fortune magazine. But cutting someone like myself in on the deal made a lot of sense. I'm sure their advertisers would be phoning in almost immediately and increasing their promotional budget with them once the big orders started rolling in from the Taylor Ranch. Brian said Fortune would help me grow my business (heavier calves and tallergrass), motivate my staff (optimistic cows and horses chomping at the bit,ready to work), and maintain my edge (not settling to be just another brokecattleman, but be the best damn broke cattleman there is). What the heck Even with the professional rate, I had second thoughts about spending any money on anything, what with the cattle market down in the basement and all. You can't fall for every smooth talking salesman whose snake oil, or magazine subscription, will cure all ills. But, then again, like Oscar Wilde said, a cynic is someone who knows the priceof everything and the value of nothing. So, without cynicism, the new year brings new optimism, new hope and, mostimportantly, a new operating loan. A professionally discounted Fortune magazine subscription could be the first chip off the old 1996 borrowed capital block. Besides, I spotted the little box to check that said "Bill me later." It's apopular option for us leading business professionals in the Towner City area. END!A$5?AW-TAYLOR-COL Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996USDA CONSERVATION ALLOCATIONS DISAPPOINT NORTHERN PLAINS FARMERSBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--As expected, northern Plains farmers weren't allocated as many acresas they applied for in the 13th Conservation Reserve Program signup. In NorthDakota, there were 395 contracts awarded, 115 fewer than than for which theyhad applied. North Dakota farmers contracted 35,266 acres, about 7,000 fewer than for which they had applied. The average cash rental rate of the North Dakota contracts was $26.43 per acre, $12.07 less than the previous average cash rental rate per acre. Total annual cash rental payments in North Dakota for the 13th signup is $932,080. Minnesota farmers contracted 18,097 acres in the latest signup, 15,000 fewerthan for which they had applied. There were 874 contracts awarded in Minnesota,509 fewer than for which farmers had bid. The average rental rate in Minnesotawas $68.64 per acre, $13.20 higher than the previous average cash rental rateper acre. The total annual rental payment for the latest signup is $1.2million. In South Dakota, 214 contracts were awarded, 262 fewer than for which farmershad bid. South Dakota farmers contracted 16,539 acres in CRP, about 14,000fewer than for which they had applied. The average rental rate per acre is$31.96, $9.52 less than the previous average rental rate. Total annual rentalpayment for the latest signup is $528,590. Montana farmers were awarded 446 contracts, 228 fewer than for which they hadbid. Total acreage contracted was 75,148. Montana farmers had bids for 106,040acres. The avearge rental rate was $30.52, $6.72 per acre less than theprevious average rental rate. The total annual rental payment for the signupis $2.3 million. Nationwide, 683,390 acres were contracted in the latest signup, about 500,000fewer than for which farmers had bid. The total number of contracts awardedwas 13,855, 10,586 fewer than for which they had bid. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996WEATHER HAMPERED FALL POTATO HARVEST IN PARTS OF MINNESOTA, NORTH DAKOTAAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--Weather conditions varied in North Dakota and Minnesota producing record crops in some areas and below average crops in other areas. The 1995 fall potato harvest was hampered, especially in northwestern Minnesota and parts of North Dakota by rain and sloppy fields. The weather kept some growers harvesting late into the fall, while others had to abandon fields. Storage has also been a problem for growers who may have harvested late blightinfected potatoes. Those potatoes are more susceptible to diseases like softrot that can cause potatoes to breakdown in storage. Late blight was especially prevalent in irrigated potatoes. Growers willcontinue to closely monitor storage bins to try to head off any problems. Growing conditions in North Dakota throughout the year weren't good enough tomatch the record breaking yields harvested in 1994. Some growers blamed hot temperatures in June and too much rain in July for thesmaller yields. Yields averaged 210 hundredweight per acre in 1995, down from the record 235cwt. per acre harvested in 1994. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, North Dakota production totaled 25.4 million hundred pound bags of potatoes in 1995, compared to 28.2 million cwt. the previous year. North Dakota growers harvested 121,000 acres in 1995, compared to 120,000 acres the previous year. Record breaking year But the reverse occured in Minnesota where growers harvested record yields ontheir summer and fall crops in 1995. Minnesota growers dug up record yields in 1995 averaging 270 cwt. per acre,which was slightly higher than the previous record of 269 cwt. per acre set in1994, according to USDA. Minnesota growers produced 20.8 million cwt. in 1995,compared to 20 million cwt. the previous year. Harvested acreage in Minnesotawas pegged at 77,000 acres, up from 74,600 acres in 1994. Total U.S. fall and summer potato production was down in 1995 at 402 millioncwt., compared to 426 million cwt. produced in 1994. Yields averaged 334 cwt.per acre, down from 352 cwt. per acre the previous year. The smaller U.S. crop has kept Red River Valley prices higher in 1995 than theprevious year. According to USDA's Market News, prices for No. 1 size A washed round red potatoes are at $8.50 to $9 per cwt., compared to $7 to $7.50 per cwt. for thesame time period time in 1994. -- Agweek Staff and Wire Reports END        Back to Headline List WT02-B40-8IA074-000493-B045-109http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb07.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013005 text/html 163322HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:27:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:37 GMTContent-length: 163134Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb07.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 'SIGNIFICANT ENFORCEMENT HAMMER' IS NEEDED TO BACK UP HOUSE COMMITTEE FOOD ADDITIVE REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS: McINTOSH AND SOUDER (516 words) WEBB TECHNICAL GROUP TAKES FSIS CONTRACT DISPUTE TO SEN. HELMS (347 words) USDA 'WHOLESOMENESS' SEAL SHOULD BE DROPPED, WARNING LABEL ADDED TO CURED MEATS, GROUPS SAY IN PETITION TO FSIS (789 words) MOLD CONTENT OF SEVERAL TYPES OF COMMERCIAL POPCORN DETERMINED (706 words) FDA PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION DESCRIBED IN POLICY STATEMENT (322 words) NCTR SCIENCE BOARD TO MEET FOR SITE VISIT REPORT, RESOURCE DISCUSSIONS (163 words) HEN STRAIN AFFECTS HOW DIET CHANGES LIPIDS IN POULTRY PRODUCTS (551 words) ACSH WANTS DELANEY REPLACED WITH FLEXIBL NEW REGULATORY PROCESS (439 words) CSPI RAISES NEW ISSUES WITH OLESTRA FOOD ADDITIVE PETITION (1327 words) CONSUMER COMMENTS OPPOSING APPROVAL FLOOD OLESTRA FILE (1720 words) PETITION NEEDED TO EXPAND ENERGY SOURCES IN POULTRY FEED IRRADIATION RULE: FDA (557 words) AFDO FLOATS PROPOSED FOOD CODE CHANGES TO MEMBERS (1337 words) FSIS IDENTIFIES REFORMS NEEDED BEFORE HACCP IMPLEMENTATION (769 words) IBP COMPLAINS OF RED MEAT, POULTRY EQUITY ISSUES AT HACCP MEETINGS (579 words) L. MONOCYTOGENES, B. CEREUS CONTAMINATION PROMPT WARNINGS TO WHITEFISH, PEDIATRIC MEDICAL FOOD MANUFACTURERS (2853 words) SINGLE PETITION PROCESS FOR ADDITIVES TO BE USED ON MEAT OR POULTRY PROPOSED BY FSIS, FDA (2183 words) NU-TECH POULTRY SYSTEM RESULTS IN LESS VISIBLE CONTAMINATION BUT SIMILAR MICRO COUNTS, FSIS SAYS (1013 words) DRAFT NUTRITION ACTION PLAN URGES HACCP, FOOD CODE ADOPTION (1025 words) CALIFORNIA MARKET OWNERS FINED FOR SELLING, MISBRANDING MEAT ADULTERATED WITH SODIUM SULFITE (322 words) FDA CLEARS MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE FOR USE IN CHICKEN, TURKEY FEED (200 words) POLYMALEIC ACID AND ITS SODIUM SALT CLEARED FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF BEET AND CANE SUGAR JUICE, LIQUOR (182 words) CDC FOODBORNE DISEASE INVESTIGATION EFFORTS CRIPPLED BY BUDGET STALEMATE (510 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES VIRTUALLY UNCHANGED FROM ADVISORY PANEL'S RECOMMENDATIONS (2395 words) FUTURE FSIS INSPECTION SYSTEM TO BE DEVELOPED BEGINNING WITH FEDERAL REGISTER NOTICE, PUBLIC MEETING: TAYLOR (1492 words) BRIEF NOTES (1356 words) CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996'SIGNIFICANT ENFORCEMENT HAMMER' IS NEEDED TO BACK UP HOUSE COMMITTEE FOOD ADDITIVE REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS:  McINTOSH AND SOUDERThe enforcement mechanisms for the recommendations in "The FDA Food Additive Review Process:  Backlog and Failure to Observe Statutory Deadline," the Government Reform and Oversight Committee's recent report, are inadequate, committee members Rep. David McIntosh (R-Ind.) and Rep. Mark Souder (R-Ind.) said in "additional views" printed with the report  (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 41).Both McIntosh and Souder are freshman legislators; McIntosh has been active in the House efforts to enact regulatory reform legislation and repeal the Delaney clause (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 20, Page 16)."Currently, the Food and Drug Administration's delay in approving food additives is caused by inertia within the agency," McIntosh and Souder noted, adding:  "While that inertia can be somewhat alleviated through instructions to do better, I am convinced that it cannot be eliminated without a significant enforcement hammer.   I am particularly concerned that the recommendations include a relaxation of the statutory deadline for a decision on a food additive from 180 to 360 days.  While relaxing the statutory deadline makes some sense, it also makes sense to transform it into a meaningful one."If the time frames in the report were expected to be 360 days, then after a brief period -- 90 days perhaps  -- the statute should provide FDA with three options, the Indiana representatives said.  Those options are:  (1)  issue a regulation approving the use of the additive; (2) disapprove the use of the additive, but only if FDA can demonstrate that an additive has not been found to be safe; or (3) if FDA fails to do either, the additive is deemed to be approved."In this way, FDA is provided with an incentive to engage in a real cost/benefit analysis in the allocation of its resources," they added, noting:  "... unless hammers such as this one are incorporated into the regulatory schemes we have developed, we are destined to see agencies fail to meet statutory deadlines and justify their failures with claims of too much work and too few resources."Six Report Recommendations Include Elimination of Pending Petitions' Backlog within One YearThe report's six recommendations were:  -- Congress should amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act review period for food additive petitions from 180 to 360 days for the most scientifically complex reviews, and the deadline should be strictly observed by FDA;  FDA should recognize that the approval of useful and safe new products can be as important to the public health as preventing the marketing of harmful or ineffective products; FDA should eliminate the backlog of pending food additive petitions within one year by reallocating the necessary agency resources; FDA should utilize outside expertise in its evaluation of food additive petitions but retain authority for petition approval; the relevance of the Delaney clause should be studied in view of modern scientific standards so that better distinctions can be made between nominal hazards and actual risks, and FDA should amend the review process to prohibit anonymous submission of data or comments.  ((6FCN 4602, 14 pages, $8)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WEBB TECHNICAL GROUP TAKES FSIS CONTRACT DISPUTE TO SEN. HELMS Raleigh-based Webb Technical Group, Inc. urged North Carolina Sen. Jesse Helms (R) to step in and prevent the Food Safety and Inspection Service from cancelling a meat and poultry analysis contract (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 28, Page 26).  The firm alleges that FSIS made the decision without conducting the necessary cost-benefit analysis.Webb said the contract cancellation would result in the loss of 17 jobs, waste hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars, and threaten meat and poultry safety.  "It has been suggested that the real savings planned by FSIS is to eliminate this work, which would further violate the intent of Congress to assure a safe and wholesome food supply for U.S. consumers," Board Chairman Neil Webb said in a recent letter to Helms."Either FSIS has a hidden agenda, or they just don't know what they are doing," Webb stated.  "Either way, we would appreciate some help in getting to the bottom of this."According to the firm, Webb has conducted residue and compositional testing for FSIS for the past 13 years -- specifically, monitoring the meat supply for economic fraud and verifying the safety of domestic and imported meat products.  On July 25, 1995, Webb was advised that FSIS would not renew the contract "due to change in the program requirements."  Webb said it found out that FSIS had planned to analyze all meat and poultry food chemistry samples in its Technical Services laboratories beginning next fiscal year.Webb said the government never proved that such a decision would be fiscally sound.  In October, FSIS responded that it had not violated procurement regulations when it dropped the contract, and that FSIS would be using new technology and upgrading equipment at its own laboratories to increase efficiency.  Webb argued that USDA guidelines barred the North Carolina firm from using new alternate technologies. Webb asked for a meeting with Helms' staff on the issue, and asked the senator to contact USDA Secretary Dan Glickman "to get to the bottom of the situation."  ((6FCN 4604, 19 pages, $9)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996USDA 'WHOLESOMENESS' SEAL SHOULD BE DROPPED, WARNING LABEL ADDED TO CURED MEATS, GROUPS SAY IN PETITION TO FSISJeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends and the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine have filed a petition with USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service seeking removal of the "wholesomeness" seal, stronger language on safe handling labels and a warning label on cured meat products.USDA received the petition Oct. 26 but did not place it on file in the hearing clerk's office until recently.  The groups had been considering suing USDA to stop use of the "wholesomeness" seal; the petition cites legal precedents and the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) as the basis for the groups' claims (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 31, Page 2).The petition, written by FET's Theodore Waugh and the Physicians Committee's Andrew Nicholson, cites the risk to consumers from E. coli O157:H7 as the basis for the groups' requests.  "The risk of serious permanent physical injury and death, USDA's inability to safeguard the meat supply and the lack of medical preparedness indicate both the seriousness and extent of the E. coli problem," the petition said, adding, "Until effective control measures are developed to eliminate E. coli contamination, USDA needs to take further actions to protect consumers and conform with its statutory obligations."The petitioners misstated the scope of USDA's declaration that E. coli O157:H7 was an adulterant.  The USDA declaration applied only to raw ground beef; the petition said that "USDA has determined that E. coli-contaminated meats are 'adulterated.'"The petition quoted the FMIA as saying, "It is essential in the public interest that the health and welfare of consumers be protected by assuring that meat and meat food products distributed to them are wholesome, not adulterated ... Unwholesome, adulterated and/or misbranded meat and meat food products ... result in ... injury to consumers.""Thus, according to USDA's own regulations, only meats lacking E. coli contamination can be labeled 'Inspected and Passed,'" the petition said, adding, "Because the FMIA prohibits misleading and false labeling, the USDA must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from meat products until it can conclusively determine that the meat is uncontaminated with the adulterant E. coli."Nicholson and Waugh said that USDA's baseline survey of steers and heifers found that "approximately 15% of all raw beef samples contain one or more species of pathogens " (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Feb. 7, 1994, Page 60).  They also cited a Sept. 22 ABC News "20/20" show that quoted "USDA doctors" as saying that "probably one out of every thousand hamburgers contains E. coli bacteria."The petition also said that USDA has admitted its sampling program for E. coli O157:H7 in raw ground beef "cannot eliminate E. coli from the food supply."Safe Handling Labels Inadequate, Cured Meats Should Have Warning Labels, Groups Say"It is clear the number of outbreaks has remained high or continued to grow even with USDA's safe care and handling labels," the groups said, adding, "In light of the continuing number of E. coli outbreaks, it is necessary for USDA to improve the current safe handling labels."  The labels should state the consequences of undercooking, the petition said, explaining:"How can consumers adapt their behavior to meet the seriousness of the health risk when they are uninformed of the potential consequences?  For all a purchaser knows, the only illness resulting from contamination is an upset stomach.  If individuals knew that kidney failure and death were potential side effects, they would take the warnings with the degree of seriousness that the hazard requires."The petitioners recommended a new safe handling label that would begin:  "WARNING: This product may contain E. coli bacteria, which can cause serious illness, including:  death, strokes, seizures, bloody diarrhea, renal failure, red blood cell destruction."  Anyone suffering from abdominal cramps or diarrhea a few days after consumption should consult a physician immediately, the label would recommend, as well as stating that the product should be cooked until no red color remains, to a minimum temperature of 155 F.  The labels should be bigger and in larger type than the current ones, the petitioners said.They called for a similar warning for cured meat products, noting that "it has become clear that E. coli contamination can survive the curing process. ... In light of this potential danger, USDA should warn consumers of cured meat's potential dangers, and at the very least, the agency must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from cured meat products until it can be certain that the meat is not adulterated with E. coli.""If USDA ignores this request, the agency will have acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in violation of the Administrative Procedures Act," the petitioners said.  ((6FCN 4605, 16 pages, $8)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MOLD CONTENT OF SEVERAL TYPES OF COMMERCIAL POPCORN DETERMINEDNoting a general lack of information on molds in popcorn, researchers undertook a study of the mold content of popcorn in commercial channels, reporting their findings in the September 1995 issue of the Journal of Food Protection.Sarath Katta and colleagues, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebr., determined the internal mold infection levels of various microwave and nonmicrowave popcorn by direct plating of kernels on Dichloran-rose bengal-chloramphenicol agar (DRBC), Dichloran-18% glycerol agar (DG-18), Aspergillus flavus/parasiciticus agar (AFPA) and Czapek's iprodione agar (CZID).The total percentage of mold-infected kernels was low in microwave yellow popcorn (5.9%) and nonmicrowave yellow popcorn (7.3%), but somewhat higher in specialty popcorn (13.6%) and nonmicrowave white popcorn (15.1%), according to the report.Of the molds found, Fusarium species predominated in the microwave yellow popcorn (54.2%) and nonmicrowave white popcorn (66.2%), whereas Aspergillus species predominated in the nonmicrowave yellow popcorn (43.8%) and specialty popcorn (52.9%).  Negligible amounts of Aspergillus flavus-parasiticus molds were found in the samples evaluated.No significant differences were found among media in enumerating total mold infection levels.  DG-18 was effective in enumerating Aspergillus species, but ineffective for Fusarium species, the researchers reported.  They recommended that either AFPA or CZID be used to determine the total percentage of mold infection levels in popcorn.Effects of Storage Conditions on Popcorn Mold Content AssessedAlso in the same issue, Katta and Lloyd Bullerman, also of the University of Nebraska, reported their findings on a study of the effects of high temperature and relative humidity, as well as packaging, on the mold content and quality of stored popcorn.White and yellow popcorn were stored in different containers at high temperature (35 C) and high relative humidity (85%) for three months.  Gradual decreases in popping volumes with the lengthening of storage time were observed in both white and yellow popcorn, the researchers reported.Few differences were found in total infection levels up to 60 days of storage, except that the Aspergillus glaucus group became established in place of field fungi.  A gradual increase in mold infection levels was then observed during the remaining 30 days of storage.  Visible mold growth was also observed on the tops of some kernels by the end of storage studies, according to the report.Internal mold infection in white popcorn stored in an open container was lower (18.3%) than in white popcorn stored in a closed plastic bag (75%) and closed plastic jar (85.3%), whereas the internal mold infection in yellow popcorn stored in an open container was higher (23.3%) than in yellow popcorn stored in a closed plastic bag (6.3%) and closed plastic jar (2.6%), the report stated.Mycoflora of Various Cereal Flakes DeterminedGerman researchers examined 12 brands of cereal flakes for their qualitative and quantitative mold contamination, reporting their findings in the July 1995 issue of the same journal.M. Weidenborner and B. Kunz, of the Universitat Bonn, in Bonn, Germany, reported higher fungal counts in two wheat and one oat flake samples, while the remaining brands showed minor contamination rates.The fungal flora consisted of 64 different species belonging to 23 fungal genera, with fungi of the Eurotium, Aspergillus and Penicillium predominant in most samples, according to the report.To obtain a comprehensive evaluation, the mycoflora of foodstuffs should be investigated on at least three different media, the researchers concluded.Simplified Method for Aflatoxin Extraction From Peanuts ReportedAlso in the same issue, researchers reported a simplified method for extraction of aflatoxin from peanut meal and kernels by CO2-methanol, using a highly pressurized fluid extraction process.Pei-Yin Wu, Da Yeh Institute of Technology, Changhwa, Taiwan, and Robin Chiou, National Chiayi Institute of Agriculture, Chiayi, Taiwan, used peanut kernels infected with Aspergillus parasiticus after milling into meals as a naturally contaminated material for investigating the efficacy of supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) as a technique for removing aflatoxin.  Methanol solutions (60% and 100%) were used to modify the properties of the extraction media, and extraction parameters such as pressure, methanol concentration, methanol/peanut meal ratio and holding time were extensively investigated.Results using this technique were comparable to those obtained using a commercialized immunochemical method, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FDA PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION DESCRIBED IN POLICY STATEMENTIn response to inquiries concerning its use of confidential information in rulemaking, the Food and Drug Administration Dec. 27 published a "Statement of Procedures for Handling Confidential Information in Rulemaking."  The cigarette and smokeless tobacco companies questioned FDA policy following the agency's August 1995 publication of a proposed rule concerning regulation of nicotine-containing cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products.  Noting that the statement was developed to address this industry's specific concerns, the agency said the procedures described reflect docket management procedures "long used" by FDA in rulemaking.    According to the statement, FDA does not make available trade secret information, confidential commercial information or other information "whose disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy."  In addition, no information that would "reveal the identity of confidential sources" would be placed into a public docket, the agency noted.  While trying to assure that "clearly proprietary information" is not "unwittingly made available," FDA advised that information submitted to a public docket does not carry a "reasonable expectation of confidentiality."  The agency contends it is under "no legal obligation" to closely examine submitted documents to determine whether they "may contain proprietary information."  FDA is aware, however, of the "sensitivity and importance" of such information, and has "long followed" certain procedures to try to ensure that "clearly proprietary information" is not made available, the agency said, noting that it scans documents for "obvious trade secrets or personal privacy information."  According to the statement, information marked "confidential" is referred to the appropriate center's Freedom of Information Act officers, FDA added, for a determination as to whether it will be exempt under the act from public disclosure.  Before any documents containing such "confidential" information are placed on public record, the appropriate center consults with the person(s) who submitted the documents as to whether it was intended that the document be made available to the public, the agency said.    Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NCTR SCIENCE BOARD TO MEET  FOR SITE VISIT REPORT, RESOURCE DISCUSSIONS The Food and Drug Administration announced Dec. 29, 1995 that a meeting of the Science Advisory Board to the National Center for Toxicological Research will be held Jan. 29 and Jan. 30 at NCTR in Jefferson, Ark.  At the meeting, the board will be given a progress report on a recommendation resulting from its Site Visit Team Report on NCTR's Analytical Methods Development program.  In addition, a presentation will be made and the board will be asked to review the center's integration of the eight programs the board has visited.  According to the FDA notice, the presentation will include a discussion of the resources allocated to these programs, as well as their relation to NCTR's strategic vision and goals.  The closed portion of the board's meeting will focus on "personal information" concerning individuals involved with NCTR's research programs, disclosure of which would constitute a "clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy," FDA noted.  For additional information, contact Ronald Coene, NCTR, 301-443-3155.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996HEN STRAIN AFFECTS HOW DIET CHANGES LIPIDS IN POULTRY PRODUCTSFatty acid metabolism may vary between strains of laying hens, according to researchers, who observed differences in how several strains incorporated a specific polyunsaturated acid from their diets.  But the differences were relatively small, and in general, PUFA in the diet produced marked increases in PUFA in the eggs and meat of the birds, according to the researchers' report in the October 1995 issue of the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.Geetha Cherian and colleagues, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, studied the effects of feeding diets high or low in alpha-linolenic acid on the lipid and fatty acid composition of the liver and subdermal fat or on products such as eggs, white meat and dark meat of six different strains of laying hens.The researchers noted that increasing the polyunsaturated to saturated fatty acid ratio of egg yolk or tissue lipids would make poultry products more acceptable to health-conscious consumers.Natural Antioxidants as Vegetable Oil Preservatives InvestigatedAlso in the same issue, Spanish researchers reported on their investigation into how some naturally formed oxidized lipid/amino acid reaction products are able to protect bulk vegetable oils against oxidation.Manuel Alaiz and colleagues, Instituto de la Grasa, CSIC, Seville, Spain, undertook a study to determine if the reaction products are able to stop or slow a peroxidative process initiated in a vegetable oil.Their findings suggest that some of the reaction products might be playing an antioxidative role in foods by delaying the peroxidative process at the same time that they are being produced, according to the report.  The researchers noted that special attention has been given to natural antioxidants in recent years because of the possible, but not yet proven, hazardous effects of synthetic antioxidants.Stability of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Egg Powder AssessedHigh spray-drying temperatures led to a higher loss of many polyunsaturated fatty acids in egg powder, according to a report in the August 1995 issue of the same journal.Francesc Guardiola and colleagues, University of Barcelona and CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, studied the influence of different factors, including spray-drying temperature, kind of antioxidant, antioxidant concentration and packing conditions on PUFA losses in egg powder stored for 10 months.Storage of egg powder under vacuum away from light effectively prevents the loss of many PUFA, according to the researchers, who also reported that antioxidants may be slightly effective in preventing PUFA losses under highly oxidative conditions.The researchers recommended that spray-dried egg yolk not be used as a long-chain PUFA source for enriching weaning foods, since oxidized fatty acids "lose their essentiality and present several harmful biological effects."Hydrolysis Seen as Major Cause of Deterioration in Frozen TroutAlso in the same issue, Swedish researchers reported that hydrolysis is the major cause of lipid deterioration in frozen farmed rainbow trout fillets.Torbjorn Ingemansson and colleagues, SIK-The Swedish Institute for Food Research, Goteborg, and Karlshamns LipidTeknik, Stockholm, Sweden, studied the extent of lipid hydrolysis and oxidation in the muscle tissue of frozen rainbow trout to elucidate the effects of acclimatization temperature and storage time on these mechanisms, using multivariate statistical methods.Lower water temperature during acclimatization (5 C rather than 12 C) resulted in reduced lipid stability during frozen storage, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ACSH WANTS DELANEY REPLACED WITH FLEXIBL  NEW REGULATORY PROCESSThe American Council on Science and Health called on Congress to repeal the Delaney clause, so that regulatory agencies would be free to balance risks against benefits and use a more appropriate weight of evidence test in regulating food additive risks.In a new booklet, "Modernize Our Food Safety Laws:  Delete the Delaney Clause," ACSH argued that the zero-risk standard has been a "scientifically indefensible double standard," and that public interest groups who support the measure would "lose power" if the measure were repealed."Strict enforcement will endanger the food supply, raising prices and making it even harder for Americans to consume the very fruits and vegetables that have been linked to reduced cancer rates and improved health," warned Elizabeth Whelan, president of ACSH.The New York City-based group said a replacement to the Delaney clause should provide a flexible regulatory process, not a specific standard.  As part of the new process, tumors or cancers should not be the sole or even primary regulatory concern, ACSH said, explaining:  "Regulators should consider a broad range of possible health risks, including cancer."It may be necessary to legislate that regulators cannot use worst-case assumptions in calculating risk except under extraordinary circumstances, the group said.  "By piling worst-case assumption upon worst-case assumption, regulators easily can overestimate risks by multiples of millions," the report said.Regulators should take into account negative and "no effect" test results as well as positive results, the report recommended, noting that current law only allows regulators to consider the positive development of tumors.Each substance should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and human exposure and epidemiology should be taken into account, it added.  "A substance that is toxic to some animals is not necessarily toxic to humans, and vice versa," the report said.Such an approach would be far from perfect, the group acknowledged, adding:  "But it would come much closer to scientific honesty and prioritization of risks than what we have now or would be likely to get from any bright-line approach."The report also reviews past applications of the Delaney clause, the Environmental Protection Agency's reform efforts, "mouse terrorism," and the politics of Delaney repeal.  The group rejected the latest attempt to override Delaney with an amendment by Sen. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa) to S 343, which was one of the regulatory reform measures.  "It leaves in place the Delaney clause and does not directly amend it, perhaps inviting litigation," ACSH said.  Also, the group said the amendment would have set a new standard for barring products on account of risk, regardless of its benefits.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CSPI RAISES NEW ISSUES WITH OLESTRA FOOD ADDITIVE PETITIONThe Center for Science in the Public Interest Jan. 2 alerted the Food and Drug Administration to new research showing beta-carotene's cancer-fighting ability and to the new Dietary Guidelines for Americans' recommendations as reasons to deny the olestra food additive petition.CSPI said the latest study by Harinder Garewal of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Tucson involved giving 50 patients a daily dose of 60 mg of beta-carotene for six months.  Unpublished results found 26 (52%) patients responded to beta-carotene, with their oral leukoplakia diminishing, CSPI reported. "The result is similar to that found in an earlier study by Garewal that used half as much beta-carotene," CSPI Executive Director Michael Jacobson said.  Garewal said his subjects were not deficient in vitamin A.According to CSPI, intervention trials have demonstrated that beta-carotenoid causes regression of oral leukoplakia, which is believed to be a precursor of oral cancer.  FDA has stated that a critical issue regarding olestra is whether carotenoids, blood levels of which are depleted by olestra, serve any biological purpose in humans other than beta-carotene's role as a provitamin A.CSPI's Jacobson also took the opportunity to point to the newly released Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which emphasize the importance of carotenoids as cancer-fighters, as inconsistent with FDA's action in considering an additive that would reduce carotenoid absorption from foods.Dietary Guidelines Special Mention Of Beta-Carotene CitedA sister agency in the Department of Health and Human Services and the U.S. Department of Agriculture deemed carotenoids of such importance that a special box lists "Some Good Sources of Carotenoids," Jacobson said."With that level of recognition that carotenoids appear to offer health benefits, it would be extra ironic if the FDA approves carotenoid-depleting olestra just weeks after release of the new federal nutrition policy," Jacobson told FDA.  The agency is expected to issue a regulation on olestra in the next month  Meanwhile, CSPI submitted lengthy comments to the olestra petition Dec. 21 after the group convinced the agency to extend the comment deadline (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 13).  CSPI had asked for the deadline extension based on two new studies:  a study on water content of stools, and a large home-use study of olestra snacks.  CFSAN was aware of the home-use study but chose to ignore it, said FDA Deputy Commissioner for Policy William Schultz in a Dec. 8 letter.  But the agency agreed to permit CSPI to submit comments on the newly available stool water content data.  CSPI filed its comments focusing on olestra's depletion of carotenoids and gastrointestinal disturbances after reviewing the transcript of the November Food Advisory Committee meeting.Failure to Give Advisory Committee Full Review of Carotenoid Data HitCSPI argued that the views of Procter & Gamble and "its few hired experts on carotenoids" were not consistent with experts "who share our concerns about the likely adverse impact on health of depletion of carotenoids, and experts who have expressed their concern about the likely adverse impact on public health of allowing olestra onto the market."The advocacy group reiterated charges that CFSAN staff had failed to provide the working group and Food Advisory Committee with data needed for an informed decision on carotenoid's role in health protection."We disagree strongly with the CFSAN staff's decision not to provide committee members and the Commissioner with a full review of data on carotenoids, since several members of the working group and Food Advisory Committee stated that they found the question of carotenoids to be the most difficult one they faced, and all data bearing on the health effects of carotenoids should have been provided to the panels."  The group added, "We trust that the in vitro, animal, clinical, epidemiological, and intervention-trial data will be reviewed by the Commissioner when he is considering what action he will take regarding olestra." CSPI also suggested that CFSAN staff not carry out the review, "given that staff's inadequate treatment of those important research data."The group found CFSAN's report on olestra "completely ignored a large and growing body" of research on the role of carotenoids in protecting health.  Included was a study appearing in the Dec. 6, 1995, issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute on the link to consuming lycopene-rich tomato products and the reduced risk of prostate cancer (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 11, Page 10)."While that study did not prove that lycopene protects against prostate cancer, the findings are very important in evaluating olestra, because lycopene is the most lipophilic carotenoid and the carotenoid most severely depleted by olestra and by the sucrose polyester used in the recent Dutch study," CSPI commented, adding:  "Since lycopene is abundant in tomatoes, it is of obvious concern that savory snacks containing olestra may well be eaten with tomato-containing meals."CSPI reiterated charges that carotenoid levels are likely to be reduced significantly by olestra, despite claims by Procter & Gamble, and that between-meal consumption of olestra would have some impact on carotenoids.On the issue of gastrointestinal disturbances, CSPI charged members of a working group on olestra and the Food Advisory Committee with defining "out of existence the diarrhea caused by olestra."  The comments added, "There was very little discussion of the numerous other gastrointestinal disturbances associated with consumption of olestra, and, since diarrhea was likely the most serious of the symptoms, by concluding that olestra did not cause diarrhea, it then became fairly simple for the panels to reach a conclusion of 'no harm.'"The group concluded that FDA should deny the olestra petition because evidence suggests that "depletion of carotenoids presents a clear risk of harm to public health, and there is absolutely no way that a conclusion can be drawn that there would be a 'reasonable certainty of no harm' if carotenoid absorption was reduced by olestra."CSPI also took aim at the legal burden of proof that the group said has been inappropriately switched to government authorities who must prove olestra is harmful.  "Those people heard the evidence demonstrating that olestra reduces serum levels of carotenoids and the evidence that carotenoids reduce risks of cancer, heart disease and macular degeneration, yet because there was not proof that carotenoids are beneficial, many of them said that olestra is safe." According to the group, the lucky consumers will be those who experience gastrointestinal problems once olestra foods become available and stop eating such foods, so "their carotenoid intake would no longer be threatened."Procter & Gamble Questions APHA Olestra ReviewOn a related note, Procter & Gamble criticized the American Public Health Association's conclusions on the pending olestra petition (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 4, Page 19) in a Nov. 28 letter to APHA Executive Director Fernando Trevino.  "Quite frankly, the November 14 letter from APHA was a surprise to us, and it is unfortunate that APHA has taken a position on olestra's use in snack foods without a full appreciation of the data," the petitioner said.The company said APHA seemed to have little interest in olestra before P&G had an opportunity to provide a "cursory one-hour overview" of the olestra research program to an APHA health protection analyst.  "A one-hour overview is not a sufficient basis on which to judge the more than 150,000 pages of research data that comprise the olestra food additive petition," the firm said.  Comprehensive clinical testing answered key concerns about the long-term public health impact of olestra snack foods, said the firm, including confirmed safety in people who are more likely to eat lower fat foods than the average person and safety in people with gastrointestinal diseases.  Procter & Gamble responded to APHA's concerns in the 13-page letter.Procter & Gamble's Christopher Hassall offered to meet with APHA to review the research in detail. ((6FCN 4603, 103 pages, $30)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CONSUMER COMMENTS OPPOSING APPROVAL  FLOOD OLESTRA FILEMore than 700 comments have filled the olestra file at FDA's dockets management branch, the vast majority from consumers urging the agency not to approve the fat substitute.While many of the comments were form letters inspired by the Center for Science in the Public Interest's campaign to keep olestra out of the food supply (See preceding story), others were generated by press reports of the four-day FDA Food Advisory  Committee meeting in November held by FDA to consider the data on olestra (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS,  Nov. 20, Pages 17 and 31, and Nov. 27, Page 3).  The comment period on the petition ended Dec. 21.A letter from Terry and Joanie Davis of Eagan, Minn., for example, cited a wire service story of the meeting, asking FDA, "Why allow the sale of a food product that will increase the likelihood of sickness for some and increase health care costs for all?"They noted that a suggested warning label should be required to be printed "in no less than 10 point font for the sight impaired," but added, "Unfortunately, this won't help the unsuspecting guest eater at restaurants or picnics unless the server has a conscience and remembers to warn them."Phytochemical Investigator Urges Denial of PetitionA researcher investigating the anti-cancer potential of phytochemicals warned FDA not to approve the pending food additive petition for olestra, predicting that use of the product may have a negative health impact.Jed Fahey, faculty research associate with the Brassica Chemoprotection Laboratory at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said he was "distressed" by the data indicating that olestra may reduce absorption of many fat-soluble vitamins.  "There are a great number of other, fat-soluble phytochemicals, some of which we are investigating in my laboratory for their anti-cancer potential," Fahey said, adding, "Many of them have yet to even be isolated in pure form and are therefore unavailable for testing.""The inclusion of olestra in commonly consumed American foods has a high probability of effecting the wholesale reduction of a multiplicity of beneficial compounds from the diet of a great many Americans," the letter to FDA Commissioner Dr. David Kessler said, adding, "Based on overwhelming epidemiological evidence, there is a high probability that the use of this product would have a negative health impact."Comments from the American Diabetes Association and the American Heart Association took no specific stand on whether FDA should approve olestra.  ADA said it supports the development and introduction into the marketplace of food products that help people lose or maintain weight, but added that it "looks to and respects the FDA review process for assurance of product safety."  AHA encouraged FDA to continue the review of all fat replacers.  The group noted that many products on the market labeled as "reduced fat" have significant amounts of mono- and diglycerides, which are a source of calories and are metabolized as fat.Comments Commend Conduct of Advisory Committee MeetingThe comments of a variety of researchers supporting approval of the fat substitute -- some of which were sent in by Procter & Gamble, the petition's sponsor --  were also included in the FDA administrative file on olestra.  Many of these letters included positive comments about the conduct of the four-day Food Advisory Committee meeting.The American Dietetic Association said one of its representatives attended the advisory committee and working group meetings on olestra, adding, "We believe that the process allowed for a full airing of ADA's views on this matter.  We fully support the FAC review process, including its interpretation of the data and consideration of public comment."A co-discoverer of olestra, Dr. Fred Mattson, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California in San Diego, noted that as early work on the compound progressed, "I came to the conclusion that olestra posed no hazard as a food ingredient.""Subsequent studies have served to strengthen this opinion," Mattson said.  He noted that olestra "is now supported by a much wider range of studies, and now many of these are on human subjects.  Moreover, the level of use is inherently limited by the nature of the food products in which it will be used."Nutritionist Johanna Dwyer of Tufts University said her interest in fat substitutes such as olestra led her to independently review some of the studies in the peer-reviewed literature.  Later, she was asked by P&G to review and edit two papers for publication on consumption models and use of the pig and other data for assessing human effects of consuming olestra.  Noting a specific interest in gastrointestinal effects, Dwyer said she requested and received additional information on GI effects, and devoted particular attention to what might be expected at very high levels of intake.At Dwyer's request, P&G sent her blinded samples of olestra-containing potato chips and regular potato chips in amounts that would constitute the 95th percentile of intake.  Dwyer said she ate these potato chips in a single bolus amount for a meal on two separate days and subsequently recorded her own views of signs and symptoms of GI distress.  "I felt more GI distress when eating the regular potato chips, and did not record any differences in stool consistency in this brief experiment," Dwyer wrote.  She noted that very high chronic use might produce changes in the consistency of the stool, but it is "inappropriate to describe these changes as diarrhea."Dwyer said she concluded that the product "is safe and may provide a benefit to some consumers who wish to eat low fat, low saturated fat salty snacks."  She added that the FDA evaluation process and the advisory committee deliberations "were reasonable, thorough and helpful."Dr. Harry Greene, clinical professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said he attended the advisory committee meeting in November and was "extremely impressed with the presentations by the FDA scientists and the presentations by the expert consultants brought in by FDA in providing an unbiased and scientific approach to the relevant studies which have been performed with olestra."CSPI Took Data Out of Context, Researcher ChargesGreene criticized presentations by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, saying much of the data "was taken out of context" or "completely misinterpreted due to a lack of scientifically acceptable statistical evaluation, and in many instances was anecdotal."  In contrast, he said, "the data presented by Procter & Gamble scientists represented clear examples of well controlled, scientifically credible studies."Greene said the chairman of the advisory committee made sure that CSPI had an equal opportunity to present its objections.Also charging that CSPI took data out of context, Dr. Michael Davidson, medical director of the Chicago Center for Clinical Research at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, noted that the clinical studies by P&G "were purposely designed to assess the extreme intakes of olestra in subjects of various body sizes and dietary habits."  Davidson pointed out that olestra "was used to replace almost 50% of the daily fat intake for those in the 32-gram dose group," which he said "included petite young women who were unaccustomed to large intake of non-digestible food.""The vast majority of subjects with gastrointestinal events were women who would rarely consume 32 grams of olestra on a single day, yet were fed 32 grams daily for eight weeks," Davidson added.  He noted that approval of olestra "has significant health implications for the entire U.S. population," since high fat consumption is a leading cause of heart disease, diabetes, cancer and obesity.Researcher Reports Positive Response to Olestra in Nutrition Education StudyDr. John Foreyt of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston said he conducted a study on the use of olestra in a nutrition education program.  Female adults were randomly assigned to either an olestra or non-olestra group, and various food products containing olestra, including shortening, potato chips, oven-ready french fries, and a mayonnaise-type salad, were made available as part of an overall nutrition education program, Foreyt said.  "Response to the product was positive," he commented, noting that subjects in both groups reduced their dietary fat consumption to approximately 30% of total calories. "Responses to our questionnaire suggested that subjects with access to the olestra products experienced less deprivation while reducing dietary fat intake than the subjects without access to the olestra products," Foreyt said, adding that the study is currently in press. "Based on our study, and my reading of the olestra research, I believe that olestra can help consumers lower overall fat intake because it gives them a choice, without sacrificing taste," he said.Dr. Gail Harrison of the University of California School of Public Health in Los Angeles complimented the special consultants utilized by FDA as in-depth review experts on olestra, calling them "absolutely the best in the field."  Harrison added, "Their reports can be relied upon in terms of scientific validity and perspective."Recommending approval of the compound, Harrison said she is "quite thoroughly acquainted with the data base supporting the safety of olestra as it is proposed for use in savory snacks in the U.S. food supply, and am convinced on the basis of reasonable scientific judgment it is safe by the standard that FDA must apply."Other letters recommending approval came from Dr. Elijah Saunders of the University of Maryland's School of Medicine, Division of Hypertension, and Dr. George Bray, executive director of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center at the Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.A letter from Penny Kris-Etherton, professor of nutrition at Penn State University, reiterated conclusions she had presented for P&G at the advisory committee meeting -- that inclusion of olestra snacks would reduce dietary carotenoids over a period of seven days by approximately 10%.  The calculations assumed that all savory snacks included in dietary records randomly selected from study subjects in target groups of interest were olestra-containing snacks, she said. "Obviously, in a real world setting, not all savory snacks consumed will contain olestra.  Nonetheless, I believe that our estimates are reasonable as a means to gain a perspective about the average impact of olestra-containing snacks in different free-living population groups," Kris-Etherton added.  ((6FCN 4608, 26 pages, $11)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PETITION NEEDED TO EXPAND ENERGY SOURCES IN POULTRY FEED IRRADIATION RULE: FDAA food additive petition approved recently by the Food and Drug Administration sought approval only of the use of gamma radiation from cobalt 60 for Salmonella in poultry feed, so a separate or supplemental petition would have to be filed to expand the approval to include other sources of ionizing radiation, the agency said recently (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 2, Page 42, and Nov. 6, Page 17).The Center for Veterinary Medicine's George Graber, director of the division of animal feeds, discussed the petition in a Dec. 6 letter to Paisan Loaharanu, who is part of the Secretariat of the International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation, International Atomic Energy Agency, in Vienna, Austria.  Loaharanu had written to CVM in October, questioning why the final rule permitting the irradiation was limited to gamma rays from cobalt 60 and did not include gamma rays from cesium-137 and electrons and X-rays from machine sources.Loaharanu had asked if there were scientific reasons for this limitation, and questioned whether it would be possible to include other radiation sources in the regulation.Petition, Rule Refer Only to Cobalt 60Graber noted that when Nordion International Inc. filed the food additive petition, FDA sought comment only on the use of gamma radiation from cobalt 60, but said "no public comment was received," and pointed out that the scope of a proceeding for issuing a food additive regulation "is limited by the terms and conditions of use set out in the filed petition.""To the extent that a person seeks to extend the petitioned-for terms and conditions of use, the person must do so by separate or supplemental petition," Graber added.  He thanked Loaharanu for sending a copy of the ICGFI document entitled, "Code of Good Irradiation Practice for the Control of Pathogenic Microorganisms in Poultry Feed."Similar letters were sent to E-Beam Services, Cranbury, N.J., AECL Technologies, Hauppage, N.Y., and Dr. Elsa Murano of the Texas A&M University's Department of Animal Science.  In objections filed following publication of the rule, all had questioned why the regulation limited the source of ionizing radiation to gamma radiation from cobalt 60.In the letters to the companies, Graber noted that nothing in the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or in FDA's regulations suggests or authorizes that "interested persons use the opportunity to object as an opportunity to expand the authorized use beyond those sought in the petition.""Indeed, the records of the rulemaking (the petition and comments, in this case, none) only contain information concerning the use of cobalt 60, and thus it appears that there would be no support in the record for your objections," he said.If FDA were to proceed to complete its evaluation of the objections and request for a hearing, "it is likely that the agency would deny the request on the basis that the request is beyond the scope of the petitioned action and is more appropriately resolved through the submission of a food additive petition," Graber said, adding that "the proper and more timely resolution is the withdrawal of the objection at this time and submission of a food additive petition."  He urged the companies to withdraw their objections, and offered to meet with them about pursuing a food additive petition.  ((6FCN 4607, 9 pages, $7 )Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996AFDO FLOATS PROPOSED FOOD CODE CHANGES TO MEMBERSProposed changes to the Food and Drug Administration's 1993 Food Code have been sent to members of the Association of Food and Drug Officials by AFDO's Food Committee, with instructions to respond by Jan. 16."The impetus for this action came as a result of a questionnaire sent by the AFDO Food Committee to state officials concerning the 1993 FDA Food Code and subsequent workshops during the [AFDO] Annual Conference," AFDO President Arthur Dell'Aria said in a Dec. 8 letter that accompanied the proposed changes.  In addition, "an Ad Hoc Committee was formed to address this task immediately after the annual conference.  The Ad Hoc Committee included state officials, USDA representation, FDA assistance and representatives from the affected industries" (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 3, Page 25).In November, FDA issued a 1995 Food Code, which made a number of minor changes and clarifications to the 1993 Code; an FDA-er referred to the 1995 revision as the "housekeeping edition," intended to clean up language, etc., prior to an anticipated major overhaul for the 1997 Code.  FDA wanted to wait and do the more extensive changes after input is received from AFDO and from the Conference for Food Protection, which meets in April of this year (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 6, Page 22).Potentially Hazardous Foods Subsection Would Be RemovedThe subsection in Chapter 1 dealing with potentially hazardous foods should be eliminated, AFDO members said, because such a variance is unnecessary.  The original language noted that  a food is not potentially hazardous if "laboratory evidence that is the basis of a variance granted by the regulatory authority demonstrates that rapid and progressive growth of infectious and toxigenic microorganisms or the slower growth of C. botulinum cannot occur." In Chapter 2, AFDO members suggested adding food manager certification "as a means test for demonstration of knowledge."  The additional wording would read:  "... the person in charge shall demonstrate his knowledge by compliance with this code, by being a certified food manager who has demonstrated knowledge of required information through an accredited test or by responding to the inspector's questions when applicable."The special handwash procedure outlined in Chapter 2, which dealt with the procedure food handlers would use after using bathroom facilities, should be eliminated, AFDO members concurred.  Instead, the section should be renamed "handwash procedures" and should be enforced throughout food operations.The variance for recreationally caught scombrotoxin-prone fish and all reference to recreationally caught fish in Chapter 3 should be eliminated, AFDO members said, with the section reading that only fish that are commercially and legally caught and harvested may be received for sale or service.  Also in that chapter, the variance requirement for using more than one tagged or labeled container or shellstock at a time should be eliminated.  The handler(s) would still be required not to commingle differently tagged or labeled groups before the fish is ordered by the consumer.The variance for cooking raw animal foods (such as raw shellfish, steak tartare, soft-cooked eggs, etc.) to required temperatures should be eliminated, AFDO members said, to remove language that grants a variance from the section if based on a HACCP plan.  Instead, consumers ordering such foods must be informed by food establishments of the possible dangers of eating such foods through labeling of menus, table tents, etc., AFDO noted, adding that consumer advisory requirements would be met by the statement:"Thoroughly cooking foods of animal origin such as beef, eggs, fish, lamb, milk, pork, poultry, or shellfish reduces the risk of foodborne illness.  Individuals with certain health conditions may be at higher risk if these foods are consumed raw or undercooked.  Consult your physician or public health official for further information."Two other suggested changes were to eliminate the requirement for a variance before brewing alcoholic beverages or using food additives as a method of flavor enhancement (Chapter 3) and to eliminate the variance requirement for utilizing a molluscan shellfish life-support system display tank for storage and display of shellfish (Chapter 4).  However, the tank system would remain part of a hazard analysis critical control point system that assures that safety and quality of the fish is not harmed through the use of such a tank, among other requirements, AFDO members noted.Ad Hoc Committee Specific Recommendations Cover Food Handling, Holding TemperaturesThe AFDO Ad Hoc Committee had a number of specific recommendations of its own, including rewording of a Chapter 2 section on the responsibilities of the "person in charge," to include food handling requirements, training and the explanation of responsibilities.  Suggested new wording included:  "Employees are preventing cross-contamination of ready-to-eat food with their bare hands by properly using suitable utensils such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs or single-use gloves; employees are properly trained in food safety; and the responsibilities, rights and authorities assigned by this Code are explained to the:  1) food employee; 2) person in charge, and 3) regulatory authority."In Chapter 3, the committee suggested the addition of a cooking chart that includes minimum cooking times and temperatures for a variety of cooked meats, eggs and related products  -- "145 F (63 C) for 15 seconds for shell eggs for individual order, immediate service, fish, seafood, beef, veal, lamb, mutton, etc., not specified below; 155 F (68 C) at 15 seconds, or 150 F (68 FC) for 1 minute, or 145 F(63 C) for 3 minutes, for pork, game animals, ground chopped meat and fish, injected meats and eggs in multi-serving batches; and 165 F (74 C) for 15 seconds for field-dressed wild game, poultry, stuffed fish, meat pasta or poultry, or stuffing containing fish, meat or poultry."An exemption in the cooking time/temperature requirements should be made for whole muscle intact beef steaks prepared in response to a consumer's order, the committee noted, adding that reheating for hot holding requirements should be changed so that the two-hour rapid heating requirement would be applied to all reheating practices.While leaving intact the code's requirements that potentially hazardous foods should be stored for hot holding at 140 F (60 C) or above or at 41 F (5 C) or below, the AFDO committee suggested language be added to allow for 45 F refrigerated storage of potentially hazardous food "provided the mechanical refrigeration unit in which the food is held is incapable of meeting the [41 F or below] requirements; is currently in place and in use; and is replaced with a unit that can meet the [41 F or below] requirement when replacement is required."The section in Chapter 3 dealing with ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food disposition would also be significantly changed by the ad hoc committee, the report explained:"An addition here would require an automatic cut-off control activated by temperatures above 45 F for vending machines that dispense ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food.  Disposition of temperature-abused foods from such systems would be consistent with the requirements for other potentially hazardous food (five days or 10 days).  The reference to manufacturers' 'sell by' or 'use by' date is removed, as they are not present on many potentially hazardous foods and are not enforced by most states."As for time as a public health control, the committee recommended a change in wording so that hot food would have to be served or discarded within two hours from the point in time when the food is removed from temperature control (the code's four-hour rule would remain in effect for cold foods). The committee said the exception for pyrethrin-based compounds should be removed from the Chapter 7 section on application of pesticides.  Also, pesticide treatment by uncertified persons under the direct supervision of a certified person would be allowed.  The change was suggested so that a broad interpretation of "applicable law" regarding application of pesticides would be allowed.In addition, AFDO is recommending a number of rewording, editing and reformatting changes for simplification or clarification.  ((6FCN 4601, 145 pages, $41).Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FSIS IDENTIFIES REFORMS NEEDED BEFORE HACCP IMPLEMENTATIONThe Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 identified several areas of reform it says are necessary, both as part of the Reinventing Government initiative and because the regulations in question need to be changed before the planned implementation of a hazard analysis critical control point system for meat and poultry inspection (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, Page 46, and related stories, Pages 25 and 41).The advance notice of proposed rulemaking lists a number of proposed areas ripe for modification or elimination because they are inconsistent with HACCP principles.  Such regulatory changes will be made before HACCP is implemented in plants, the ANPR added.Regulations mentioned in the ANPR fall into broad categories, such as:  definitions; inauguration, suspension and withdrawal of suspension; appeals procedures and related administrative procedures; reinspection of product entering establishments, and retention and disposition of product; restrictive, command-and-control type regulations that delimit processing and treatment methods intended to eliminate specific food safety hazards; and recordkeeping and access to records under the Freedom of Information Act.The ANPR invited comment on any of these areas, and added that "FSIS specifically requests comment on its efforts to transform regulations from heavy reliance on command-and-control approaches to greater reliance on performance standards, and solicits detailed suggestions concerning which existing regulations need to be changed to be consistent with HACCP, and how those regulations should be changed."Several specific candidates for revision or removal were presented in the ANPR.  Under "definition":Include general HACCP-related terms and redefine inspection organization and activity terms.Under "application for and grant or refusal of inspection":Revise prior approval procedures; shift to performance standards.Under "inauguration and withdrawal of inspection; inspection program employees":Clarify role of inspection program.  Integrate this with rules for suspending and withdrawing inspection.Assure that appeals procedures comport with enforcement under HACCP.Under "facilities for inspection":Clarify standards for essential facilities.Convert requirements for sanitation and facilities to performance standards or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Simplify detailed requirements for equipment and cleanliness, for example; convert to performance standards and/or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert equipment and cleaning requirements to performance standards and/or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Remove obsolete provisions for slack barrels, similar containers and means of conveyance, and burlap wrapping.Clarify decision criteria concerning employment of diseased persons.Convert tagging insanitary equipment, utensils, rooms and compartments provisions to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees.Update rules for temperatures and chilling and freezing procedures for poultry and make changes to accommodate HACCP (i.e., changes in addition to pathogen reduction amendments proposed 2/3/95).Under "entry into official establishments, reinspection; reinspections, preparing and processing establishments":Convert rules for articles entering establishments and product disposal to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Eliminate prior approval procedures for total quality control systems.Convert requirements for processing procedures and articles used in preparing products to performance standards, and clarify role of inspection program employees.Eliminate command-and-control type requirements for the use of nitrite and sodium ascorbate or erythorbate in bacon; convert these requirements to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert requirements for the treatment of pork and pork products to destroy trichinae into performance standards; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert requirements for preparing articles not for use as human food (e.g., dog food) to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees; eliminate command-and-control type requirements.Eliminate redundancy with other provisions (i.e., mixtures containing products that are not classed as meat food products).Convert procedure for handling product adulterated by polluted water to performance standards and decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert requirements for tagging chemicals, preservatives, cereals, spices, etc., to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert rules for substances such as pesticide chemical residues, food additives and color additives to performance standards and role of inspection program employees.Make requirements for handling of certain material for mechanical deboning consistent with any new time-temperature requirements.Convert compliance procedures for meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems to performance standards, and clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert requirements for canning and canned products to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Under "transportation":Eliminate obsolete provisions; focus on and clarify policies and performance standards.Comments are due Feb. 27.  For more information, contact Paula Cohen at 202-720-7164.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IBP COMPLAINS OF RED MEAT, POULTRY EQUITY ISSUES AT HACCP MEETINGSIBP, Inc. complained in a recent letter to the Food Safety and Inspection Service that recent meetings on the HACCP/Pathogen Reduction proposal should have focused on red meat versus poultry regulatory equity issues.In the letter to USDA Acting Undersecretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor, the Nebraska firm's James Lochner said he attended all six of the HACCP public meetings and the Food Safety Forum (See Food Chemical News, Nov. 13, Page 32), but that there was "insufficient focus on red meat versus poultry regulatory equity issues." "There is ample published research demonstrating increased food safety risks with poultry as a result of current processes allowed by FSIS poultry regulations," Lochner said, questioning "why these issues have not been addressed in more detail."  In the second round of comments to the proposal, IBP stressed the importance of microbiological testing in HACCP validation and ongoing HACCP verification.  The firm also stressed that insufficient data exist to use indicator organisms for a performance standard.  "IBP believes USDA has only one choice: microbiological guidelines as a HACCP verification component.  This is the only viable solution until data is generated on an ongoing basis and then related to an increased risk of human health."   Validation should be defined as documenting a critical control point that eliminates microbiological hazards, IBP said, and, "When possible, validation should demonstrate the elimination of pertinent pathogens, i.e., Salmonella and Escherichia coli O157:H7."  Validation, Lochner added, should be conducted either off-line in a research facility or with extensive on-line testing using indicator organisms, or with past reported research.Verification Testing Based on Volume for Large Plants, Time for Small Plants SuggestedVerification should be defined as an ongoing demonstration of control with microbiological testing to verify that the process is in control, according to Lochner IBP's senior vice president, technical services.  USDA should prescribe minimum frequencies for an acceptable HACCP program based on volume for large plants and time frame for small plants, IBP's Lochner told Taylor, recommending one microbiological verification test per species per 1,000 head increment per week for large meat and poultry plants and a minimum sample frequency of once a week for small plants.  For fresh meat and poultry plants that are not slaughter plants, microbiological testing as a HACCP verification should focus on relative change and operational sanitation, Lochner said.All plants should be required to submit their ongoing HACCP microbiological verification results to USDA, which will then generate averages and baselines over a two-year period.  USDA will need to develop details on where samples are taken, how they are handled, and laboratory methods for the information to be useful, IBP said. In other comments, the firm recommended that USDA develop criteria for a process step to be classified as an antimicrobial treatment, adding that a one log reduction was not an effective criterion.  Also, USDA should allow carcass cooling rates to be incorporated into HACCP programs with micro validation and verification to demonstrate that the chill rates control growth of indicator organisms or pathogens.  USDA must reconsider the use of immersion chilling in poultry "if it seriously wants to improve the protection of public health," IBP added.Finally, IBP urged USDA to move quickly in implementing the sweeping regulations and suggested that if certain industries or companies are unwilling to improve the process, then USDA may require mandatory controls.  "These cannot be political decisions," Lochner added.  ((6FCN 4606, 8 pages, $6)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996L. MONOCYTOGENES, B. CEREUS CONTAMINATION PROMPT WARNINGS TO WHITEFISH, PEDIATRIC MEDICAL FOOD MANUFACTURERSDetection of Listeria monocytogenes in processed whitefish roe prompted a warning letter from the Food and Drug Administration to a Wisconsin fish roe manufacturing operation.  The Dec. 11 letter from FDA's Minneapolis District to James Vander Mause, president, Atlas International, Inc., Jefferson, Wis., said the pathogen was detected in a sample collected during an inspection of the facility.FDA said that according to documents obtained during the inspection, Atlas does not sample and analyze incoming whitefish roe for microbiological pathogens, nor does the firm obtain "written assurance from suppliers that the roe is in compliance with federal laws and regulations."  The agency urged Vander Mause to incorporate a mechanism to "assure" that incoming fish roe will not be contaminated.  Failure to assure compliance with laws and regulations may result in regulatory action without further notice, FDA warned Vander Mause.  The agency said he should notify the agency of "specific steps" taken to correct these deficiencies. Contamination with diarrheal enterotoxin producing Bacillus cereus has caused a pediatric medical food to be deemed adulterated, according to a warning letter from FDA's Minneapolis District.  The Dec. 1 letter to David Pyott, president/CEO, Sandoz Nutrition, Inc., St. Louis Park, Minn., said samples of the firm's Vivonex Pediatric Medical Food were found to be contaminated.  While acknowledging that the contamination was "spotty," the agency said several portions contained >100 B. cereus and of the isolates tested for enterotoxin production, all were found to produce enterotoxin.  FDA noted that the Sandoz contention that there was no significance to the B. cereus findings was based on several assumptions:  the strain will not grow at a pH of 4.85; there is a four-hour growth lag period after hydration, and room temperature storage "significantly decreases" rate of growth.  The agency added, however, that while this may "normally be the case," it should not be assumed for this strain, "particularly in a food intended for individuals of compromised health."  Pyott was warned that failure to assure compliance with laws and regulations may result in regulatory action without further notice.  The agency said he should notify the agency of "specific steps" taken to achieve correction of these deficiencies.Insanitary Processing, Storage Conditions Lead to Warnings for Mushroom Processing PlantMichael Giorgio, owner, Prima Foods, Inc., Rehrersburg, Pa., received a warning from FDA's Philadelphia District concerning violations of acidified food manufacturing regulations.The Dec. 7 letter said an inspection of Giorgio's mushroom processing plant revealed the following deficiencies:water in washing tank was not changed during a full day's processing and became "increasingly dirty," resulting in mushrooms still bearing soil entering the blancher;blancher observed with discolored mushrooms and "grease-like" material adhering to it;equipment used to hold mushrooms before and after blanching was not "adequately cleaned";walk-in cooler has a drain pipe leading directly outside and the pipe was not screened to prevent pest entry;mushrooms packed in brine remained on packing floor for several hours before being refrigerated, with mushrooms labeled for refrigeration at 35 F stored in a cooler at 47 F;brine solution for coldpack mushrooms was stored in open vat and hand-dipped to fill mushroom container, with ascorbic acid used in brine preparation stored in uncovered container;pH meter was used without being standardized;blancher auger had flaked rust between blades and the rubber conveyor leading into blancher was frayed at edges, and a "large amount" of steam built up in the building.In addition, FDA noted that several mushroom samples were found to contain "very high levels" of bacteria, leading the agency to be concerned that this may be "indicative of poor processing or handling practices."FDA said that Giorgio acknowledged that Prima Foods should have "ceased production" of the mushrooms and that should the firm wish to make these foods in the future, registration as an acidified food manufacturer is required.'Serious Violations' Alleged at California Fish Processing OperationFDA's San Francisco District sent a warning letter to Robert Johnson, president, MFM, Inc., Berkeley, Calif., saying that an inspection of his shell fish and fin fish processing operations in San Francisco revealed "serious violations" of food manufacturing regulations.  According to the Dec. 1 letter:water lines serving processing operations lacked backflow prevention devices;raw shrimp were held in a metal, perforated container, placed directly on a wet floor and washed with a water spray from a hand-held hose;inspectors observed soap suds draining from drain board containing thawing shrimp, large drinking cup floating in sink, fork "nearly submerged" among shrimp and "personnel items" on drain board;chemical cleaners were stored on shelf directly above fish in open cardboard box;employees were seen handling hoses and other non-food items then resuming processing of seafood without washing or sanitizing hands, andan unprotected ice machine, with standing water in three-sided trough at its base, was located in an area allowing car and forklift traffic.FDA also said that L. monocytogenes, Type 1, was detected in a swab sample taken from the surface of a packaging table.  The swab was among several other environmental swabs found to be negative for Listeria and Salmonella microorganisms.  Johnson was told to take "appropriate steps" to correct these violations to prevent adulteration of foods processed by the facility.  Adulterated foods are subject to seizure, the agency added.  Insect, Rodent Findings at Bakery Draw Warning LetterAn FDA warning letter to Ralph Pacifico, president, Angelo Pacifico & Sons, Inc., Altoona, Pa., said insanitary conditions at the bakery resulted in bakery products being adulterated.  The Nov. 22 letter from the agency's Philadelphia District said beetle-like insects and one larval stage insect were found throughout the flour storage and conveyor system, one dead mouse was found on the production floor near mixes, and exposed bread products and "potential rodent entry points" were observed.FDA said its laboratory analysis of flour revealed insects in various stages of the beetle life cycle, indicating nesting.  Analysis of various finished bread products revealed rodent hair, insect fragments and cat or dog hair, the agency added.  During the inspection of the bakery, it was noted that the conveyor and access panels were welded or glued shut, making inspection and cleaning "more difficult," FDA noted.  The firm's response that it would initiate a program aimed at cleaning the whole flour system "until no further insect nesting activity is noticed" is not sufficient, the agency added, saying that the company needs an "effective, ongoing sanitation program" to eliminate the insanitary conditions.  Pacifico was told to take prompt action to correct these deficiencies.  Failure to do so, the agency added, may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.    'Insanitary Conditions' Cause Stored Foods To Be Deemed AdulteratedFoods at an Alabama warehouse have been deemed adulterated due to "insanitary conditions," according to a warning letter from FDA's Nashville District.The Dec. 12 letter to J. Barton Greer, Jr., chairman of the board, Autry Greer & Sons, Prichard, said an inspection of the facility revealed a "widespread insect infestation" in the dry storage portion of the warehouse; spilled products at numerous locations within the warehouse; food products stored directly against the wall; insecticides and other hazardous chemicals stored directly adjacent to food items; poor handling of distressed food products, and damaged floors and walls in produce and meat coolers.  In addition, FDA said that 10 separate lots of food products, including flour, cornmeal, rice, beans and instant pudding, were found to be insect infested.Greer was told to take prompt action to correct these deficiencies or face possible regulatory action such as seizure and/or injunction.  Undeclared Colors Prompt Warning LettersFDA's Chicago District sent a warning letter to Rashid Sweiss, president, Eden International, Inc., Blue Island, Ill., concerning misbranding of two of the firm's products. The Aug. 30 letter said that "Eden's Red Chickpeas" contained undeclared FD&C Red #3 and "Eden's Gourmet Mix" contained undeclared FD&C Red #40.  FDA also advised Sweiss that net contents need to be declared in metric as well as in inch-pound units.  Sweiss was told to inform the agency of steps taken to correct the violations.  Airlines Warned About Insanitary Processing Facilities, Public Conveyance Violations Food processing and watering point violations involving the airline industry were subjects of warning letters from FDA's San Francisco District.Herbert Kelleher, president and CEO, Southwest Airlines, received a Nov. 21 letter pointing out several processing deficiencies as well as watering point violations.The insanitary conditions resulted in a classification of the facilities as "Not Approved."  A "Non-Approved" or "Use Prohibited" classification was awarded to a facility serving the airline industry, according to another warning letter from FDA's San Francisco District.The Dec. 1 letter to David Tam, president, Tam Fresh Cut-Pack, Inc., Sacramento, Calif., said an inspection of the facility revealed the following:  lack of chemical test kits for chlorine sanitizer; standing water on floor near vegetable sink and floor of walk-in refrigerator; vegetables in boxes stored directly on refrigerator floors; knives on soiled surfaces were not sanitized; lack of functional thermometers in walk-in refrigerators; accumulation of old, slimy vegetable debris on onion slicer; accumulation of old food debris on exterior of scales; waste water flows across driveway to sewer, with employees seen walking through this water while cleaning food containers; unshielded fluorescent lights over processing areas, and unsealed hole in double wall in production area providing possible hole in the wall for vermin. Both Kelleher and Tam were told to notify the agency of steps taken to correct the violations.  Manufacturing, Labeling Violations of Vet Products Disclosed in FDA WarningsFailure to follow good manufacturing practice regulations for finished pharmaceuticals resulted in FDA issuing a warning to a Missouri veterinary drug manufacturer.The Dec. 5 letter from FDA's Kansas City District to Henry Bobe, president/chief executive officer, Fermenta Animal Health Company, said an inspection of the firm's Elwood, Kan., facility revealed the following "significant deviations":failure to establish and follow an adequate process validation plan for all tablet, bolus and powder products to assure they have the identity, strength, quality and purity they purport or are represented to possess;failure to include directions in certain product Master Formula Records to recirculate product from the dead space at the base of the ribbon blender, and failure to have in place an adequate method validation for finished product analysis.  Noting that the inspection consisted in part of pre-approval review of manufacturing compliance, FDA said the deviations must be corrected before the district can concur with approval of the ANADAs and it has therefore recommended to the Center for Veterinary Medicine that approval of these ANADAs be withheld.  FDA said the inspection also revealed that a manufacturing change had been instituted for another product "without CVM approval."   Bobe was told to notify FDA of the specific steps taken to correct the noted violations.  FDA's Los Angeles District sent a warning letter to Louis Gottlieb, president, Very Healthy Enterprises, Inglewood, Calif., noting that several of the firms products are new animal drugs which are not the subject of approved NADAs.The April 3 letter said that a new animal drug may not be legally marketed unless it is the subject of an approved NADA.  FDA said the following products are not generally recognized as safe and effective for the indications for use in their labeling:Ear Relief Natural Medicine & Ear Cleanser for Dogs and Cats; Scratch Free Natural Medicine for Dogs and Cats; Eye-C Eye Medicine for Dogs and Cats with Vitamin C and Zinc (Zinc Plus C Ophthalmic Solution); Flea Relief Natural Medicine and Diar-relief Natural Medicine.Gottlieb was told to take prompt action to correct these violations or face possible regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.FDA's Buffalo District has warned a veterinary products company that it is manufacturing/repacking and distributing adulterated and misbranded new animal drugs.In a May 17 letter to Richard Sanzen, president, Equest Inc., Saratoga Veterinary Products Co., Saratoga Springs, N.Y., FDA said no NADAs are in effect for the firm's Equi-Spaz Paste, Re-Coup and Doloflex products.  The firm's failure to provide FDA with a  list all drugs manufactured/repacked results in the products being deemed misbranded, FDA said.  The agency said Sanzen should take action to ensure that the firm meets all federal law and regulation requirements.Violations of Medicated Feed Mill Regulations Described in FDA WarningsPhil Yoder, president, Yoder Feeds, Kalona, Iowa, received a warning letter from FDA's Kansas City District concerning violations of federal current good manufacturing regulations for medicated feeds.  The Oct. 18 letter said an inspection of the facility revealed a failure to perform assays at periodic intervals for all medicated feeds requiring approved applications, and the use of Type A articles in the manufacture of medicated feeds beyond their labeled expiration dates.  Failure to correct these deficiencies may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice, FDA said.  The Kansas City District also sent a warning letter to Leland Smith, president, Custom Feed Services Corp., Norfolk, Nebr. concerning medicated feed manufacturing violations.In the June 30 letter, FDA said an inspection of Smith's facility revealed a failure to conduct the required number of assays of medicated feeds in a calendar year.Smith was informed by FDA that failure to correct these deficiencies may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.FDA's Cincinnati District sent a similar letter to Leslie Gossett, terminal manager, PM AG Products, Inc., Owensboro, Ky.  In its Dec. 7 letter, the agency said deviations from medicated feed regulations included the failure to:  provide a drug scale suitable for the units or weights for which it is used; assure daily inventory records are accurate and adequate, and check batch records to determine that all required steps have been performed, as errors were found in drug receipt and production records.Gossett was urged by FDA to establish procedures whereby such violations do not recur.  Until the violations have been corrected and the corrections verified by FDA, CVM will not approved medicated feed applications from the facility, the agency added.FDA Notes Illegal Drug Residues in Animals Intended for Human FoodFDA's Seattle District warned two animal producers concerning the detection of illegal drug residues in animals intended for use as human food.In an April 13 letter to Cornelius Timmermans, Lynden, Wash., FDA said a USDA analysis of a calf revealed the presence of neomycin at 7.27 ppm and tetracycline at 0.96 ppm in the kidney.  Neomycin residues in the kidney of another calf were found at 41.54 ppm, the agency noted.Al and Anna Biemold, Cascade Farms, Everson, Wash., also received a warning letter from the Seattle District.  The April 3 letter said a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf detected residues of neomycin at 3.31 ppm and 8.80 ppm tetracycline in kidney tissue.Timmermans and the Biemolds were told to correct the violations and to establish procedures to prevent their recurrence.  Failure to do so, FDA added, may result in regulatory action without further notice.Two warning letters concerning detection of illegal drug residues were also sent by FDA's Cincinnati District.A Dec. 11 letter to Ray Geiser, Apple Creek, Ohio, said a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf revealed the presence of 0.48 ppm penicillin in the kidney and 0.43 ppm in the liver.  In a Dec. 4 letter, Roger Morlock, Valley City, Ohio, was told that a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf detected tetracycline in the liver at 1.3 ppm and in the kidney at 4.3 ppm.  FDA said Geiser and Morlock hold animals under conditions "so inadequate" that diseased animals and/or medicated animals bearing potentially harmful drug residues are likely to enter the food chain.  Both were urged to correct these violations and to establish procedures to prevent their recurrence.Louis Agueda, Merced, Calif., received a warning from FDA's San Francisco District.  The Nov. 15 letter said a USDA analysis of a cull dairy cow revealed the presence of oxytetracycline in the liver at 5.3 ppm and in the kidney at 0.26 ppm.  Noting that Agueda has "a history" of offering adulterated animals for sale for human food, FDA said other animals contained illegal antibiotic residues and one tested CAST positive.  FDA said Agueda lacks adequate systems for determining the medicated status of animals, for assuring that medicated animals are withheld from slaughter for appropriate periods of time and for assuring that drugs are used according to label directions.  The agency added that Agueda should correct these deficiencies or face regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.  ((6FCN 4610, 45 pages, $16)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SINGLE PETITION PROCESS FOR ADDITIVES TO BE USED ON MEAT OR POULTRY PROPOSED BY FSIS, FDAThe Food and Drug Administration and Agriculture Department's Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 proposed a simplification of the review process for food additive, color additive and generally recognized as safe affirmation petitions for substances that are to be used on meat or poultry products.  Currently, such products must go through separate FDA and FSIS reviews, the proposal suggests a single joint review instead. There were two notices published on the issue, one from FDA, one from FSIS, both in the Dec. 29 Federal Register.Under the proposal, a single petition would be submitted to FDA, which would pass on pertinent petitions or parts of petitions to FSIS.  Future FSIS listings for meat and poultry additives would be harmonized with those of FDA and incorporated into FDA's regulations, "providing a basis for the eventual elimination of FSIS' separate listing in Title 9 CFR," said the FDA notice.  An FSIS notice said that the Title 9 review will occur in three to five years, leading to the elimination of duplicative listings found in FDA's Title 21.  FSIS will continue to retain a small list of specific substance use prohibitions and will add new prohibitions as necessary, the FSIS notice said.FAPs, CAPs and GRAS affirmation petitions not involving use in meat, meat products or poultry would not be affected by this proposal, and would continue to be reviewed by FDA only.The two agencies developed a memorandum of understanding on how they will work together in reviewing such petitions.  Basically, according to the MOU published in the FSIS notice, FDA will share pertinent petitions with FSIS, and FSIS will provide advice to FDA on any criteria, restrictions, conditions of use or other prohibitions that may be necessitated by the Federal Meat Inspection Act or the Poultry Products Inspection Act.Some notable specifics of that MOU include:"In situations where FSIS' Title 9 and FDA's Title 21 do not specifically address the intended use of a particular substance for meat or poultry products, any interested party may request that FSIS evaluate the status of such use.  FSIS will conduct a review and determine whether the use is acceptable in meat and poultry products, including whether the use is approved under the FFDCA (Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act).  Under the terms of the MOU, FSIS would seek FDA's concurrence with FSIS' review and conclusions.  If FDA does not concur that the use is approved under the FFDCA, the petitioner would be required to submit a food additive or color additive petition to FDA requesting that FDA's regulations be amended to accommodate the requested use."In situations in which FDA receives a petition for the use of a substance or a use of a substance that is not approved under the FFDCA, a petitioner shall prepare and submit a food additive petition or a color additive petition only to FDA.  FDA will consult with FSIS regarding petitions for meat and poultry use, and, under the terms of the MOU, FSIS concurrence would be required for the approval of the use of substances intended for use in meat and poultry and that are codified in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations."FSIS will provide any advice to FDA, in writing, on any criteria, restrictions, conditions of use, or prohibitions FSIS believes necessary concerning use of the products subject to the FMIA and the PPIA."Requests for a determination (by FSIS) of the acceptability of substances may result in the need for rulemaking when (1) FSIS standards of identity and composition preclude the use of a substance; or (2) there is concern about the suitability of a substance for the intended use because the substance has never been used in meat and poultry before, or the applications of the substance are new, e.g., a new meat, meat food, or poultry product category."Requests for determination of acceptability of new substances and new uses of substances in meat and poultry products are currently submitted by the requester ... to FSIS.  FSIS will continue to require that a request for an acceptability determination for the use of a new substance in meat and poultry or for the new use of an approved substance be supported by information and technical data that establish that (1) the use of the substance will not render the product in which it is used adulterated or misbranded and (2) the proposed use of the substance is at the lowest level necessary to accomplish the intended technical effect(s) in each category of the product in which the substance is used."The evaluation by FSIS of the acceptable use of a new substance or new use of a substance in meat and poultry products subject to this MOU will be based on the following conditions that must be addressed by the requester.  The conditions set forth are in accordance with the provisions for use of substances in 9 CFR and 21 CFR:  (1) The substance has a documented history of use in foods; (2) The substance is derived from food or a food ingredient and is not considered to be a chemical or synthesized additive; (3) The process for manufacturing the substance does not result in a severe alteration of the molecular structure resulting in the formation of a chemical residue whose safety has not been shown; (4) The safety of the substance has been evaluated by an independent authority and adequate safety data have been presented; (5) The suitability and efficacy of the substance have been shown through adequate data submission.  The lowest level of the substance necessary to achieve the intended functional effect must be shown, and the use cannot render the products to which the substance is intended for use adulterated or misbranded; (6) The FDA has determined the common or usual name of the substance, and (7) FDA must concur with FSIS' determination of acceptability in order to allow use."Proposal Part of FSIS Reinventing Government ProcessSeveral regulatory reforms were published by FSIS Dec. 29 (See related stories, Pages 18 and 41).  "By adopting modern regulatory tools and streamlining or eliminating old rules and requirements, we will enhance the safety of meat and poultry products on the tables of America," said USDA Acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor in a Jan. 2 statement.  The proposals were all part of the agency's Reinventing Government initiative (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, 1995, Page 46).According to the Dec. 29 FDA Federal Register notice, the reason for the change was that:"Over the years, the two agencies have cooperated on food ingredient issues on an as-needed, substance-specific, and case-by-case basis.  Nonetheless, because of their different regulatory needs, the two agencies' regulations governing the use of these substances in foods are cast in formats and terms that are not fully consistent with one another.  This absence of consistency causes difficulty and inconvenience to persons who need to refer to both agencies' regulations on approved substances and uses."In addition, it is not clear where one agency's jurisdiction ends and another's begins, the notice said, and this has led to both agencies conducting separate, sequential review and rulemakings before a new meat or poultry use can be permitted.  "Many years can elapse between the time a manufacturer petitions FDA for the approval of a food additive or a color additive under the act and the appearance of FSIS regulations of approval for meat and poultry uses," the FDA notice said.The notice went on to say that under the proposal, such substances would be authorized for use in meat and poultry products under the jurisdiction of FSIS on the basis of FDA's regulations.  Future FDA food additive, color additive and GRAS substance affirmation listings would specify any approved meat or poultry product uses, and the conditions of such uses, in accordance with FSIS recommendations "to the extent those recommendations are consistent with" the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.In the future, FDA will include in its listings the amounts and uses of substances permitted for meat and poultry products, the FSIS notice proposed.Also, the administrator of FSIS would retain legal authority to prohibit or restrict the use of specific substance(s) in meat or poultry products by notice-and-comment rulemaking, "but is not expected to have to exercise that authority on a regular basis because FDA's statutory authority, exercised in accord with the MOU, would provide a basis for appropriate limitations on uses in meat and poultry products," it continued.Another proposed change in the regulations states that sorbic acid, calcium carbonate, and other salts of sorbic acid "shall not" (as opposed to the current "may not") "be used in cooked sausage or any other product; sulfurous acid and salts of sulfurous acid shall not be used in or on any product, and niacin or nicotinamide shall not be used in or on fresh product, except that potassium sorbate, propylparaben (propyl p- hydrobenzoate), calcium propionate, sodium propionate, benzoic acid, and sodium benzoate may be used in or on any product provided in 21 CFR or by a regulation in this subchapter" --         9 CFR 318.1(d)(2).GRAS Products Subject of Special Provision"Substances whose use is GRAS, however, are exempt from the premarket approval requirements of the act and need not be listed in FDA's regulations in 21 CFR.  For a substance that is not affirmed by FDA as GRAS or otherwise listed (in 21 CFR parts 182 or 184) of FDA's regulations, or for a GRAS substance listed by FDA for general food use, where meat and poultry uses are neither specified not prohibited, FSIS would continue to consider a manufacturer's basis for claiming GRAS status and suitability for use in meat or poultry products,"the notice said, adding that FSIS would make the determination in consultation with FDA as needed to ensure the appropriate advice is given and that FDA has notice of the determination.Substances currently listed as GRAS for food use generally (in accordance with good manufacturing practices) would be considered GRAS by USDA for use in meat, meat food products and poultry products, unless otherwise restricted by FSIS regulations such as standards of identity or composition, "or in specific cases where the inspection program determines that use may adulterate the product," FSIS added.Manufacturers also have the option of seeking advice from FSIS regarding the suitability of products currently listed in FDA regulations for general use in foods or for use in meat or poultry products.  "FSIS' responses and related correspondence could be available to the public, except that the formulation and process data for proprietary mixtures would be kept confidential," the FSIS proposal said, adding:  "Parties requesting such evaluations would be advised to petition FDA when the requested use is not permitted under FDA's regulations."The notice said that such inquiries should be addressed to Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service, Product Assessment Division, USDA, FSIS, RP, West End Court Building, Washington, DC 20250-3700.FSIS Will Maintain Listing of Authorized Substances for Interested Parties"FSIS' title 9 listing of authorized substances is incomplete, inconsistent with, and duplicative of FDA's listings," said the FSIS notice.  "The agency plans to eliminate its current listing over time by rulemaking as listings are determined to be duplicative of FDA regulations.  However, FSIS will retain its own regulations on specific substance use prohibitions and will add new prohibitions as necessary."Also, for the convenience of its inspectors, inspected establishments and other interested persons, FSIS will maintain a comprehensive listing, in its directive system, of substances authorized for meat and poultry uses under USDA's 9 CFR and FDA's 21 CFR.  This listing will include:Substances currently listed in 9 CFR;Substances currently listed for meat or poultry uses in FDA food additive, GRAS or prior-sanctioned listings;Approved color additives currently listed under FDA regulations (21 CFR section 73,74, and 82), approved food additives listed in 21 CFR 172-173 and 180, prior sanctioned substances listed under part 181, GRAS substances listed in 21 CFR 182 and 184, if permitted for general use on foods (which includes meat and poultry) in accordance with good manufacturing practices, unless meat or poultry uses of the substances are otherwise precluded;GRAS substances found by FSIS to be suitable for specified meat and poultry uses on the basis of information and data submitted by petitioners to FSIS.  Factors affecting FSIS findings of suitability include:  Existing FDA GRAS listings, which need not explicitly permit but may not preclude the specific use in meat or poultry products; and, concurrence of FSIS with the petitioners and FDA acceptance of FSIS' determination;FDA food additive, color additive, GRAS, prior-sanctioned substance listings promulgated after this proposal becomes final that provide for meat and poultry uses.Comments must be received by Feb. 27 (at FSIS) or March 14 (at FDA).  For more information, contact FSIS' Ralph Stafko at 202-720-8168 or FDA's George Pauli at 202-418-3090.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NU-TECH POULTRY SYSTEM RESULTS IN LESS VISIBLE CONTAMINATION BUT SIMILAR MICRO COUNTS, FSIS SAYSAn automated poultry evisceration system being tested in a Georgia plant significantly reduced visible carcass contamination over a Streamlined Inspection System line, but microbiology tests between the two lines were not significantly different, according to a Food Safety and Inspection Service midterm report on the pilot project (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 23, Page 30).The October report on Stork Gamco's Nu-Tech Poultry Processing System, being tested in a Gainesville ConAgra plant, concluded that "the data supports continuing the pilot and approving a second pilot to verify the Nu-Tech system."  The Nu-Tech system operates at up to 140 birds per minute, with four USDA inspectors.Postmortem disposition agreement for the Nu-Tech and SIS-2 lines compared favorably (0.7% for the Nu-Tech line vs. 0.4% for the SIS-2 line) and supports the acceptability of the inspection procedure, the FSIS report said, adding that "higher condemnation rates on the Nu-Tech line may be due to improved visibility of the viscera target organs and the inside carcass cavity."The Nu-Tech system's complete evisceration prior to inspection "greatly reduced internal and external visible contamination (digestive tract contents, feces, gall)," the FSIS report said, adding, "Visibly cleaner carcasses were presented for inspection.  Carcasses prior to final washing and chilling were visibly cleaner.  Visible contamination on the Nu-Tech line remained constant from post-evisceration to the final wash at 11% outside contamination and 4%-5% inside contamination.  Visible contamination was markedly higher and increased on the SIS-2 line from post-evisceration to the final wash from 19%-27% outside contamination and 12%-15% inside contamination."  The Nu-Tech evisceration probe causes less organ damage compared to the conventional spoon eviscerator, FSIS said.The number of carcasses identified for reprocessing at the inspection stations was similar for both systems.  The Nu-Tech line was higher, as expected, FSIS said, adding, "The one-step evisceration on the Nu-Tech line prior to inspection allows for greater visibility inside the bird.  The SIS-2 reprocessing rate does not include the inside and outside carcass contamination observed post-inspection at viscera separation."No Correlation Between Visible Contamination and Microbial Load:  FSISThe microbiological testing "showed no significant difference between the lines or between points within each line," the report said, adding, "There does not appear to be correlation between the amount of visible contamination on the carcass and the microbial load."The report noted a "significant decrease in Salmonella presence on the SIS-2 line between rehang and prior to the cropper.  The interpretation of the Salmonella decrease in this study is not clear and will require further evaluation of the raw data."  ((6FCN 4609, 19 pages, $9)Nu-Tech Project Has Lost Union Support:  CarneyThe Nu-Tech pilot project, called the Poultry Carcass Inspection/Evisceration Project (PCIEP) by FSIS, has lost the support of the inspectors' union, the National Joint Council of Food Inspection Locals, NJC Chairman David Carney said in a Dec. 19 letter to acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor.At a Dec. 14 consultation with the agency on the project, Carney said, "it was evident ... that FSIS management has made every attempt to promote PCIEP to the poultry industry by reducing the number of the line inspectors and increasing line speeds. ... FSIS has been remiss in the efforts of promoting PCIEP by not conducting ergonomic impact studies and has yet to follow through with Cumulative Trauma Disorder Task Group.  With lack of supporting data for PCIEP progression, the National Joint Council must now take the position that we can no longer subject inspectors to whimsical accommodations to the poultry industry.  It will now be the position of the National Joint Council that (the union) will no longer participate in Poultry Carcass Inspection Evisceration Projects."The union asked to negotiate the "'methods, means and technology' of performing work" with FSIS.  Carney noted that although the NJC's Southern Council had engaged in a memorandum of understanding for the ConAgra pilot plant, "this does not circumvent nor diminish impact to the bargaining unit at other proposed test sites."Inspectors Walk Off Line at Georgia Poultry Plant; FSIS to Fill Future VacanciesAs many as eight FSIS inspectors walked off a poultry line at a Georgia plant for several minutes recently because they had not been given a break.  The union said the action underscores how serious the shortage of inspectors has become.  FSIS officials said a break was planned for the inspectors, but that the inspectors walked off the line before the Inspector-in-Charge could get to them.  FSIS officials said poultry carcasses piled up on the floor during the inspectors' absence and that the agency may take disciplinary action.  "This tells me they think they're more important than the food hundreds of people are going to eat," one agency official said.The only solace for the agency and industry is that the shortage may not get any worse.  Taylor has apparently decided to hire one new inspector for every one that leaves in the future, although the new inspector may be hired in a different area if agency officials think a more critical vacancy exists elsewhere.Final 1,000-Plant Review Report Reiterates: Sanitation Biggest ProblemThe final report of the 1,000-plant review conducted by FSIS' Review and Assessment Program was released last month, and the conclusions were similar to those of an interim report:  sanitation remains the biggest problem found in plants (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, March 13, Page 27).The review of 1,014 plants between October 1993 and February 1995 resulted in 129 plants being issued Accelerated Deficiency Notices.  Sixty percent of all deficiencies found in the review were in the area of sanitation, and over 90% of those deficiencies were found in less than half of the plants reviewed.  The report also said that "dramatic short-term decreases" in sanitation problems were found in plants where ADNs and Progressive Enforcement Action measures were applied.  The 1,000-plant review results were used to develop FSIS' proposed standard operating procedures for sanitation included in the HACCP proposal.  ((6FCN 4611, 22 pages, $10)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DRAFT NUTRITION ACTION PLAN URGES HACCP, FOOD CODE ADOPTIONA draft report of the U.N. Plan of Action for Nutrition recommended the application of HACCP to pre- and post-harvest of all foods and encouraged universal adoption of the Food and Drug Administration Model Food Code by all levels of government.The U.S. Departments of Agriculture, Health and Human Services and Agency for International Development are seeking comment on the draft plan by Jan. 29, a Dec. 28 Federal Register notice said.  The final U.S. Plan for Action is to be submitted to the World Health Organization for approval.  The latest effort stemmed from a 1992 meeting of the International Conference on Nutrition in Rome where 159 countries agreed upon a general blueprint for improving world nutrition status.Besides the HACCP and Food Code recommendations, the draft plan urged policymakers to improve the health and environmental status in animal agricultural systems by expanding the use of proven research such as baseline studies of microbiological problems to gauge contamination levels in the slaughter and processing of cattle and other species.The report urged expanded automated information systems such as the Field Automation and Information Management initiative to support the modernization of USDA field inspection programs.  In-plant inspectors should have access to automated information systems and such technology should be used to improve field to headquarters communication, the draft plan recommended.Plan Also Calls for Monitoring Dietary Exposure to Toxic ChemicalsOther recommended strategies to improve U.S. food safety included:  stepped-up monitoring of dietary exposure to toxic chemicals in foods, and continued assurances that food and food ingredients developed through new processing, packaging and packaging technologies are safe and nutritious.  Special nutritional foods should be regulated following the same standards of method and validation as for regular foods, the draft plan said.The government-wide plan endorsed new technologies that increase shelf life of perishables, improve safety in crop production including Integrated Pest Management, and improve ways to monitor food additives and detect toxic chemicals in foods.One emphasis in the draft plan was on expanding public education on food safety by promoting the use of hotlines and enhancing government disease reporting systems. The draft plan earmarked gaps in the U.S. food safety system that must be addressed in order to improve good health and nutrition.  The plan's authors recommended that more food processing operations use modern, proved effective systems to prevent food contamination, that legal requirements and enforcement for safe food handling need to keep pace with changes in marketing and preparation, and that some public water systems need to be upgraded.The nutrition plan also focused on the need for improved diagnosis and reporting of foodborne and waterborne illnesses and for expanded consumer education.  Gaps in the following food safety research areas were highlighted:  "Rapid detection and identification of foodborne and waterborne biological, chemical, and physical hazards; prevention of food and water, biological, chemical, and physical contamination; achievement of desired behavioral changes among consumers and food producers and processors; measurement of the incidence of foodborne and waterborne illness; and assessment of risk related to microbial organisms." Nutrition Monitoring Gaps Identified in Draft ReportPointing to the current budget climate, the draft plan ranked the "most critical gaps" in nutrition monitoring that should be corrected.  The report urged the government to develop culturally sensitive survey instruments for dietary information from high-risk groups; a set of methods and interpretive criteria for nutritional status and health conditions and improved dietary indicators; and methods that can be used by states, local communities and researchers that are comparable with national methods and allow for surveillance.  Guidelines for verifying and updating food composition data should also be revised as new methodologies are developed, the draft plan said.The report also cited gaps in nutrition-sensitive food production and economic programs and agricultural research that can hinder efforts to incorporate nutrition considerations in national policies.  The draft plan found that decision-makers need to improve coordination and dissemination of nutrition information to food producers, improve information on sustainable agriculture, step up research information to support cost/benefit analysis of nutrition policies, and increase interdisciplinary training for those seeking careers in nutrition.To address gaps, the report recommended a strategy that included basic research to enhance plant germplasm and sustainable production, to increase animal and fish production through integrated management and health systems, and to beef up economic analysis methods that can chart costs and benefits to society of healthy eating.  The draft plan identified gaps in human nutrition research that may block understanding between diet and disease.  Issues identified included:  the range in intake of nutrients and other food components that optimize health and reduce chronic disease; patterns of food intake and physical activity that provide the nutrition standard and appropriate energy balance to improve health; the point where nutrients interact with human genes to alter disease risk; factors affecting adoption and maintenance of behaviors that support optimal nutrition and physical activity patterns; and how research can translate into community interventions that improve health and nutritional status.The draft plan called for expanded public and private basic and applied research into a host of areas, such as basic studies of nutrition and dietary modulation of gene expression and cellular and metabolic processes, bionutrition, interaction with nutrients and environmental agents, safer upper limits of nutrition and nutritionally vulnerable populations.The document also mentioned gaps in U.S. policies that promote breastfeeding and proposed strategies to fix them.  The draft U.S. action plan identified the following themes in the December document:  Eating for Health, Nutrition Security for All, Safe Food and Water from Source to Table, Promoting Breastfeeding, Nutrition-Sensitive Food Production and Economic Policy, Human Nutrition Research and Nutrition Monitoring.  The plan also includes an international section, which outlines how the U.S. government can support developing countries in each of the World Plan of Action's subject areas.Single copies of the draft U.S. Plan of Action for Nutrition are available from Jay Hirschman, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, USDA, 1120 20th St., N.W., North Lobby, Suite 200, Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-418-2312, or fax 202-208-2321.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CALIFORNIA MARKET OWNERS FINED FOR SELLING, MISBRANDING MEAT ADULTERATED WITH SODIUM SULFITEThe U.S. District Court, Central District of California, has fined owners of a California meat market over $7,000 for selling adulterated and misbranded meat, according to USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service.Cazares Carniceria, a partnership doing business as Maywood Plaza Market, Inc., Riverside, pled guilty to selling meat to which sodium sulfite had been added and mixed to conceal damage and make the meat "appear of better and greater value," FSIS reported.  The partnership was fined $6,200.  Also fined was another partner, Ignacio Cazares, who pled guilty to misbranding meat because it had no labeling saying it contained sodium sulfite.  FSIS also reported that the partnership and Ignacio Cazares were placed on two years' probation for the incident, which took place in 1993.Bacteria-Tainted Ice Cream, Decomposed Tuna Steaks RecalledPotential contamination with Listeria monocytogenes bacteria prompted Friendly Ice Cream Corp. to recall half-gallon containers of its Chocolate Fudge Brownie Yogurt and Purely Chocolate Yogurt, according to news wire reports.  The company said there have been no reports of illness linked with the yogurt, which was manufactured in Troy, Ohio.    The Massachusetts-based firm said it halted production of the frozen yogurt and issued recall of 30,000 containers after the Food and Drug Administration detected the contamination during routine testing.  The recall affected product distributed in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and Virginia.  A recent FDA Foods Class II enforcement report noted the recall of over 14,000 pounds of frozen yellow fin tuna found to be decomposed and containing "hazardous levels of histamines."  Recalled by Tysons Foods, Inc., Springdale, Ark., the recall involved IQF Tuna Pieces; 4-oz. Tuna Steaks; 6-oz. Tuna Steaks; 8-oz. Tuna Steaks, and 4-oz. Tuna Sandwich Cuts manufactured by Tyson Seafood Group, Seattle, Wash.  Recall of the tuna, distributed nationwide as well as internationally, is ongoing, FDA reported.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FDA CLEARS MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE FOR USE IN CHICKEN, TURKEY FEEDIn a final rule issued Jan. 2, the Food and Drug Administration amended  573.625, menadione nicotinamide bisulfite, to provide for the safe use of the food additive, 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2-methyl-1,4-dioxo-2-naphthalene sulfonic acid with 3-pyridine carboxylic acid amine, CAS Reg. No. 73581-79-0, as a nutritional supplement for the prevention of vitamin K deficiency and as a source of supplemental niacin in chicken and turkey feed when used at a rate not to exceed 2 g/t of complete feed.  Vanetta (U.S.A.) Inc. petitioned the agency for the regulation (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 22, 1994, Page 38).Animal Drug Sponsor Changes Announced by FDAJan. 4, FDA issued final rules amending animal drug sponsor regulations to reflect changes in sponsor name and addresses and one change in sponsor: 522.883, etorphine hydrochloride injection, was amended to change the sponsor from Fort Dodge Laboratories to Wildlife Laboratories, Inc.; 510 was amended to reflect a change of sponsor name and address from American Cyanamid Co. to American Cyanamid, Division of American Homes Products, P.O. Box 1339, Fort Dodge, Iowa  50501, and to reflect a change of sponsor address for TRINADA, Inc. to One Executive Drive, P.O. Box 1399, Fort Lee, N.J. 07024.   Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996POLYMALEIC ACID AND ITS SODIUM SALT CLEARED FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF BEET AND CANE SUGAR JUICE, LIQUORThe Food and Drug Administration issued a final rule Jan. 5 amending  173.45, polymaleic acid and its sodium salt, to clear its use to control mineral scale during the production of beet and cane sugar juice and liquor at higher levels than the maximum currently permitted, as well as to amend specifications for the additives.  Ciba-Geigy, Inc. submitted a petition to FDA for the regulations (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 3, 1990, Page 34) containing information on a new manufacturing process which resulted in a lower weight-average molecular weight and number-average molecular weight than those currently permitted.  FDA issued a tentative final rule May 2, 1995 (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, May 8, 1995, Page 22), noting that the molecular weight determinations (weight-average in the range of 540 to 850; number-average in the range of 520 to 650) are to be based on the improved analytical method submitted by Ciba-Geigy, entitled "Determinations of Molecular Weight Distribution of Poly(Maleic) Acid."  Having received no comments or responses to the tentative final rule, FDA concluded it should be issued as a final rule.   Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CDC FOODBORNE DISEASE INVESTIGATION EFFORTS CRIPPLED BY BUDGET STALEMATEThe month-long budget stalemate has yet to have long-term consequences for the national sentinel site program but has crippled the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's ability to investigate foodborne outbreaks (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 17, Page 37)."No doubt the furloughs have made it difficult to keep the national surveillance system going," remarked CDC Medical Epidemiologist Fred Angulo.  State and local health departments are still collecting and reporting surveillance data to CDC investigators, but the agency cannot synthesize the data without support staff, he explained.  Travel is severely restricted, so CDC has had to postpone site assistance to state officials who have requested help from federal disease investigators, he added.  The budget crisis means states are not provided with resources to determine the magnitude of potential foodborne outbreaks."Fortunately, nothing major has happened," Angulo said, warning that the government shutdown could place CDC officials in a difficult situation if there were another deadly outbreak such as the Hanta Virus.  "How would we respond when we have no support?" Angulo said.Another key area where disease control officials are crippled is laboratory support.  With CDC's reference laboratory closed, federal officials are unable to analyze difficult case samples forwarded by state health departments.  These samples are checked against the federal laboratory's large specimen collection.  "We are the only lab in the country that does this," Angelo noted.While CDC has not been able to synthesize data from the national sentinel site program, a multi-agency effort to chart foodborne disease trends, the schedule is not likely to slip, CDC's Angulo predicted.  Since the objective of the program is not to respond to daily outbreaks but to record long-term trends, the furloughs are expected to have only a short-term impact.  The information is still being forwarded to CDC and, once the government budget battle is over, the data can be "run through computers," he explained.  "We've been unable to compile information and look at it," he said.  "But when the furlough ends, we will be on the same schedule."HHS Moves to Shore Up Health Statistics BranchMeanwhile, CDC Director David Satcher was told Dec. 13 that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services would be designating a "consolidated health statistics entity" to strengthen and coordinate general-purpose health surveys throughout HHS.HHS Secretary Donna Shalala said the new effort will create a stronger National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) while keeping the agency within CDC.  Shalala stressed that the new effort must continue to be objective and neutral in providing the foundation for health policy. Among the changes, Shalala plans to strengthen the role of NCHS director, expand NCHS's role in HHS data policy and provide the agency with greater independence and "a greater ability for NCHS to assume responsibility for the integrity, quality and efficiency of HHS statistics effort."Shalala said she plans to review the changes in two years and assess whether NCHS should stay in CDC in meeting statistics objectives.  ((6FCN 4612, 35 pages, $13)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES VIRTUALLY UNCHANGED FROM ADVISORY PANEL'S RECOMMENDATIONSThe fourth edition of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, unveiled last week as the "gold standard for good nutrition and health," is virtually unchanged from the draft prepared this summer by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 28, Page 38).  The guidelines for the first time include information on physical activity and dieting, vegetarian diets and recommendations that adults maintain their body weight as they age.  They also include an expanded section on grains, fruits and vegetables.The guidelines, last issued in 1990, were generally praised by industry and consumer groups.  However, the American Frozen Food Institute said the guidelines mislead consumers by suggesting that eating cooked or raw vegetables is the only way to obtain proper vegetable servings.  "[T]his language omits other categories of vegetable products, such as frozen," the group said.In the only reference to frozen foods, the guidelines state, "The availability of fresh fruits and vegetables varies by season and region of the country, but frozen and canned fruits and vegetables ensure a plentiful supply of these healthful foods throughout the year." Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala stressed that the guidelines reflect an increased understanding of the role of physical activity in maintaining an adequate diet.  "Diet and exercise are the twin engines that can carry you on the road to good health," she said at a Jan. 2 news conference.Baltimore Researchers Find Weight Loss Is More Effective than Exercise in Reducing CHD in Middle-aged and Older Overweight MenSeveral recent studies published in prominent medical journals have examined the effects of weight loss and aerobic activity on heart disease and other health conditions.Weight loss proved more effective in improving coronary artery disease profiles than exercise did in a group of 170 obese middle-aged and older men, a group of Baltimore-based gerontology experts led by physician Leslie Katzel of the University of Maryland School of Medicine noted in a study published in the Dec. 27 Journal of the American Medical Association.  The scientists set out to compare the effects of weight loss vs. aerobic exercise training on CAD risk factors in healthy, sedentary, obese, middle-aged and older men.  Ninety-seven percent of the study subjects were white.Seventy-three subjects started a nine-month, diet-induced weight loss program; another 71 an aerobic exercise program, and 26 served as a control group.  The "controls" were instructed not to lose weight or change their diets or level of physical activity for nine months.  During the test time period, dropouts affected each group  -- 44 finished the weight-loss program, 49 finished the aerobic program and 18 controls completed their assignment.  All original test subjects were instructed for three months in the principles of an isoenergetic American Heart Association phase I diet before the study began.Study results showed that "weight loss significantly improves lipoprotein concentrations, glucose tolerance, postprandial insulin levels and blood pressure levels, whereas aerobic exercise training in the absence of weight loss training has substantially less beneficial effects on these parameters," Katzel et al. noted, adding:  "This suggests that weight loss should be an integral part of interventions to reduce CAD risk in obese, middle-aged and older individuals."In an editorial in the JAMA issue, physician William Hazzard of the Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, N.C., noted that "the most encouraging news from this study is that carefully supervised weight loss achieved through reduced energy intake ... can significantly reduce blood pressure, fasting glucose levels (and improve oral glucose tolerance), triglycerides and low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, all serving to improve CAD profiles.  Correlational analyses suggested that the reduction in fat mass achieved was central to these changes."The study by Katzel et al. also "forms another link in the chain of evidence pointing toward weight control as a principal feature of a successful preventive strategy" for slowing the negative health effects often felt by aging Americans, Hazzard noted.  Successful aging, or preventive gerontology, has as its cardinal principle "the discovery of synergistic strategies or common pathways to preserving health and promoting health longevity," he said, adding:"This study further legitimizes the pathogenetic sequence that has underlain our advice to aging Americans -- i.e., sedentary behavior begets central adiposity begets insulin resistance begets hypertriglyceridemia, hyperglycemia, increased LDL concentrations, decreased HDL concentrations and hypertension.  ... However, as demonstrated in this study, weight loss reverses this cascade."Noncentral Obesity, While Less Serious than Central Obesity, Still Has Major Health Effects:  Manitoba ResearchersWhile central obesity, which is characterized by fat concentrated in the upper body and high waist-to-hip ratios (WHR), is considered the most potentially health-adverse type of obesity, Canadian researchers who published a study in the same JAMA issue are concerned that people who are noncentrally obese are not aware that their condition also is likely to be bad for their health.  The scientists defined noncentrally obese people as being overall obese but with low WHR.A representative sample of 2,792 adult residents of Manitoba, Canada, aged 18 to 74, were interviewed for the Manitoba Heart Health Survey.  Of that group, 2,339 underwent clinical examinations.  Blood pressure, fasting plasma glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, high density lipoprotein and low density lipoprotein measurements were compared with body mass index (BMI) and WHR.The Manitoba survey was part of a national effort to estimate the prevalence and distribution patterns of cardiovascular risk factors and assess the level of knowledge regarding cardiovascular health among Canadians.  In conducting the survey, physician T. Kue Young and colleague Dale Gelskey of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, found that noncentral obesity is not metabolically benign.  BMI as an overall measure of obesity is as important as, and sometimes more important than, WHR in predicting metabolic effects."Noncentral obesity is associated with a more unfavorable profile of blood pressure, plasma lipids and glucose compared with the nonobese, the researchers noted.  The Manitoba findings were similar to those from a study on male Japanese urban workers, among whom both BMI and WHR were associated with blood pressure, total cholesterol and HDL."There was a gradation in mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure between the nonobese, the noncentrally obese and the centrally obese," Young and Gelskey said, adding:  "While WHR was the stronger predictor than BMI for systolic blood pressure, the reverse was true for diastolic blood pressure. ... Our data relating to BMI and WHR are relevant to the design and implementation of health education and promotion.  Participants of risk assessment programs who are identified as noncentrally obese should still be offered appropriate nutritional and behavioral counseling for weight control, since this type of obesity is associated with significant metabolic effects, although of a reduced magnitude than central obesity."JAMA Contributors Disagree on the Possibility that Blood Cholesterol-lowering Drugs May Contribute to CancerResearchers/physicians Thomas Newman and Stephen Hulley of the School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, concluded in a "special communication" in the Jan. 3 JAMA that, after a literature review of the findings and implications of rodent carcinogenicity linked to lipid-lowering drugs, "the results of experiments in animals and humans suggest that lipid-lowering drug treatment, especially with the fibrates and statins, should be avoided except in patients at high short-term risk of coronary heart disease."  They added that "most cholesterol-lowering drugs cause or promote cancer in rodents."They caution, however, that extrapolation of this evidence of carcinogenesis from rodents to humans is an uncertain process, requiring longer-term clinical trials and careful postmarketing surveillance during the next several decades.Two physicians/researchers from the University of Arizona School of Medicine in Tucson disagreed with Newman and Hulley's findings, noting in a JAMA commentary in the same issue that "Newman and Hulley speculate that some classes of lipid-lowering drugs are more likely to cause cancer than others.  This speculation overlooks the fact that dietary treatment [used to lower lipids] has been reported to have the same apparent impact on cancer mortality as drug therapy.  If there is a relationship between treatment of elevated cholesterol levels and cancer, the critical factor would have to be lowering cholesterol levels, not the specific drug selected for therapy."James Dalen and William Dalton noted that they agreed with Newman and Hulley that all drugs should be subjected to safety monitoring before and after their introduction to clinical use.  But they added:  "We do not agree that a 20-year randomized clinical trial is feasible or necessary."The Arizona doctors said that Newman and Hulley "have not presented convincing evidence that cholesterol lowering by diet or drugs increases the risk of cancer death.  Their frequently reported recommendations that screening for and treatment of high cholesterol should be limited to those patients who are at greatest risk of CHD death, i.e., those with established CHD, might be supported by cost considerations but cannot be supported on the basis of safety or the risk of cancer."Primary prevention of CHD should remain an important public-health priority, Dalen and Dalton said, but deciding "the appropriate age to begin screening and treatment requires further discussion and careful consideration of the costs.  We hope the National Cholesterol Education Program will address these issues in their future meetings."Long-term Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy Does Not Halt Weight Gain, Fat DistributionMenopause has been associated with increases in upper body (android) fat distribution, researchers Donna Kritz-Silverstein and Elizabeth Barrett-Connor of the Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, University of California in San Diego, noted in the Jan. 3 JAMA, and they set out to see if such weight gain and distribution occurred in women taking hormone replacement therapy at the same rate as it occurred in women not taking HRT.They reported the results of a 15-year cohort study of 671 women aged 65 to 94 who lived in Rancho Bernardo, Calif.  The women fell into three groups  -- those who had never used hormone replacement therapy (194), those who used HRT intermittently (331), and those who used HRT continuously from the start of the study (from 1972 to 1974, ending with follow-up clinic visits between 1988 and 1991).After adjustment for potentially confounding covariates, "there were no significant differences between estrogen users and nonusers in BMI at follow-up, change in weight or BMI between baseline and follow-up, or WHR or fat mass at follow-up," Kritz-Silverstein and Barrett-Connor said.The researchers noted that many factors other than menopausal status are related to the prevalence of obesity and fat distribution, which varies substantially by ethnic and socioeconomic group.  The Rancho Bernardo subjects were white, relatively well-educated and at baseline leaner on average than the U.S. population, Kritz-Silverstein and Barrett-Connor said, adding:  "Therefore, these findings may not be generalizable to populations consisting of other racial, ethnic or socioeconomic groups."Studies Look at Adult Alcohol Consumption's Role in Adult Respiratory Health, Children's Cancer A group of researchers led by physician Mark Moss of the Department of Medicine, Denver General Hospital, looked at the effect of chronic alcohol abuse on the incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and in-hospital mortality.  Their results, published in the Jan. 3 JAMA, showed that a prior history of chronic alcohol abuse "increases the risk of developing ARDS in critically ill patients with an identified at-risk diagnosis."There are seven diagnoses that have been defined as causing a patient to be at risk for the development of ARDS:  sepsis, severe pancreatitis, hyper-transfusion, witnessed aspiration of gastric contents, abdominal trauma, chest trauma and multiple fractures, Moss et al. noted.  They had a total of 351 consecutive patients enrolled in their study between 1986 and 1993, with the largest group being white males.ARDS is associated with a mortality rate of 40% to 60%, Moss et al. noted, and they hope that their results "may be useful in the earlier and more accurate identification of patients at high risk for developing ARDS."  No specific therapy currently exists for treating ARDS, but people at high risk for the syndrome might benefit from the early use of respiratory and cardiovascular monitoring devices and other forms of intensive care unit  technology, the researchers said, adding:  "Furthermore, the identification of additional risk factors for the development or ARDS could yield new insights into the pathophysiology of the syndrome."The use of alcoholic beverages "poses a serious health problem for the American society," Moss et al. noted, adding that in 1985, an estimated 10.6 million Americans were dependent on alcohol, and an additional 7.3 million experienced some negative sociological consequences of alcohol abuse.  The National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism "has estimated that alcohol-related problems cost our society $117 billion in 1983, and this figure has likely increased over the past decade."  Meanwhile, an evaluation of data from a Children's Cancer Group case-control study was conducted by a group of researchers led by Xiao-Ou Shu and Julie Ross of the Division of Pediatric Epidemiology/Clinical Research, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis."  The conclusions reached by Shu et al., and published in the Jan. 3 edition of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, were that maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy increases the risk of infant leukemia, especially acute myeloid leukemias (AML), while maternal smoking does not elevate risk for either AML or acute lymphoid leukemias (ALL).  The implication is that "in utero exposure to alcohol may contribute to leukemogenesis involving myeloid cells."Paternal alcohol consumption did not confer an increased risk of infant leukemia, but paternal smoking one month prior to pregnancy was related to an elevated risk of ALL (OR = 1.56 and 95% CI = 1.03-3.26).In the Children's Cancer Group study, 302 leukemia cases (203 ALLs, 88 AMLs and 11 other leukemia types) were diagnosed in children 18 months of age and younger, and 558 individually matched, regional controls were included in the analysis.  Information about parental alcohol consumption and smoking behavior during pregnancy and the month prior to it was collected by telephone. Future studies should focus on the evaluation of the effect of timing of alcohol consumption, morphology-specific associations and interaction between alcohol consumption and other environmental exposures, Shu et al. noted.  Studies of biologic mechanisms for alcohol exposure during pregnancy and infant leukemia are also warranted, they said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FUTURE FSIS INSPECTION SYSTEM TO BE DEVELOPED BEGINNING WITH FEDERAL REGISTER NOTICE, PUBLIC MEETING:  TAYLORUSDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service will begin a public process soon to determine how the agency will use its inspection resources under a HACCP-based inspection system, acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor told FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS in an interview last week (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 29)."We've begun talking informally with constituencies about a process through which we would develop alternative modes of deploying our inspection resources both within plants and downstream, during transportation, distribution and retail," Taylor said, adding that the agency "would then pilot test and gather data to demonstrate that these alternative modes are better from a food safety standpoint.  Our goal here is not to save money or to reduce the resources we apply to this oversight, but to improve food safety by redeploying our resources.  We aren't going to make any changes in our inspection program unless we are confident that it will work to improve food safety."Taylor said the process will begin "in the next month or so" with a Federal Register notice announcing a public meeting "and other opportunities for people to help design the pilots."  The data from the pilots "will be made available in a way that people can participate in evaluating what we've learned" so the agency gets "the broadest possible input into modernizing how we use our inspection resources," Taylor said.The agency has been plagued by a shortage of inspectors and a budget shortfall that has stretched resources thin.  At the same time, Taylor has pledged to expand the agency's inspection oversight as part of a farm-to-table food safety system, and FSIS inspectors are also expected to perform additional monitoring and verification duties under HACCP.  Figuring out how to reconcile all that was one of the main charges of the agency's "top-to-bottom" review (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, Pages 4, 7 and 27).Reinventing Inspection Central to New Strategy" ...  We have a new framework, a HACCP framework, for the plants we inspect, which will require new tasks being performed by our inspectors; we also have a farm-to-table strategy that says there are going to be roles for FSIS at the transportation stage, distribution, and perhaps greater involvement in the retail level," Taylor said, adding, "So we've got new roles and responsibilities, we've got to keep achieving what we've achieved in the past, because what we've done in the past is valuable, but with all that, we're not likely to get significant new resources to do this job.  So it's very clear and very central to our new strategy that we reinvent inspection itself."How the agency carries out its statutory mandate of carcass-by-carcass inspection is likely to be central to the debate.  One agency plan would replace the current two to three line inspectors in broiler plants with one "zone" inspector, with plant employees performing sorting tasks (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 25, Page 53).  Agency officials have also discussed eliminating one of the inspection points of head, viscera or rail, and one top-to-bottom team recommended requiring plants to present only "normal" animals for inspection. "There's a lot of work that's gone on to begin to develop some possible alternative modes of inspection, and certainly looking at alternative ways to carry out the carcass-by-carcass mandate would be part of an overall alternative," Taylor said, adding, "We wouldn't be looking at that in isolation from how we're overseeing HACCP within that plant or how we're inspecting downstream from that plant.  But there's no question, going back to the National Academy of Sciences' report on a risk assessment approach to poultry inspection (1987), that there are opportunities to still achieve the very important consumer protection objectives of the current system of inspection but then make better use of our inspectors in addressing higher-priority food safety issues.  We're not wed to any particular alternative. ... We plan to lay out some possibilities in the Federal Register and the public meeting and have a public discussion about them."Taylor was sympathetic to the concerns of the inspectors' union, the National Joint Council of Food Inspection Locals, which is likely to be a formidable obstacle to change in the current inspection system.  "Everybody knows that we need to improve the way we do our job and use our resources and I think everyone is also rightfully concerned that we make these changes in a way that really will make things better," Taylor said, adding, "It's not change for change's sake.  Our employees, the industry community, the consumer community, the scientific community all have a legitimate set of interests and concerns that we need to consider and take full advantage of, and we're going to have a process that does that.  It's a very important undertaking, but it's very central to the success of the food safety initiative."Reorganization Plan to Go to Glickman This Week; Reinventing Government DiscussedTaylor also said that the agency's reorganization plan will formally go to Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman this week.  Details on the plan, which appeared in FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS in December, will likely be made available this week (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 11, Page 5).  Taylor said the plan is a "sweeping reorganization aimed not at downsizing the agency but at making the best possible use of all the resources we have both in the field and in headquarters.  It will be a reorganization that is in line with our HACCP, our farm-to-table food safety strategy."Taylor made his comments as the agency published several documents as part of USDA's reinventing food safety initiative (See stories, Pages 18 and 25).  A National Performance Review report on current and future USDA and FDA food safety initiatives is expected to be released today.Taylor said the "focal point" of the four FSIS documents was an advance notice of proposed rulemaking laying out the agency's regulatory reform strategy and listing regulations to be revised or eliminated to conform with HACCP.  "I know this has been a concern of a number of constituencies, particularly industry, that we not simply layer HACCP on top of the existing system," Taylor said, adding, "We are very committed to having a single integrated inspection that's centered around HACCP.  For HACCP to be successful, we have to very thoroughly review and reform our existing regulations."Taylor said the regulatory review, reinventing inspection and the reorganization are all part of the agency's reinventing itself as it moves to a HACCP-based inspection system.  "In order to make HACCP work, we need to change FSIS in a very fundamental way," he said.Taylor reiterated his commitment to make existing regulations compatible with HACCP before plants are required to implement HACCP.  Taylor said the agency is conducting a "page-by-page review" of existing regulations.  The initiative "goes beyond those that relate to safety and thus to HACCP to include all of our labeling regulations, our standards of identity, all of our prior approval systems for labeling, equipment, facilities.  There are a significant number of rulemaking initiatives coming along that not only support our HACCP initiative but are part of the president's regulatory reform and reinvention of government."Two published proposals would eliminate duplicative review of ingredients with FDA and establish a "generic amendment that would permit nutritionally improved standardized foods to be sold under a standardized name," Taylor said.  A final rule published the same day (Dec. 29) streamlined the prior label approval process.Other "very significant proposals" are forthcoming that would eliminate prior approval of facilities, equipment and blueprints and establish a performance standard for cooked meat and poultry products, Taylor said.  A "very good draft" of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on transportation, being done in concert with FDA, has been completed and will be published in the "next couple months," Taylor said.The agency is also moving ahead on the issue of carcass washing versus trimming after an October public meeting on the issue (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 30, Page 31).  "That was a good discussion of that issue and we have a lot of information to consider," Taylor said, adding, "We have data from the steam-vacuum trials that are very relevant to this issue, and we intend to take a next step on that issue and we're working on it."Despite the frenzy of activity at FSIS, rumors have persisted that Taylor will depart with the publication of a final HACCP rule.  Taylor said the rumors are untrue.  "I've heard the rumors but there's absolutely nothing to it," he said, adding, "We've got a lot of work to do.""We're all very busy but we've got a lot of very capable, committed people working very hard to get this done," he said, adding, "It is amazing to me how much is being produced.  It's a heroic effort that employees here are making."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BRIEF NOTESThe Produce Marketing Association on Dec. 22 asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate an advertisement in the Dec. 11 issue of Supermarket News by Food & Water, Inc.  PMA charged that the ad, which stated that pesticide residues on produce kill more Americans than assault weapons (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 45), are unfair and deceptive.  PMA asked the FTC to issue a cease-and-desist order against the ad as well as statements by Food & Water that produce treated with agricultural chemicals in compliance with government regulations is unsafe. The Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 issued a final rule that expands the types of labeling that are authorized for use on meat and poultry in both official U.S. establishments and certified foreign establishments.  The rule is said to eliminate unnecessary duplication in the labeling system, and is part of the Reinventing Government proposal (See related stories, Pages 18 and 25).  The effective date of the rule is July 1.FSIS Dec. 29 also published another Reinventing Government proposed rule that would give definitions of meat and poultry products that have been altered due to their nutritional content (i.e., "fat free," "low fat," "light").  Comments on the proposal are due Feb. 27, and questions should be addressed to Charles Edwards, 202-254-2565.Egg quality assurance and the end of the federal Salmonella program were the subjects of two recent letters.  On Nov. 20, Rep. Joe Skeen (R-N.M.), chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration and related agencies, asked for "an appropriate" amount of federal assistance to be given to the Salmonella enteritidis program in 1996 (the budget for which has been entirely cut) to allow for a smooth transition from a federal program to a state-industry program.  William Bell, executive director of the New England Poultry Association, wrote to Michael Taylor, USDA acting under secretary for food safety, Dec. 13, asking that FSIS employee and SE program worker Sheila Foster be funded through June to help train state egg-grading personnel to act as SE control monitors.FSIS will be inviting the American Association of Meat Processors, the Eastern Meat Packers Association and other industry groups to discuss the inspector harassment issue.  The meeting probably will be held this month in Washington, AAMP said Jan. 1 (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 13, Page 8).FSIS Dec. 1 allowed Venta de Especialidades Quimicas S.A., a Spanish firm, the right to allow the use of a blend of carrageenan (70%), xanthan gum (15%) and locust bean gum (15%) as a binder mix injected in water-added hams to prevent purging of the brine solution.  A letter to the firm said FSIS anticipated initiating rulemaking on the subject shortly (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 2, Page 9).Food & Water, Inc. is planning a Jan. 23 press conference in Washington at which Samuel Epstein of the University of Illinois will present new research on the health risks of dairy products from cows treated with bovine somatotropin.George Giddings died suddenly Dec. 24, according to Isomedix, Whippany, N.J.  Giddings was a consultant to Isomedix, and helped prepare the petition, now under consideration by the Department of Agriculture, seeking approval of irradiation of beef.The "Seafood HACCP Road Show," a series of seminars explaining the recently published final rule, has a couple of tentative dates lined up for this winter.  Put on by FDA's Office of Seafood, the road show hopes to hit the highway in February, with a meeting held before, after or during the Feb. 18-21 Pacific Fisheries Technologists conference in San Diego, Calif.  Also on the agenda are as-yet-unscheduled seminars in New Orleans and Baltimore and one coinciding with the March 12-14 Boston Seafood Show, an FDA-er said last week.  Funds permitting, the road show may also get to Hawaii, the FDA-er noted, because regulators and industry there complained about the difficulty they had getting to any of the Pacific Coast meetings of FDA's earlier series of informational seminars about the seafood HACCP proposed rule (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Jan. 31, 1994, Page 16).  For more definite information about the upcoming seminars, call the Office of Seafood at 202-418-3133 in early February.None of the 186 samples of domestic and imported animal feeds tested for pesticide residues by FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 1995 (July 1 to Sept. 30, 1995) were considered to have exceeded regulatory guidances, according to a Dec. 26 memorandum to regional food and drug directors, district directors and state feed control officials from Randy Arbaugh, Division of Federal-State Relations, Office of Regional Operations, of FDA's Office of Regulatory Affairs.  Tests conducted by FDA regional offices found a variety of pesticides, including diazinon, chlorpyrifos-methyl, chlorpyrifos-ethyl, malathion, pirimiphos-methyl, diazinon, DDT, lindane, fonofos and gardona.  ((6FCN 4613, 8 pages, $6)The Food and Drug Administration announced Jan. 4 the availability of a report prepared by the Center for Veterinary Medicine's Fluoroquinolone Working Group.  Addressing issues related to the center's approval of fluoroquinolone antimicrobial drugs in food animals, the report was written to respond to concerns about "increased  ... resistance in zoonotic organisms" in food animals that are transmitted to humans and cause disease.  The report, which will be featured in a full-length story next week, is available by contacting the Communication and Education Branch, CVM, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, Md. 20855.A test being developed by Cornell University researchers with funding from the New York Center for Advanced Technology in Biotechnology is aimed at being a more sensitive and reliable method to test municipal water supplies for Cryptosporidium parvum, the university reported.  Cornell also said that researchers at the university have worked out a way of using carbonation to keep dairy products fresh and fortified for months.The Lancet reported in its Dec. 23/30 issue that Streptococcus suis is a threat to pig farmers and abattoir workers.  The study found that the pathogen can enter the body through cuts or cracks in the skin surface, and can lead to fulminate sepsis and a type of meningitis, among other serious diseases.  "Infection could possibly be prevented by prompt disinfection of skin injuries of persons at risk," the article said.Caroline Smith DeWaal of the Center for Science in the Public Interest said she did not mean to imply that only restaurants are responsible for food safety (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 25, Page 23).  "The bottom line is that -- from farm to table -- we all need to share responsibility for food safety.  My remarks at the USDA conference are clear that neither consumers nor restaurants have sole responsibility for ensuring the safety of food products," DeWaal wrote the National Restaurant Association's Robert Harrington.  Harrington had expressed concern about her use of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data.Tracking Foodborne Pathogens from Farm to Table:  Data Needs to Evaluate Control Options is available from USDA's Economic Research Service.  The proceedings cover the meeting held on the issue last January (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Jan. 16, Page 38).  It costs $18; call  1-800-999-6779 to charge a copy or send a check to ERA-NASS, 341 Victory Drive, Herndon, Va. 22070.Some of the active compounds in Sho-saiko-to, a Chinese herbal medicine, may have antimutagenic effects, according to a paper by Masanori Ohtsuka and colleagues published in the December Japanese Journal of Cancer Research.Some noted food writers and scientists don't want olestra used, according to an article in the Jan. 3 New York Times.  Marion Nestle, chairwoman of the department of nutrition and food studies, New York University, and Clark Wolf, a New York restaurant consultant, both listed the product as one of the things they would "best like forgotten."  Others said that they wanted a return to fatty foods (eaten in moderation) instead of less tasty low-fat substitutes.Conjugated lineoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fat found in red meat, has been proven to inhibit breast and skin cancer in three rodent studies, according to the November/December issue of the 1995 Meat Board Research/Meat Science Update.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-9IA074-000493-B045-146http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013034 text/html 82110HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:28:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:34 GMTContent-length: 81923Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb17.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PROCESS TECHNOLOGY Butter Flavor Derived from Lactic Acid (448 words) Honey Makes Fat Free Chips Crisper (438 words) Vegetable Fibers to Resemble Meat (219 words) Better Cinnamon Rolls with SFE (599 words) PRESERVATIVES/ANTIOXIDANTS Isothiocyanates Are Natural Alternative (550 words) Covi-Ox Protects Against Rancidity (226 words) Rosemary Puts Pep in Pepperoni (243 words) FATS AND SUBSTITUTES FDA Committee Says Olestra Safe (496 words) Fatty Acid Polyester Used in Low-Cal Food (201 words) Product Bakes Moister Cakes (99 words) Proprietary Process for Peanut Butter (211 words) Chicken Fat Powder With a Milk Carrier (85 words) SWEETENERS Glazing Over Caramel Corn (244 words) Systems Bio-Industries Adds on Aspartame (273 words) Splenda Sweetens Mexican Drinks (117 words) Sugar-Containing Solutions Softened (300 words) FLAVORS AND ENHANCERS Honey Heightens Taste Perception (537 words) Report Determines That MSG Is Safe (522 words) More Intense Cinnamon Flavor (123 words) TESTING AND ANALYSIS SFE Compared with SPE for Ham Analysis (151 words) Pesticides Removed from Fruits, Veggies (428 words) RESEARCH REPORTS Focus on Foods' Health Benefits (655 words) Consumers Trust Farmers the Most (164 words) INDUSTRY NEWS New Markets Sought by U.S. Food Makers (513 words) Companies Expand and Restructure (267 words) Xylose Plant Now Under Construction (102 words) Processors Acquire Ingredient Firms (382 words) Meats and Baked Goods Acquired (181 words) MARKETS Sugar Prices Drop, Maybe Up for Milk (366 words) Shifts Seen in Vitamin E (384 words) Demand for Garlic Is Seen Tripling (151 words) REGULATIONS FDA Proposes Changes in NLEA (664 words) FDA Requires HACCP for Seafood (213 words) Meat Processors Want Safety Rules, Too (157 words) RESOURCES Product Information in Print, Online (174 words) MEETINGS (72 words) CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Butter Flavor Derivedfrom Lactic AcidA pilot-scale catalytic reactor system will be used by Natura, Inc.(3900 Collins Rd., Suite 1007, Lansing, MI 48910; Tel: 517/336-4635) for the natural processing of 2,3-pentanedione from lacticacid. 2,3-Pentanedione is used as the buttery flavor in popcorn andother food products.  According to Chemical Marketing Reporter, anestimated 15,000 lbs. of 2,3-pentanedione are annually consumedworldwide in food related applications.The Dept. of Agriculture (USDA) awarded $203,000 to Natura in asecond-phase grant to develop a large-scale catalytic reactionprocess and to improve product purity and yields of natural 2,3-pentanedione.  The large-scale process should result in lowerprices for the product.  At present, the natural form costs $60-$80/lb., while the synthetic version costs $50-$60/lb.When FIN first spoke with Prashant Kokitkar, the principalinvestigator in the development of the catalytic reactor system, hesaid the pilot-scale reactor was "nearly at the end of theconstruction stage" and that he expected to have the system running"within a week."  The commercial-scale reactor should beoperational within one year.  Kokitkar explained that the one-stepprocess provides a shortcut in manufacturing, thereby offeringtime-saving and cost-cutting advantages over the other twoapproaches used by industry currently.Other advantages are that the process is environmentally friendlyand that the starting material is lactic acid, derived from thefermentation of corn. The commercial methods of 2,3-pentanedioneproduction either extract the chemical from dairy products or startwith petroleum in a multi-step, expensive process.While a post-doc at Michigan State University (MSU), Kokitkar waspart of the group that invented the process.  Dennis Miller ofMSU's Dept. of Chemical Engineering and Ned Jackson of the Dept. ofChemistry were also part of the team.  MSU has filed a patent forthe process, which will be licensed to Natura.  A contractor willmanufacture the product for Natura.  Kokitkar points out that thechemical produced by this method has been tested and found to be"nature-identical."  The investigator adds that in addition tobeing a valuable food ingredient, 2,3-pentanedione has thepotential to be used as a starting material for other flavorcompounds.Natura is a spin-off company of the Michigan BiotechnologyInstitute, located at the same address.  Natura, which wasincorporated in December 1994, focuses on the production of naturalfood flavors and ingredients.  Ron Carlotti, Natura's president,explained that the young company is "looking for prospectiveinvestors to get through the start-up phase."  Natura is seekingpotential customers, in both food and non-food areas.  In additionto 2,3-pentanedione, products under development for the foodindustry include a salty flavor and a sugar bulking agent.  Abiophosphorescent material has potential applications outside thefood industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Honey Makes FatFree Chips CrisperFat-free potato chips can be made with microwave technology, butthe appearance and texture of these chips does not compare withcommercial chips.  Scientists in California have found thatincluding honey in the process can enhance the color and crispnessof microwavable fat-free potato chips.  This research project waspart of a larger effort to develop healthy snack foods.In the process, sliced potatoes are soaked in brine and honey,drained, and then sent through a microwave tunnel.  The scientistsinvestigated 27 combinations of study variables--type of honey,concentration of honey in solution, and duration of exposure to themicrowave oven.  Liquid honey, drum-dried honey, and a mixture ofthe two were investigated.  The level of concentration was 4%, 5%,or 6% honey.  For each trial, the exposure time variable was set at4.45, 9.86, or 12.59 min.  Color and texture were measuredquantitatively with a chromasensor and a texturometer,respectively.The brownest chips resulted from the potatoes soaked in drum-driedhoney, which contained 70% honey solids.  The 6% honey solution wasfound the best for browning.  Not surprisingly, the darkest chipsalso resulted from the longest exposure time to the microwave oven.The potatoes soaked in 5% honey solution made the crispest chips,based on the amount of force needed to break the chip.  Also, themedian experimental variable for exposure time made the crispestchips (9.86 minutes).  After statistical analysis, the authorsconcluded that the process variables resulting in the crispest,brownest fat-free chips were 4% liquid honey solution and anexposure time of 4.45 min.Kyros Demetriades, Clarissa Guffey, and Hany M. Khalil (Dept. ofFood Science and Nutrition, California Polytechnic StateUniversity, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407; Tel: 619/756-2852) published"Evaluating the Role of Honey in Fat-Free Potato Chips" in FoodTechnology [49(10): 66-67, 1995].  The article was based on a paperfirst presented at the Annual Meeting of the Institute of FoodTechnologists, Anaheim, CA, June 3-7, 1995.  The project was fundedby the National Honey Board.In an interview with FIN, Khalil said that the potato chips "tastedvery good," especially if you desire a chip with more of a potatotaste.  For those who crave the fatty taste of regular chips, theymay need to lower their expectations.  Khalil explained thatswitching to reduced fat snack foods means you need to "compromisea little bit for the health benefits."Khalil's work focuses on the use of microwave energy in processdevelopment.  In addition to developing potato chips and carrotchips as snack foods, Khalil currently is devising a microwavemethod for reducing microbial content in spices.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Vegetable Fibersto Resemble MeatEdmund W. Lusas, Gabriel J. Guzman, and Steven C. Doty of the FoodProtein Research and Development Dept. at Texas A&M University(College Station, TX 77843-2476; Tel: 409/845-2777, Fax: 409/845-7244) have patented a method (U.S. 5,437,885) for convertingoilseed protein meal into meat-like fibers.  The fibers can be usedin a product such as beef jerky to provide a more nutritionallybalanced snack food.The first step of the new process is to mix water with dehulled,defatted oilseed protein meal, such as that originating fromsoybeans.  The mixture is heated at a temperature between 200 and350F, extruded, coated with edible oil or fat, and extruded again.Non-spongy fibers with a nonporous texture result. The fibersresemble glistening, broiled meat fibers.Lusas explained that when these fibers are worked into beef jerky,the product looks fresher and has a good appearance.  The objectiveof the project was to develop fibers that look shiny, which is whyoil is applied in the last stages of extrusion.The department is a contract process research and development groupthat focuses on oilseed processing.  One of their strengths is oilextraction, and most of the projects are supported by industry.Projects include the development of reduced-calorie peanut snacksand a low-cost texturized soybean product that resembles groundmeat.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Better CinnamonRolls with SFEThe true cinnamon of commerce is prepared from the inner bark ofthe tropical tree Cinnamomum zeylanicum, while an inferior productgenerically termed "cassia" is obtained from closely related treesof the same genus. Tests for cinnamon purity and quality controlhave previously relied on Soxhlet extraction, solvent extraction atreflux, or simultaneous steam distillation-solvent extraction, butthree U.S. and British researchers have determined that solvent-assisted supercritical fluid extraction isolates the essential oilsof true cinnamon and cassia more efficiently for separation andanalysis by series-coupled column gas chromatography.Kenneth G. Miller, Colin F. Poole (Centre for Analytical Chemistry,Imperial College, South Kensington, London SW7 2AY, U.K.) and TinaM.P. Chichila optimized extraction conditions for essential oilsfrom powdered cinnamon by carbon dioxide at 300 atm and 70C. Theymixed 0.5 g of powdered cinnamon with 4.5 g anhydrous sodiumsulfate and added 1.0 ml acetonitrile at the beginning ofsequential 30 min. static and 30 min. dynamic extraction periods.They collected the semivolatile essential oils by solvent trappingin ethyl acetate and analyzed them directly by series-coupledcolumn gas chromatography after filtration and partial solventevaporation.The authors used a Suprex 200A supercritical fluid chromatographthat was modified for supercritical fluid extraction. Controlextractions were made from each sample by Soxhlet extraction. Theauthors used a Seimens Sichromat-2 dual-oven gas chromatographfitted with a split injector and a flame ionization detector. Forgas chromatography/mass spectrometry, they used a 3400 gaschromatograph equipped with a model 1075 splitless injectorinterfaced to a Finnigan MAT Magnum ion tap detector.Poole reports in Journal of High Resolution Chromatography [18-8,461-471, 1995] that the three authors identified and quantified 21compounds in 24 authenticated and retail samples of cinnamon andcassia. The dominant essence in both cinnamon and cassia is trans-cinnamaldehyde, which varies in concentration from 0.5-53 mg/g,with smaller amounts of various aromatic compounds and esters. Truecinnamon and cassia are easily distinguishable by the presence incinnamon of eugenol and benzyl benzoate, which are absent ornegligible in cassia. Cassia, in contrast, contains coumarin anddelta-cadinene, which are absent or trace components in cinnamon.The extractions were slow or incomplete at pressures below 300 atmand temperatures below 50C. The authors found that solvent-assisted supercritical fluid extraction was at least equivalent toSoxhlet in its ability to extract semivolatile compounds fromcinnamon and cassia, and preferable to Soxhlet for generalapplications because it gives faster extractions without generatingartifact peaks. Absolute recoveries by supercritical fluidextraction and Soxhlet were about the same while solvent reflux for2 hrs. and simultaneous steam distillation/solvent extractionachieved significantly lower recoveries of many components.The concentration of cinnamaldehyde is one parameter for judgingthe flavor quality of spice, with quality being directlyproportional to concentration. The average cinnamaldehydeconcentration in cassia, however, is actually higher. Principalcomponent analysis of the 23 samples using the relative compositionof the 12 major semivolatile essences gave a clear distinctionbetween cinnamon and cassia. The loadings for "principal component1" are heavily weighted to benzyl benzoate, 2-methoxycinnamaldehyde, and benzaldehyde as positive coefficientsand coumarin and beta-caryophyllene as negative coefficients forcinnamon.High relative concentrations of benzyl anzoate and 2-methoxycinnamaldehyde are characteristic of cinnamon and highrelative concentrations of coumarin and beta-caryophyllene arecharacteristic of cassia. The authors conclude that principalcomponent 1 effectively discriminates between cinnamon and cassia.A plot of PC-1 versus PC-2 clearly separates the 24 samples intotwo groups of 11 and 13, with all the U.S. cinnamons falling in thecassia group.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Isothiocyanates AreNatural AlternativeAlthough the commercial use of isothiocyanates is limited, Canadianscientists propose that the natural agents could replace syntheticpreservatives in certain applications of packaged foods.  Theirvolatility make them attractive candidates for use in modernpackaging, either with other antimicrobial agents or on their own.Pascal J. Delaquis and Joe Mazza of the Agriculture and Agri-FoodCanada Research Centre (Summerland, BC V0H 1Z0; Tel: 604/494-7711)have reviewed the effect of isothiocyanates on microbes."Antimicrobial Properties of Isothiocyanates in Food Preservation"was a peer-reviewed article published in Food Technology[49(11):73-84, 1995].Isothiocyanates are found in cruciferous plants, such ashorseradish, cauliflower, mustard, cabbage, turnip, radish,rapeseed, and Brussels sprouts.  The Romans used mustard seed topreserve wine and fruit juices.  These sulfur-containing compoundscan be recovered commercially by steam distillation of ground wetplant material, but synthetic manufacturing processes have beenavailable since the 1940s.  Isothiocyanates have been used formilitary tear gas, pesticides, and industrial purposes.The molecular structure of isothiocyanates varies.  The genericmolecular formula is R-N=C=S where the R-side group may be methyl(CH3), allyl (CH2-CH-CH2), or a number of other possiblestructures.Isothiocyanates have been found potent inhibitors of microorganismswhen tested with a variety of fungi, yeasts, and bacteria.  In the1960s, about 100 natural and synthetic isothiocyanates were testedfor antifungal activity, and it was found that the aromaticderivatives were the most effective of the natural compounds.  Inthe 1990s, Japanese scientists have shown that vapors can inhibitthe growth of several fungi.  At a concentration of 1%, allylisothiocyanate can prevent yeast growth in fruit juices.  A reviewof the antibacterial studies determined that isothiocyanates arenot as effective at impeding the growth of bacteria as they arewith fungal growth.  Also, certain strains are more resistant tothe bacteriocidal and bacteriostatic effects than others.Natural extracts of allyl isothiocyanate (CH2-CH-CH2-N=C=S) areused as a preservative in Japan.  Synthetic forms may becontaminated with a toxic substance, allyl chloride, which is usedin the manufacturing process.  Allyl isothiocyanate is incorporatedinto the packaging material in order to extend the shelf life ofcertain foods.Isothiocyanates are not widely used because the health effects areunknown.  The findings are mixed regarding toxicity and potentialhealth benefits.  At least three recent studies show that certainisothiocyanates may inhibit the development of cancers.  At thesame time, certain kinds are thought to be linked to thedevelopment of goiters through the binding of iodine by thethiocyanate ion.  Some isothiocyanates are thought to be cytotoxicor mutagenic.  The data are contradictory.  The authors urge thatmore research be conducted in this area, since these compoundscould provide a natural source of preservatives.Another reason isothiocyanates may not be used widely as foodpreservatives is the pungent flavor and odor of these compounds.Threshold levels range from 8 parts per billion (ppb) for allylisothiocyanate to 380 ppb for 3-butenyl isothiocyanate.  But,antimicrobial activity in foods may be possible with concentrationsbelow the threshold level in the vapor phase.  Allyl isothiocyanateis used to control surface growth.  Studies have not been conductedon the absorption and dissolution of these compounds into foodproducts.  Delaquis and Mazza urge that more investigations beconducted to determine the potential of isothiocyanates as foodpreservatives.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Covi-Ox ProtectsAgainst RancidityHenkel Corp. (5325 S. Ninth Ave., La Grange, IL 60525-3602; Tel:708/579-6150, Fax: 708/579-6152) markets a product consisting ofnatural mixed tocopherols to protect foods containing highlyunsaturated oils.  Covi-Ox protects against oxidative rancidity,which leads to off-odors and off-flavors.  Natural mixedtocopherols are GRAS (generally regarded as safe) substances andare approved as a preservative by the Food and Drug Administration(21 CFR 182.3890).  According to the company, Covi-Ox tocopherolsare the only approved natural fat-soluble antioxidants available.Since the tocopherol mixture is of low volatility, Covi-Ox can beadded to the food product during high-temperature processingwithout losing activity.  By contrast, synthetic antioxidantsusually volatilize at the same high temperatures.  According toHenkel, Covi-Ox may be used as an antioxidant to protect lecithin,vegetable and citrus oils, milk fat, cereal, dehydrated potatoes,meat products, and a long list of other foods or ingredients.Covi-Ox is available as a water dispersible powder (Covi-Ox T-30P)and as clear, viscous oils (Covi-Ox T-50 and T-70).  The optimallevel of tocopherols in food products ranges between 0.01% and 0.2%of the fat or oil content.Henkel Corp. is one of the top 200 international companies, and itsFine Chemicals Div. is the leading producer of natural tocopherols.In addition to Covi-Ox, the Fine Chemicals Div. markets mediumchain triglycerides, whipped topping concentrates, and bread/bakingingredients.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Rosemary PutsPep in PepperoniDiversitech, Inc. (2411 NW 41st St., Gainesville, FL 32606-6662;Tel: 904/377-7071, Fax: 904/377-7073) markets three forms ofRosemary extract for extending the shelf-life of pepperoni andother meat products.  The extract stabilizes color and flavor andretards the oxidation of fat in the meats.ColorLife Rosemary extracts come in an oil-soluble powder (RosemaryPowder-P), an oil-soluble liquid (Rosemary Liquid-O), and a water-dispersible liquid (Rosemary Liquid-W).  The powder may be added tothe meat mix directly or mixed with dry spices or solids.  Whenrefrigerated and protected from moisture, light, and oxygen, thepowder remains stable for at least two years.The usage rate is 0.01% to 0.05%.  Liquid-O can be added to the fatportion of a food, mixed with flavorings and then added to thefood, or diluted with oil and sprayed onto food.  Liquid-W can beused in sausage, snack flavorings, and soups.  Depending on fatcontent, Liquid-O inhibits rancidity at dilutions of 0.02% to0.10%, while Liquid-W inhibits at dilutions of 0.03% to 0.14%.Diversitech markets spice blends to the food industry, primarily tothe meat industry.  The company markets ColorLife as a standardizedrosemary extract.  An advantage of this product is its standardizedactive ingredients.  Diversitech offers customized blends withother antioxidants or spices. According to the company, most of therosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) imported to the U.S. is grown inSpain, France, and Portugal.  The leaves contain compounds thatstabilize the fats in meat.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA CommitteeSays Olestra SafeThe fat substitute olestra is undergoing Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) review.  The FDA Food Advisory Committee metrecently and determined that olestra poses no harm as a foodingredient.  Olestra is the only fat-based fat substitute ever toundergo federal review in the U.S.  Other fat substitutes arecarbohydrate- or protein-based.Procter & Gamble Co. (One Procter & Gamble Plaza, P.O. Box 599,Cincinnati, OH 45201-0599; Tel: 513/983-1100, Fax: 513/983-9369)first sought approval to use olestra as a food ingredient in 1987.At that time, the company filed a food additive petition for usingolestra in shortening and cooking oil.  In 1990, the petition wasamended to use olestra as a fat substitute in savory snacks.Examples of salty or sharp-tasting snacks of interest to thecompany are cheese puffs and crackers.The Advisory Committee discussed the findings of a team of seniormanagers from FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutritionand FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine, who met earlier in 1995.The team of senior managers reviewed safety data and discussed thedata with experts from academia and federal agencies.  Since theoriginal petition was filed in 1987, Procter & Gamble has submitteddata from more than 150 investigations on the safety of olestra.A working group of the Food Advisory Committee reviewed the fatsubstitute's chemistry and consumption, toxicology, potentialinterference with drug absorption, effects to the digestive system,labeling, and nutritional effects.  The group decided that thestudy questions and data were sufficient, but the vote was notunanimous for deciding that the data indicated that olestra wassafe for human consumption.  The group recommended that productsmade with olestra carry a warning label that the ingredient mightcause intestinal discomfort or might have a laxative effect.Although no studies showed that olestra has an adverse effect onthe ability to absorb water-soluble vitamins, the committeerecommends that olestra be fortified with vitamins A, D, E, and K.The full Food Advisory Committee concurred with the findings of theworking group.  The Advisory Committee decided that "a reasonablecertainty exists of no harm" from olestra's proposed foodapplications.  The FDA will use this analysis in order to decide onwhether to allow Procter & Gamble to use olestra as a foodingredient.Olestra is a fat substitute formed from the combination of sucrosewith fatty acids.  The food ingredient does not liberate caloriesbecause the body cannot metabolize it.  In olestra, the glycerolmolecule present in fat is replaced by sucrose.  And instead ofthree fatty acid molecules, olestra has seven or eight.  The fatsubstitute is not metabolized because digestive enzymes cannot getpast the fatty acid molecules to access the sucrose center beforeolestra exits the digestive tract.Procter & Gamble reported food and beverage sales of $3.988 billionin 1995.  Crisco, Jif, Duncan Hines, Folgers, Hawaiian Punch, andSunny Delight are examples of its more common household food andbeverage products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Fatty Acid PolyesterUsed in Low-Cal FoodA two-step process prepares saccharide fatty acid polyesters froma sugar and a reagent containing a fatty acid.  The resultingpolyesters can be used as fat substitutes or low-calorie fats infoods.Gerry Hasenhuettl of Kraft General Foods (3 Lakes Dr., Northfield,IL 60093; Tel: 708/646-7469) invented the process (U.S. Patent5,440,027).  First, the sugar is partially esterified.  Then, areagent containing a fatty acid is used to react with the partiallyesterified sugar.  The reagent may be fatty acids, fatty acidesters, salts of fatty acids, or fatty acid anhydrides.  Saccharidefatty acid polyesters result from the reaction.Less carmelization and fewer decomposition reactions are two basicadvantages of using a partially esterified sugar for the reaction.Also, the reaction system is more homogeneous, and the formation oflow molecular weight ester byproducts is less.According to Hasenhuettl, these saccharide fatty acid polyesterswould fall into the same category as olestra, a zero-calorie fatsubstitute made from sucrose and fatty acids.  Procter & Gamble(One Procter & Gamble Plaza, P.O. Box 599, Cincinnati, OH 45201-0599; Tel: 513/983-1100, Fax: 513/983-9369) manufactures olestraand has petitioned the FDA for approval to use the fat substituteas an ingredient.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Product BakesMoister CakesJuan M. Gonzalez-Sanz of the Pillsbury Co. (200 S. 6th St.,Minneapolis, MN 55402-1464; Tel: 612/330-4741) invented a low-fatspreadable composition that can be used with baked foods or alone,as a frosting.   Shortening, starch, a hydrocolloid, an emulsifier,and a sweetener make up the product.  The starch has a hydrophilicstarch component and a modified hydrophobic starch component.When used as a frosting, the low-fat composition exhibits enhancedadhesion.  When used in baked foods, such as cakes, rolls, breads,biscuits, and pastries, the product increases the moistness. U.S.Patent 5,439,697 was issued to Pillsbury for this invention.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Proprietary Processfor Peanut ButterSeabrook Enterprises, Inc. (100 Galleria Pkwy. NW, Suite 580,Atlanta, GA 30339; Tel: 770/951-0404) now markets a reduced-fatpeanut butter for fillings, coatings, bakery items, nutrition bars,dairy products, and candy centers.  Only two reduced-fat peanutbutters have been commercialized.  A similar product is the low-fatpeanut spread, which does not contain the minimum level of 90%peanuts to qualify as peanut butter.According to Tucker Dodson, Seabrook Enterprise's VP of sales, themain advantage of Seabrook Enterprise's reduced-fat peanut butteris that it "has all the same nutritional function with 25% lessfat" than whole-fat peanut butter.  No vitamin or mineralsupplement is added to the all-natural product.  The flavor is moreconcentrated, the product is less apt to separate, and the peanutbutter is more heat stable.About 25-30% of the fat is removed by their proprietary method.  In1994, the company applied for a patent for the fat-extractingtechnology.  Although this product is sold solely as a foodingredient on the industrial market, the peanut butter is availablefor repackaging for retail sale.Dodson describes the company as a "vertically integrated peanutshelling and processing company" that is the largest of its kind inthe U.S.  Seabrook Enterprise processes 400 million pounds ofpeanuts annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chicken Fat PowderWith a Milk CarrierInternational Dehydrated Foods, Inc. (IDF, 3801 E. Sunshine,Springfield, MO 65809; Tel: 417/881-7820, Fax: 417/881-7274) ismaking available a Powdered Chicken Fat that uses nonfat dry milkas a carrier. To protect flavor, BHA, propyl gallate and citricacid are added, but natural antioxidants are also available.The powder is white to ivory-colored, has a mild flavor and odortypical of chicken fat, and meets all applicable FDA requirements.Suggested applications are chicken seasoning, cream soups, drygravy mixes, sauces and dry soup mixes.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Glazing OverCaramel CornMichael L. Jensen and Sara J. Risch of Golden Valley MicrowaveFoods, Inc. (7450 Metro Blvd., Edina, MN 55439; Tel: 612/835-6900)have invented a microwavable mixture for sweetening microwavepopcorn.  The mixture is composed of unpopped popcorn, a sweeteningblend, and a glazing blend.  Salt may also be added to the unpoppedcorn.The sweetening blend is made from an oil and sugar crystals.  Theweight ratio of sweetening blend to unpopped popcorn is between0.5/1 to 1.5/1.  The oil's melting point is above 115F. Thecrystalline sugar has a moisture content less than 2% by weight.The glazing blend, which is mixed with the unpopped popcorn, ismade from corn syrup (80-90% by weight), oil (10-20% by weight),and an emulsifier.  As with the oil used for the sweetening blend,the glazing oil's melting point should be above 115F.Jensen, a food technologist with Golden Valley Microwave Foods,told FIN that the method has been used in the past for a marketedpopcorn product.  The work originated in order to eliminate thesecond step necessary in making caramel popcorn.  In order tosweeten the popcorn, a wafer is placed on the cooked popcorn andmelted in a second microwaving step.  Jensen and Risch's inventioneliminates the need for a separate wafer containing sweetener.Instead, the popcorn is coated with both sweetening and glazingblends.  The patent may be licensed by companies interested inusing the mixture in their own products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Systems Bio-IndustriesAdds on AspartameThe NutraSweet Co. (1751 Lake Cook Rd., Deerfield, IL 60015; Tel:708/940-9800) no longer has exclusive rights to aspartame, andSystems Bio-Industries (8 Neshaminy Interplex, Suite 213, Trevose,PA 19053; Tel: 215/638-7801) joins the list of other companies whohave added aspartame to their line of food ingredients.Aspartame is about 200 times sweeter than table sugar (sucrose).The artificial sweetener is an ingredient in 500 foods andbeverages, such as yogurt, drink mixes, and carbonated soft drinks.The product loses sweetness when exposed to heat, moisture, oralkaline conditions.  Aspartame is made by joining two amino acids--aspartic acid and phenylalanine--which are found in naturalproteins.Aspartame is one of the most widely tested food ingredients.  Morethan 100 safety tests were conducted before it was marketed.  Theproduct was approved in the U.S. in 1981 as an ingredient inpowdered mixes and for use as a tabletop sweetener.  In 1983,carbonated drinks were added to the list of approved uses. The foodingredient is marketed in more than 70 countries.  Product namesinclude NutraSweet, Equal, Spoonful, and Natra Taste.According to Jim Duffy, account manager, sales and marketing (620Progress Ave., Waukesha, WI 53186; Tel: 800/654-2396), the companyis an industry leader among food ingredient manufacturers. Inaddition to Aspartame 200, they manufactures a variety of foodingredients and additives, including enzyme-modified dairyingredients, gels, fruit preparations, pectins, and natural flavorsystems.  In January 1995, when SKW Trostberg A.G. of Germanyacquired the company, the name was changed to Systems Bio-Industries from Sanofi Bio-Industries.  The acquisition increasedSKW's total sales to the food industry by $1 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Splenda SweetensMexican DrinksMcNeil Specialty Products Co. (501 George St., New Brunswick, NY08903-2400; Tel: 908/524-1837, Fax: 908/524-6735) is awaiting FDAapproval for its Splenda brand sweetener (sucralose) in the U.S.,but this low calorie sweetener made from sugar can be found in manyoverseas applications.The latest is a line of diet, lightly-flavored sparkling watersmarketed under the name Spark Lite and made by Agua de MasaJunghanns, a privately-held company located in Puebla, Mexico. Thedrink is available in three flavors:  tangerine, kiwi and peach,and is packaged in 12-ounce cans. Splenda is made here by McNeil,a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, and is imported and distributedin Mexico by Johnson & Johnson S.A. de C.V.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sugar-ContainingSolutions SoftenedA cation exchange resin-based process for softening aqueoussolutions such sugar juice or molasses has been investigated.Michael Saska of the Louisiana State University (LSU, ChemicalEngineering Dept., Baton Rouge, LA 70803; Tel: 504/388-3327)reports that the sugar cane and sugar beet industries produce largequantities of non-crystallizable sugar juice, or sugar factorymolasses.  This molasses has a high sugar content and is treatedto extract the sugars.Such conventional treatment involves subjecting the molasses to anion exclusion chromatography process using a fixed support of astrong sodium (Na) or potassium (K) cation resin.  The problem isthat magnesium (Mg) and/or calcium (Ca) salts dissolved in themolasses and, as charged Ca2+ and/or Mg2+ ions, replace the Na+ andK+ ions during the chromatography operation, reducing theseparating power of the technique.  As a result, the chromatographyoperation is interrupted periodically to regenerate the cationresin.Regeneration reagent is consumed and productivity is reduced.  Oneapproach to overcome the problem involves the elimination of theCa2+ and/or Mg2+ ions prior to the chromatography step.  Such atechnique also requires the use of a regeneration reagent and hasthe additional disadvantage of producing wastewater containingsugar, reducing the yield from the overall process.In the new process, the sugar juice is softened by bringing it intocontact with Na+ and/or K+ cation exchange resins in a conventionalmanner.  The key to the new technique is the regeneration part ofthe process, which makes clever use of one of the liquid effluentsin a sugar factory.  The raffinate generated during thechromatographic separation and charged with Na+ and/or K+ ions isnormally discarded.  The researchers concentrated the raffinate andused it to regenerate the resin used in the primary separation.U.S. Patent 5,443,650 covers the new technique.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Honey HeightensTaste PerceptionAnna Resurreccion and her colleagues at the Dept. of Food Scienceat the University of Georgia (Center for Food Safety and QualityEnhancement, Georgia Station, Griffin, GA 30223; Tel: 770/228-7284;email: aresurr@gaes.griffin.peachnet.edu) have demonstrated in arecent study that honey can have an effect on the perception ofsweet, sour, bitter, and salty tastes.  The sensory evaluationtests were performed by panels of trained evaluators.The intensity of sweet solutions is enhanced by the addition ofhoney.  When 25% honey is added to a 5% sucrose solution, thesweetness intensity is doubled.  Other solutions, such as 10%sucrose, are not enhanced to the same degree.  Orange blossom honeywas shown to have the most enhancing power.Pure solutions of citric acid were used to evaluate honey's effecton the sourness of solutions.  The sourness intensity rating of acitric acid solution was decreased from 50 to about 17 by theaddition of 25% honey.  The more sour the solution, the morepronounced the effect.  A citric acid solution rated at 100 wasreduced to about 28 by the addition of honey.  This study showsthat honey has the ability to increase consumer acceptability ofvery sour products, such as citrus beverages, yogurts, and berry-based products.Caffeine solutions were used to measure the reduction of bitternessresulting from the addition of honey.  Orange blossom, wildflower,and clover honeys were used to evaluate the reduction.  Cloverhoney showed the widest margin of difference; the bitternessintensity plunged from 50 to 3.2.  Food developers could use honeyin order to mask bitterness in certain foods, which can result frommolecular breakdown during processing.Honey can mask the high saltiness intensity of salt-cured products,such as ham and bacon.  The panel of evaluators indicated thatadding honey to a sodium chloride solution decreases the saltintensity score from 50 to about 28.  With a saltier solution, thescore dropped from 150 to about 45 with the addition of honey.The carbohydrate composition varies between honeys, which mightexplain why orange blossom, wildflower, and clover honeys hadslightly different results in this study.  Fructose and glucose arethe main carbohydrates in honey.  In addition to thesemonosaccharides, maltose, sucrose, and other oligosaccharides arefound in honey.In addition to being a sweetener, honey as an ingredient can holdmoisture, can extend shelf-life, can promote color and flavordevelopment, and can be used as a browning agent or surface coatingin microwavable products.  The National Honey Board Food TechnologyProgram (P.O. Box 281525, San Francisco, CA 94128-1525; Tel:800/356-5941) conducts studies on the use of honey in foods.According to Veronique LaGrange, senior scientist and spokespersonfor the Honey Board (TJP Market Development, 3242 Jones Cr. NW,Washington, DC 20007; Tel: 202/625-6055), the primary purpose ofthe Honey Board Food Technology Program is to "help manufacturersuse honey in their products."  The studies tend to be applications-oriented for products already in existence.  The program providesprinted documents, in the form of newsletters and researchmonographs, and assistance to manufacturers who wish to use honeyin their products.  New ways of using honey, as well as new marketsfor honey, are offshoots of the program.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Report DeterminesThat MSG Is SafeFor most people, ingestion of monosodium glutamate (MSG) does notpose a problem.  For others, this flavor enhancer can causeheadaches and other unpleasant effects.  The Life Sciences ResearchOffice of the Federation of American Societies for ExperimentalBiology analyzed the adverse reactions people have had to MSG.  Thereport was prepared for the Center for Food Safety and AppliedNutrition of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).Free glutamate, in the form of MSG or protein hydrolysates, is usedto enhance flavor.  Currently, MSG must be listed when added as aningredient to foods.  But free glutamate is a natural component ofmany foods, such as Parmesan cheese and even tomatoes.The FDA is using the analysis in order to determine whether thelevel of free glutamate should be included on labels when presentin a "significant" amount.  A quantitative value of "significance"is yet to be defined.  According to the Institute of FoodTechnologists ("Monosodium Glutamate: A Statement of the Instituteof Food Technologists" Food Technology [49(10):28, 1995]), theglutamate content of MSG is 78%, while the glutamate content ofhydrolyzed vegetable protein is about 8%.The report concluded that MSG is safe since the short-lived adversereactions are confined to a small subset of the population.  Nostudies have demonstrated long-term effects from the ingestion ofMSG, such as the development of tumors or toxicity to the nervoussystem.  Other organizations deeming MSG safe include the WorldHealth Organization, American Medical Assn., Commission on EuropeanCommunities, and Institute of Food Technologists.Most foods contain less than 0.5 grams of MSG per serving.  Thereport found that about 3 grams of MSG are necessary for an adversereaction to occur.  Subjects eating large amounts of MSG on anempty stomach were most likely to complain of ill effects.MSG is made by fermenting starch, corn sugar, or molasses fromsugar cane or sugar beets.  The ingredient harmonizes with saltyand sour tastes, but does little to enhance sweet foods.  Somescientists classify MSG's effect as a fifth taste sensation knownas "umami."According to Chemical Marketing Reporter [248:18, 1995], the annualU.S. market for MSG is 40,000-50,000 metric tons.  Two companiesproduce the ingredient domestically, Archer Daniels Midland Co.(4666 Faries Pkwy., P.O. Box 1470, Decatur, IL 62525; Tel: 217/424-5200, Fax: 217/424-5839) and Ajinomoto USA (Eddyville, IA).  Bothoperations are fairly new:  Ajinomoto USA's domestic plant has beenin operation since 1993, and Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s site wentonline in 1994.  MSG's cost per pound is about 69 cents.While the domestic demand for MSG is stable, exports are on theincrease.  About 60% of the exports are sent to Canada, Mexico, andthe U.K., but the Netherlands and France are also consumers ofAmerican-made MSG.  In 1994, exports totaled about 193 metric tons,and in 1995, shipments increased to 5,000 metric tons.  One sourceclaims that the worldwide demand for MSG is increasing by 10% or20% annually.  The report prepared for the FDA may help to redressMSG's tarnished image in the U.S. and enhance annual consumptionlevels here.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996More IntenseCinnamon FlavorBaltimore Spice, Inc. (9740 Reisterstown Rd., Owings Mills, MD21117; Tel: 800/365-3229, Fax: 410/363-6619) is introducing anencapsulated cinnamon to help bakers who have yeast leaveningproblems when adding ground cinnamon to a yeast dough. Typically,bakers either reduce cinnamon usage in the dough to allow moreleavening or change to topical cinnamon application rather thanadding to the dough. Both of these techniques, however, candiminish desired cinnamon flavor.To provide a stronger flavor impact and instant release of volatileoils, encapsulated cinnamon may be used instead of regular groundcinnamon, and at a slightly lower level that will still produce anacceptable cinnamon flavor. The outcome is greater leaveningbecause there is a decreased percentage of cinnamon in the dough.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SFE Compared withSPE for Ham AnalysisThe conventional method for analyzing N-nitrosamines in hams waschallenged by the development of a supercritical fluid extraction(SFE) method.  Scientists at the Eastern Regional Research Centerof the Dept. of Agriculture (Agricultural Research Service,Philadelphia, PA 19118; Tel: 215/233-6400) compared solid phaseextraction (SPE) to SFE for extracting N-nitrosamines in hamsprocessed in elastic rubber nettings.Both the SPE and the SFE methods used gas chromatographic-chemiluminescence detection.  The SFE's variable restrictor wasequipped with a silica gel adsorption cartridge.  No statisticaldifference was found between the results obtained by the twomethods.  Advantages of SFE are the reduction in solvent use andthe speed of the analysis.John W. Pensabene, Walter Fiddler, Robert J. Maxwell, Alan R.Lightfield, and James W. Hampson published "Supercritical FluidExtraction of N-Nitrosamines in Hams Processed in Elastic RubberNettings" in the Journal of the Association of Official AnalyticalChemistry [78(3):744-748, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Pesticides Removedfrom Fruits, VeggiesTwo recent publications describe the removal of pesticides fromvegetables and fruits using supercritical fluid extraction (SFE).Both studies found SFE an acceptable method for the removal ofpesticides from produce for analysis.Steven J. Lehotay and Konstantin I. Eller of the BeltsvilleAgricultural Research Center of the Dept. of Agriculture(Environmental Chemistry Lab, Bldg. 7, Rm. 224, Beltsville, MD20705-2351; Tel: 301/504-6078) developed a method for analyzing thelevels of 46 pesticides in grapes, carrots, potatoes, and broccoli.The multiresidue method used SFE in conjunction with gaschromatography/ion trap mass spectrometry in order to extract andanalyze residues.The SFE was performed at 320 atm and 60C, and the extracts weretrapped on solid phase media.  Silica gel bound to octadecylsilanewas found suitable for this purpose.  The trap was then eluted withacetonitrile.  Next, the chromatographic analysis was performed.Greater than 80% recoveries were achieved for 39 of the 46pesticides.  The recoveries of the other pesticides, with theexception of methamidophos and omethoate, were more than 50%.Both incurred and fortified samples were used in a subsequentanalysis to evaluate the method.  The blind experiment showed thatthis method resulted in recoveries similar to results from sevenlaboratories using solvent-based extractions with traditional gaschromatograph detectors.Lehotay tells FIN that the focus of his work is pesticide analysisof agricultural commodities, and SFE is one of the primary methodsof extraction being developed by the lab.  The study was publishedas "Development of a Method of Analysis for 46 Pesticides in Fruitsand Vegetables by Supercritical Fluid Extraction and GasChromatography/Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry" in the Journal of theAssociation of Official Analytical Chemistry [78(3):821-830, 1995].In a similar study, scientists in Spain used a simple SFE method toremove pesticide residues from fresh pepper, cucumber, and tomatosamples.  Under moderate conditions, commercial SFE equipmentextracted methamidophos at a level greater than 70%, as well aschlorpyrifos, endosulfan, and procymidone.The fresh samples were mixed with anhydrous magnesium sulfate.Methanol was used as a modifier for the carbon dioxide fluid.Extraction conditions were a pressure of 300 atm and a temperatureof 50C.  The authors recommend further development of this methodfor the extraction of multiple residues.A. Garcia-Valverde, A.R. Fernandez-Alba, A. Aguera, and M.Contreras of the Pesticide Residue Research Group of theUniversidad de Almeria (Facultad de Ciencias Experimentales, Spain)published "Extraction of Methamidophos Residues from Vegetableswith Supercritical Fluid Carbon Dioxide" in the Journal of theAssociation of Official Analytical Chemistry [78(3):867-873, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Focus on Foods'Health BenefitsMarketers of dairy, tomato, and perhaps flour products have someheartening news about the health benefits of their foods. Thefindings from three independent studies concluded that aged personsshould eat more dairy foods to get vitamin D to reduce risk of boneloss, men should eat tomatoes to reduce risk of prostate cancer,and women of childbearing age should eat foods rich in folic-acidto reduce risk of birth defects.A report published in the December 5 issue of The Journal of theAmerican Medical Association found that many elderly people fail toget enough vitamin D because they lack opportunities to get outdoorexposure to sunlight.  Sitting by a sunny window won't do the jobbecause the glass filters out the ultraviolet light needed toconvert precursor molecules to vitamin D in the skin.The report was based on a study conducted at the Union MemorialHospital's Div. of Geriatrics in Baltimore. The subjects were 244people age 65 and over, some of whom were confined to nursing homesor in their own homes, and some who were able to go outdoors. Thestudy raised the question as to whether recommended dietaryallowance levels should be reevaluated in order to see if higherlevels of vitamin D supplementation are needed.  Mentioned as goodnatural sources of vitamin D were milk, dairy products, egg yolk,oily fish such as sardines, salmon, tuna and liver.Foods containing tomatoes, which are rich in the antioxidant,lycopene, are believed to provide higher levels of protectionagainst prostate cancer, according to Harvard Universityresearchers led by Dr. Edward Giovannucci of  the Harvard School ofPublic Health. Men who ate at least 10 servings per week were foundto have a 45% lower rate of the cancer compared to men who ate 4-7servings weekly and had only a 20% reduction in the cancer.Further good news is that the tomatoes could be in any form, suchas sauces, juice, raw and even in pizza. In fact, cooked tomatoproducts appeared to be more protective than either juice or rawtomatoes, on the assumption that when tomatoes are heated theircells burst and release more lycopene.The nine-year study examined the eating habits of 47,000 men in thehealth professions between the ages of 40 and 75, and was publishedin the December 7 issue of The Journal of the National CancerInstitute. The first survey was taken in 1986, and the subjectswere followed and periodically re-examined. At the end of the studyin 1992, there were 812 cases of prostate cancer among thesubjects, and the dietary histories of these cancer subjects werethen compared with the subjects who did not develop the cancer.Also published in the December 5 issue of JAMA  was a report fromthe University College in Dublin, Ireland which stated thatfortifying food with folic acid may be the best way to reduce thenumber of babies born with severe birth defects.  Irish researchersat the college said a four-year study of blood samples frompregnant women showed that those with the lowest levels of folate,a salt of folic acid, in red blood cells had the highest risk ofbearing a child with a neural tube defect such as spina bifida.A 48% reduction in the total neural tube defect rate istheoretically achievable with an increased population intake of 0.4milligrams per day of folic acid, according to the report, and thiscould better be realized by fortifying foods than withsupplementation. Folic acid, a vitamin necessary for blood marrowto make red blood cells, is found in a wide variety of foods,particularly liver and raw vegetables. In the U.S., there isdiscussion about fortifying flour with folic acid because it is astaple in the diet and women wouldn't have to change their dietaryhabits in order to intake adequate levels.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Consumers TrustFarmers the MostAfter all the money and trouble that food processors went throughto create new labels, how do consumers rank them as crediblesources of information about foods?  Second only to farmers,according to the second annual American Food Consumer Surveyrecently conducted by Purina Mills, Inc. of St. Louis.  The studyasked more than 3,500 consumers from across the country about theirattitudes, practices and sources of knowledge concerning their foodsupply, during August-September, 1995.The food information sources considered as "most credible" by thesurvey's respondents included farmers (26%), food labels (19%),family and friends (14%), food industry (10%), educators (9%),government agencies (9%), grocers/supermarkets (6%), news media(4%) and advertising (3%). Further findings were that 74% believethat farmers should use high yield farming technology to feed ourgrowing population; 63% feel that the food they consume is safe,and the greatest concerns among respondents about our food supplyare in the areas of water contamination, bacterial contaminationand pesticide use.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996New Markets Soughtby U.S. Food MakersThe search for new markets via new product development or new landsto sell to have forged three recent marketing agreements between aleading baking products company and the market leader of fat-freeand reduced-fat snack foods, a maker of natural foods and threeJapanese companies that will market them, and a world-leading soupcompany acquires a controlling interest in a joint venture topenetrate southeast Asian markets.Pillsbury, the Minneapolis-based subsidiary of Britain's GrandMetropolitan PLC will produce, market and sell SnackWell's bakingmix products under license from Nabisco.  The first product will beSnackWell's Low Fat Fudge Brownie Mix, and shipments will beginthis month. The mix was created by a proprietary balancing ofingredients in order to achieve the rich chocolate flavor of high-quality brownies, but with less fat. Each brownie has just 2.5grams of fat, compared with 7 grams in regular fudge brownie mixes.The baking mix marks the first time the SnackWell's name appearsfor this type of product. Currently, the Snackwell's line includesfat-free and reduced-fat cookies, crackers, breakfast bars, yogurtsand instant puddings.  In just three years, Nabisco's SnackWell'shas become the largest cookie and cracker brand in the U.S.Since Japanese consumers are like their American counterparts andwant healthy foods, Kushi Macrobiotics Corp. of Stamford, CT hasformed an agreement with three major Japanese natural food retailand wholesale companies that will market the Kushi Cuisine line ofpremium natural food products:  Meiwa Sangyo Co. Ltd., a subsidiaryof Mitsubishi Corp., Anew-Naturally Yours Co. Ltd., and TKB Mart.Kushi Cuisine products will be the only nationally available line,and it will include 33 premium, easy-to-prepare natural foods.Camden, NJ-based Campbell Soup Co., which is the world's leadingsoup company, is acquiring its first manufacturing facility inSoutheast Asia, in Malaysia. Campbell has achieved this move byacquiring the controlling interest in a joint venture with one ofMalaysia's leading food firms,  privately owned Cheong Chan (HupKee) Sdn. Bhd. of Petaling Jaya. The new company will manufacturesoups, chili sauces, ketchup and foodservice products and ethnicChinese sauces.  Campbell will market and distribute these productsthroughout the ASEAN (Association of South East Asia Nations)countries of Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei, Thailand, ThePhilippines and Vietnam.Campbell is hoping to capitalize on the love of soup in Asia, aswell as the strength of Malaysia's economy. A total of 40% of theworld's soup is consumed in Asia, either homemade or commercial.Soup consumption is strong in Southeast Asia, particularly amongethnic Chinese, and prepared, packaged soup is popular among peoplein the upper income segments. The top selling Campbell soup in Asiais corn soup designed especially for the local market.Malaysia has one of the strongest and fastest growing economies inthe Asia Pacific region, and 1995 was the seventh year in which thegrowth rate was above 8%. While only 17.5 million people live inMalaysia, there are  some 300 million people living in southeastAsia, 83 million of whom live in urban areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Companies Expandand RestructureTo deal with projected domestic growth, one company expands afacility, and with an eye toward global growth, two companiesreorganize their U.S. or international divisions.Opta Food Ingredients, Inc. headquartered in Bedford, MA hascompleted the expansion of its Louisville, KY facility that willdouble its capacity to produce Oat Fibers, its line of functionaltexturizing agents that can also increase dietary fiber in foods.The expansion was in response to increased demand for theproprietary ingredient from its customers, who include foodprocessors and foodservice operators. Among the former are five ofthe 10 largest U.S. consumer packaged food companies.Eastman Chemical Co. based in Kingsport, TN has combined two of itsbusinesses to create a new organization to be known as PerformanceChemicals.  As of January 1, the company's Polymer Modifiers andNutrition and Formulation Products businesses will be oneorganization that includes four business units, one of which isFood Ingredients and Specialty Products. Specialty Products is aconsolidation of four business segments--Cosmetics  and PersonalCare, Nutritional Supplements, Textile Chemicals and  UrethaneIntermediates.  (The other three business units comprisingPerformance Chemicals are involved with chemicals andpharmaceuticals.)International giant, Philip Morris Co. has reorganized Kraft FoodsInternational, a subsidiary of Kraft Foods, Inc. The internationalsubsidiary has extensive coffee, confectionery, cheese and otherfood operations throughout Europe, the Middle East, Africa and theAsia/Pacific region. The restructured Kraft Foods Internationalwill include four separate regional units--Kraft Jacobs SuchardWestern Europe; Kraft Jacobs Suchard Northern Europe; Kraft JacobsSuchard Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa, andKraft Foods Asia/Pacific.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Xylose Plant NowUnder ConstructionCultor (Kyllikinportti 2, SF-00240 Helsinki, Finland) plans toconstruct a $70 million xylose plant in Austria.  Xylose is used inthe production of xylitol, an ingredient used to sweeten chewinggum and oral hygiene products. Cultor's subsidiary, Xyrofin, claimsthat worldwide demand for xylitol is increasing by 25% annually.The subsidiary also claims to have 80% of the world market forxylitol.The xylose plant will be located next to a birch pulp productionunit, allowing Cultor to use one of the byproducts of pulpproduction for the extraction of xylose.  The streamlined logisticswill enhance the efficiency of the process.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Processors AcquireIngredient FirmsSome processed products used as basic ingredients in processedfoods have new addresses, as does a supplier of flavors andseasonings. Some recent sales include companies that make potatoproducts, fruit products, Italian food products, and pickle andspecialty food products.Minneapolis-based Michael Foods, Inc. bought the institutionalrefrigerated potato products business of Interstate Food ProcessingCorp., located in fort Fairfield, MR  Interstate is the secondlargest producer in the U.S. of foodservice refrigerated potatoproducts after Michael Foods' Northern Star Co. subsidiary.Monitor Sugar Co. of Bay City, MI has purchased Graceland FruitCooperative of Frankfort, MI, the country's premier supplier ofpreservative-free dried fruit products to the food processing,foodservice and grocery markets. Food processors use the fruits incereals, baked goods, dairy products, trail mix, candy and otherfood products.Garma Gourmet Group of Milan, Italy has acquired the Italian FoodProducts division of The Quaker Oats Co. The divested businessesinclude edible oils marketed under the Cuore and Topazio brandnames, and Polenta Valsugana, a pre-cooked corn flour meal. TheItalian Food Products division is located in Silea, Italy. Thiscontinues the company's recent policy of shedding divisions outsideits core beverage and grain-based foods businesses.Dean Foods Co. of Franklin Park, IL has acquired Paramount Foods,LLC, a pickle and specialty products processor located inLouisville, KY.  Paramount sells pickles and other specialty fooditems under the Paramount label, and private labels to retail andfoodservice outlets throughout the Mid-South.  Dean Foods startedits pickle business over 30 years with the acquisition of theoriginal Green Bay Food Co.  Subsequently, through the acquisitionof successful regional pickle companies, Dean has grown to becomeone of the two largest pickle businesses in the U.S.  In addition,on a national basis, Dean is a leading producer of dairy products,ranks third in market share in processed vegetables, and second inpickles and specialty  products.Technology Flavors & Fragrances, Inc. located in Amityville, NYbought Seafla, Inc. of Milford, OH. Seafla is a maker of premiumsavory flavors, seasonings and cheese powders used in makingconvenience foods, snack foods, condiments, bakery products,confectioneries, deli-foods, and meat, poultry and seafoodproducts. Technology develops and makes flavors for use in naturalflavored beverages, confectioneries, and health foods.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Meats and BakedGoods AcquiredConAgra Inc.'s Bronx, NY-based National Foods has acquired MogenDavid's meats sold under the brand names of Mogen David, AmericanKosher, Isaac Gellis, Judea and Zion. Mogen David distributeskosher products, including smoked and cured meats and sausageproducts throughout the tri-state New York metropolitan region andin Florida.  The purchase reflects ConAgra's continuing interest inthe kosher meat market, which began in 1992 with its acquisition ofNational Foods, manufacturer of Hebrew National, a leadingprocessor of kosher meats in the U.S. National  Foods, reports toConAgra's Armour Swift-Eckrich division.Chiquita Brands International, Inc. of Cincinnati sold its MeatDiv. to Smithfield Foods, Inc. This action now completes Chiquita'sexit from the meat business, which is outside its core business ofprocessing food products, and where it is an international leader.Silverado Foods, Inc. of Tulsa, OK purchased MarveLoaf Corp. ofHolbrook, NY, maker of a low fat yogurt cake, and a line of muffinsand crumb cakes.  The purchase complements Silverado's specialtybaked goods products, part of the company's product line which alsoincludes gourmet and snack foods.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sugar Prices Drop,Maybe Up for MilkWith the announcement by a leading candy maker that prices for acandy bar will go up five cents, the Washington DC-based AmericanSugar Farmers were quick to point out that the price hike hadnothing to do with the price of sugar.  That's because sugar priceshave decreased during the past five years, and cane and beetfarmers have not had a price increase in 10 years.Supporting this contention are figures from the Dept. ofAgriculture and the Bureau of Labor Statistics which report thatthe wholesale price that food manufacturers pay for their sugar hasfallen 16% since 1990.  However, during this same period, theprices for sugar-containing products, such as candy, bakery goods,cereal and soft drinks, have increased from 10-22%. So like the mansaid, it can't be because of sugar.Milk prices are another matter because their increase may be tracedto the well-meaning but misguided program currently underconsideration by Congress. According to the International DairyFoods Association of Washington, DC, the new dairy plan would lockin milk prices at January 1996 levels,  the highest levels in thepast five years, and would cost consumers an estimated $1 billionmore annually.The plan was worked out by the National Milk Producers Federation,an organization that represents the major dairy farmercooperatives. The plan would eliminate some of the surplus productsthe government would purchase, locking in a minimum price level forfluid milk, and adding several new ways that milk producers wouldshare the money paid for their milk.  Budget savings would beaccrued by changing the government's policy of buying surplus dairyproducts. Currently, the dairy price support program buys anybutter, milk powder or cheese that isn't purchased.  Under the newplan, this would involve only cheese.The outcome could be that butter and powder would be dumped onworld markets at low prices, which would then be subsidized by anew system assessing all dairy farmers to cover the differencebetween lower prices and former government support levels. Thisscenario could cause a shortage of dairy ingredients for U.S. foodmanufacturers, forcing up prices of finished products at theconsumer level.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Shifts Seen inVitamin EThe market for tocopherol is undergoing major changes a naturaltocopherol is becoming increasingly available for food applicationsand as key players in the business are forming strong alliances.The global tocopherol market is currently almost $1 billion. Mostof this tocopherol, which is produced by synthesis, is used inagricultural feed. About $100 million in sales are generated by thefood industry.  The market for synthetic tocopherol is shared byfour companies: Hoffmann-LaRoche, with a market share of 45%; BASF,with a market share of 28%, Rhone Poulenc, with a market share of16%; and Eisei, at 11%.A specialty in the food market is natural tocopherol. This isobtained by an extraction and purification process from soya scams,the residues which remain after soya oil is processed and refined.The current worldwide market for natural tocopherol is about $50million and is shared by Henkel, Eastman Chemical, and Eisei.Although these companies produce their natural tocopherol by theirown technology, they all depend on the provision of the rawmaterial by other companies.  The global soya oil industry iscontrolled by only two companies: Archer Daniels Midland (ADM),which has a 40% share, and Cargill, with 35%.Hoffmann-LaRoche signed an agreement with Cargill in early 1995 tojointly construct a 1000 ton natural tocopherol plant.  WhileCargill is responsible for supplying raw material, Hoffmann-LaRocheis responsible for marketing.The plant is scheduled to come onstream in late 1996. At fullcapacity, it will consume about 50% of the worldwide production ofsoya scams.  Since the global production of soya oil has reached aplateau, there is not much raw material left for competitors.Eastman obtains its soya scams from ADM, but a major procurementproblem will  arise for Henkel--and especially Eisei.  Roche couldeventually obtain a market share of 70%.Tocopherol is also contained in significant amounts in palm oil andpalm leaves. However the extraction of  pure tocopherol is muchmore difficult.  Henkel and Eisei both have a strong position inthe palm oil market, especially in Malaysia and Indonesia.  Thesecompanies may well turn their efforts to developing  new processingtechnology to wrest tocopherol from palm sources.  The palm oilindustry is booming and the raw materials available to makingtocopherol are therefore increasing.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Demand for GarlicIs Seen TriplingGarlic production in the U.S. has tripled in the past 20 years,according to a cover story appearing in Smithsonian.  In 1975, theDept. of Agriculture recorded 140 million pounds of garlicproduced, and in 1994, the figure had soared to 493 million pounds.The current annual growth rate is about 10%.The U.S. also imports garlic from Argentina, Chile, China, Mexico,Spain, and Taiwan.  About 100 million pounds of the pungent,bulbous herb are imported each year.  The per capita consumptionwas estimated to be 0.6 pounds in 1975 and 1.6 pounds in 1994.  InEurope, per capita garlic consumption is twice as great.As a food ingredient, garlic is available as a puree, dry flakes,and powder.  The product is used in a variety of foods, includingfrozen dinners, powdered mixes, and bottled sauces.  California isresponsible for 90% of the commercial garlic produced in the U.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA ProposesChanges in NLEAIf you market a food that can deliver health benefits to consumers,you want to let them know about it.  That's the attitude of membersof the Washington, DC-based National Food Processors Assn. (NFPA)who have been petitioning the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) tomake changes in the NLEA since October 1994.  Now it looks liketheir efforts will be rewarded because the FDA is proposing toamend existing regulations governing health claims and nutrientcontent claims.The October 25 petition was followed by a preliminary answer fromthe FDA on May 11, 1995 which stated there would be some favorableresponses to some requests. The newly proposed rule, published inthe Federal Register on December 21, 1995, calls for: Flexibility in Health Claims Language - provides greaterflexibility in health claims language for some of the longer healthclaims currently in effect. One proposed amendment focuses on thecalcium-osteoporosis health claims removing the requirement fornoting that specific populations (i.e., White and Asian women) areat particular risk for osteoporosis. FDA is proposing to permit,under certain conditions, abbreviated health claims that aretruthful and non-misleading and that include a referral statementdirecting consumers to the complete claim elsewhere on the label.FDA has acknowledged the benefits of permitting more consumer-friendly messages and communications as supporting the intent ofthe health claims concept. Synonyms and Implied Nutrient Content Claims - allows the use ofsynonymous nutrient content claims on food labels when consistentwith, and adjacent to the defined nutrient content claim term.FDA's proposal allows the use of synonymous nutrient content claimson food labels.  In the FDA's view, undefined synonyms of nutrientcontent claim terms must be presented on the label immediatelyadjacent to a defined term.  The defined term would be required tobe used with the most prominent undefined term, following the rulesoutlining prominence of claims. Modifications to the "Jelly Bean" Rule in Health Claims -modifies the requirement prohibiting a health claim from being madeon a food which does not contain at least 10% Daily Value perserving of at least one of a number of nutrients.  The FDAsproposed rule modifies the minimum nutrient contributionrequirement, or "jelly bean" rule, for health claims.  Thisrequirement prohibits a health claim from being made on a foodwhich does not contain at least 10% Daily Value per serving ofvitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, iron, protein, or fiber.Specifically, FDA has proposed to exempt raw and processed fruitsand vegetables, and enriched cereal grain products and enrichedbread with standards of identity, from the "jelly bean" rule.  TheFDA also will consider whether other types of foods, such asformulated products, should also be exempt from the "jelly bean"rule. Health Claims Disqualifying Nutrient Levels - discusses case-by-case evaluation of changing disqualifying levels for total fat,saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, which would prohibit the useof any health claim, to levels which would trigger a disclosure-type referral statement. FDA denied a request in the NFPA petitionthat FDA change disqualifying nutrient levels for total fat,saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, which would prohibit the useof any health claim to levels which would trigger a disclosure-typereferral statement.NFPA had requested that health claims be prohibited only when thenutrient is adversely associated with the disease referenced in thehealth claim. While FDA denied this broad approach, the Agencyindicated it will evaluate this case-by-case.  FDA included in thepreamble to the claims proposed rule substantial guidance topetitioners, and discusses factors to be considered in any requestthat disqualifying nutrient levels be changed to levels requiringlabel disclosure.Another denial by the FDA was NFPA's request that the agency allowtruthful, non-misleading health claims established as presumptivelyvalid based on the findings of scientifically authoritative thirdparties. The FDA stated it does not have authority under existinglaw to approve such a policy change.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA RequiresHACCP for SeafoodConsumer concern about the safety of eating seafood is about to bemitigated. The FDA has set safety regulations for the seafoodindustry that involve using preventive controls based on principlesof the system, Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP).Seafood processors must identify potential problems that could makeseafood unsafe, then establish and monitor targeted control pointsto minimize the hazards, and then keep a record of the results.FDA surveillance and inspection programs will still be in place butHACCP recordkeeping will enable regulators to monitor productsafety more effectively on a more continuous basis rather than relyon the previous system which involved spot checks.  Seafoodprocessors are responsible for both domestic and imported seafoodmaterials. The program will be fully implemented over the next twoyears but inspections begin in 1996.The new ruling was immediately applauded by the commercial seafoodindustry which sees the HACCP program as one that will benefitfederal and state inspectors, consumers and seafood processors.Inspectors will now have a historical view of the facility becauseHACCP records will date back to the last inspection visit.Consumers will be assured of seafood safety and quality, andprocessors will have a cost-effective system that will help toincrease sales of processed seafood products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Meat Processors WantSafety Rules, TooNow that consumers will be assured of the safety of seafoodproducts, processors of some types of meat products feel that theyare at a disadvantage because they can't provide the sameassurances. Specifically, the day after the FDA announced its newrequirements for seafood processors (see above story) the NationalPork Producers Council and the National Cattlemen's Assn. announcedthat beef and pork industry leaders formed a working group toprepare a plan of action to achieve equity between red meat andpoultry inspection and food safety issues.The aim is to improve the food safety process, create a more levelplaying field for producers, and provide better information forconsumers.  The group is to consider regulatory, legislative, andjudicial issues to ensure that new safety regulations set the samerequirements for all meat and poultry products, and "to eliminateeconomic inequities that put beef and pork at an economicdisadvantage in the meat case."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Product Informationin Print, OnlineProduct information is being offered by two test makers with freecatalogs, and one leading confection maker on the Internet.Biomerieux Vitek (595 Anglum Dr., Hazelwood, MO 63042-2395; Tel:314/731-8500, Fax: 314/731-8700), is making available its 1996Industrial Products Price List with product numbers, pricing andordering information for its entire line of automated microbiologysystems, manual test systems, automated immunoassay test systemsand related products.Supelco, Inc. (Supelco Park, Bellefonte, PA 16823-0048; Tel:800/247-6628, Fax: 800/447-3044) has just released its 1996 SupelcoChromatography Products catalog which lists 13,000 products, ofwhich over 1,000 are new. The 950-page catalog features productsfor GC, HPLC, LPLC, TLC, sample handling, chemical standards, morethan 500 application chromatograms and conditions, four indices forquick searches, and theory introductions and technical productdescriptions..Hershey Foods Corp. (100 Crystal A Drive, Hershey, PA 17033-0810;Tel 717/534-7631) has a new address--on the World Wide Web:http://www.hersheys.com/~hershey. Targeted mostly to consumers,food industry professionals might still be interested in the site'scompany history, financial information and new product information.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MEETINGSMarch Conferencefor DFISA & FISAThe Dairy and Food Industries Supply Assn. (DFISA) and the FoodIndustries Suppliers Assn. (FISA) will hold its 1996 Annualconference from March 30 to April 2 at the Loews Coronado BayResort in San Diego, CA. Intended for suppliers to the food, dairy,beverage and related processing industries, the conference willhave feature speakers, business and technology sessions.Contact: Dorothy Brady (Tel: 703/761-2600).Back to Headline List WT02-B40-10IA074-000493-B045-182http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013147 text/html 112701HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:28:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:36 GMTContent-length: 112513Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb10.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNet January 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL: (114 words) FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING (48 words) OAT PRODUCTS (50 words) FDA STREAMLINING: (127 words) ACTION FOR NUTRITION (100 words) LABEL SNAFUS (77 words) CANNED TUNA: (53 words) BATF ACTIVITY: (110 words) PHYTOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATOR URGES DENIAL OF OLESTRA PETITION (1559 words) RESEARCHERS QUESTION LINK BETWEEN TRANS FAT, HEART DISEASE (1208 words) WARNING LETTER ISSUED TO CHICKPEA MANUFACTURER FOR UNDECLARED ADDITIVES (197 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES' EMPHASIS ON CAROTENOIDS CITED IN CSPI OLESTRA LETTER (469 words) FDA REJECTS OPTIMAL HEALTH STANDARD FOR DETERMINING RDIs (533 words) STRUCTURE/FUNCTION CLAIMS, DISCLAIMER STATEMENTS PROPOSED (1288 words) FSIS ISSUES FINAL RULE REDUCING PRIOR LABELING APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS (1398 words) STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED BY FSIS (1651 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES GENERALLY RECEIVE FAVORABLE REVIEWS (561 words) FDA STRIVES FOR CONSISTENCY IN DSHEA NUTRITION LABEL RULES (4954 words) FDA SUPPLEMENT PROPOSAL DEFINES 'HIGH POTENCY ANTIOXIDANT' TERMS (1488 words) WARNING LABEL ON CURED MEATS SOUGHT IN PETITION TO FSIS (715 words) CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL:  MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL:  The Food Safety and Inspection Service published a Dec. 29 proposed rule to amend its meat and poultry inspection regulations to "harmonize and improve" the procedures used by FSIS and FDA for reviewing and approving the use of substances in meat and poultry products.  Under the proposal, FSIS would no longer issue its own regulations listing the substances it finds suitable, instead deferring to FDA for future regulations on suitable substances for meat and poultry products.  FDA published a similar proposal in the same issue of the Federal Register.  (EDITOR'S NOTE:  This proposal will be covered in greater detail in next week's issue of FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS.)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING was pledged again by the agency in a Dec. 29 Federal Register notice accompanying proposals on prior label review, modifying standards and elimination of prior approval for additions to meat and poultry products (See separate stories).  The agency asked for comment by Feb. 27.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996OAT PRODUCTS OAT PRODUCTS and reduced risk of coronary heart disease proposal was published by FDA in the Jan. 4  Federal Register in response to a petition from Quaker Oats Company (See FLN July 13, Page 6).  (Details of the proposal will appear in FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS Jan. 11.)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA STREAMLINING:  FDA STREAMLINING:  The Grocery Manufacturers of America said it is pleased that FDA has taken a partial step toward streamlining its "bulky" nutrition labeling regulations, but added that it remains to be seen whether the agency's proposal on nutrient content and health claims will actually allow food companies to make changes in label claims, a GMA spokesman told FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS (See FLN Dec. 21, Page 11).  CSPI's Bruce Silverglade argued, however, that FDA's proposed changes will allow companies to "clutter up" the label with information that will make it more difficult for consumers to identify "low" and "reduced fat" foods.  "FDA should be clearing up these problems instead of making it easier for food companies to make health and nutrition claims," Silverglade said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996ACTION FOR NUTRITION ACTION FOR NUTRITION draft U.S. plan was made available through  Dec. 28 Federal Register notice by the three sponsoring agencies:  USDA, Department of HHS and the Agency for International Development.  The nine aspects of the international plan include:  (1) incorporating nutritional objectives into development policies; (2) improving household food security; (3) protecting consumers through improved food quality and safety; (4) preventing and managing infectious diseases; (5) promoting breastfeeding; (6) caring for the socio-economically deprived and nutritionally vulnerable; (7) preventing and controlling specific micronutrient deficiencies; (8) promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles, and (9) assessing, analyzing and monitoring nutritional situations.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996LABEL SNAFUS LABEL SNAFUS led to two recalls:  (1) 7,875 cases of Kellogg's Low Fat Pop Tarts with Smucker's Real Fruit Frosted Strawberry with Natural and Artificial Flavors; strawberry cartons actually contained chocolate fudge Pop-Tarts; (2) 10,565 cases of Pope brand Tomato Paste in six-ounce cans, by Pope Foods, Oradell, N.J., product manufactured by T.E.C., Pompeii, Italy, because the bottom label of the product said "Product of Italy," while the top label said, "Product of Hungary."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996CANNED TUNA:  CANNED TUNA:  Bumble Bee Seafoods has withdrawn a petition filed in July 1993 to amend the standard of identity for canned tuna to allow for the addition of chopped or diced jalapeno peppers.  The firm said it is no longer interested in pursuing the petition (See FLN July 29, 1993, Page 13).Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996BATF ACTIVITY:  BATF ACTIVITY:  The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms issued a Dec. 29 final rule allowing up to 300 milligrams per liter (300 ppm) of citric acid to be added to vodka without changing the product's designation as "vodka."  "This level was intended to ensure that distiller may continue to use citric acid as a smoothing agent to correct objectionable tastes which might result from such things as the water used in reducing the proof, the charcoal used in distillation or the glass in which packaged," BATF said, noting that by definition, vodka may not have any distinctive taste, color, aroma or character.  The rule went into effect immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996PHYTOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATOR URGES DENIAL OF OLESTRA PETITIONA researcher investigating the anti-cancer potential of phytochemicals has warned FDA not to approve the pending food additive petition for olestra, predicting that use of the product may have a negative health impact.  However, a host of letters received by the agency last week stressed that research has confirmed the safety of the fat substitute (See FLN Dec. 21, Page 3, and Dec. 28, Page 3).Jed Fahey, faculty research associate with the Brassica Chemoprotection Laboratory at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said he was "distressed" by the data indicating that olestra may reduce absorption of many fat-soluble vitamins.  "There are a great number of other, fat-soluble phytochemicals, some of which we are investigating in my laboratory for their anti-cancer potential," Fahey said, adding, "Many of them have yet to even be isolated in pure form and are therefore unavailable for testing.""The inclusion of olestra in commonly consumed American foods has a high probability of effecting the wholesale reduction of a multiplicity of beneficial compounds from the diet of a great many Americans," the letter to FDA Commissioner Dr. David Kessler said, adding, "Based on overwhelming epidemiological evidence, there is a high probability that the use of this product would have a negative health impact."Comments from the American Diabetes Association and the American Heart Association took no specific stand on whether FDA should approve olestra.  ADA said it supports the development and introduction into the marketplace of food products that help people lose or maintain weight, but added that it "looks to and respects the FDA review process for assurance of product safety."  AHA encouraged FDA to continue the review of all fat replacers.  The group noted that many products on the market labeled as "reduced fat" have significant amounts of mono- and diglycerides, which are a source of calories and are metabolized as fat.The comments of a variety of researchers supporting approval of the fat substitute -- some of which were sent in by Procter & Gamble, the petition's sponsor --  were also included in the FDA administrative file on olestra.  Many of these letters included positive comments about the conduct of the four-day Food Advisory Committee meeting held by FDA in November to consider the data on olestra (See FLN Nov. 23, Page 10).  The comment period on the petition ended Dec. 21.The American Dietetic Association said one of its representatives attended the advisory committee and working group meetings on olestra, and added:  "We believe that the process allowed for a full airing of ADA's views on this matter.  We fully support the FAC review process including its interpretation of the data and consideration of public comment."A co-discoverer of olestra, Dr. Fred Mattson, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California in San Diego, noted that as early work on the compound progressed, "I came to the conclusion that olestra posed no hazard as a food ingredient.""Subsequent studies have served to strengthen this opinion," Mattson noted.  He noted that olestra "is now supported by a much wider range of studies and now many of these are on human subjects.  Moreover, the level of use is inherently limited by the nature of the food products in which it will be used."Nutritionist Johanna Dwyer of Tufts University said her interest in fat substitutes such as olestra led her to independently review some of the studies in the peer-reviewed literature.  Later, she was asked by P&G to review and edit two papers for publication on consumption models and use of the pig and other data for assessing human effects of feeding olestra.  Citing her specific interest in gastrointestinal effects, Dwyer said she requested and received additional information on GI effects, and devoted particular attention to what might be expected at very high levels of intakes.At Dwyer's request, P&G sent her blinded samples of olestra-containing potato chips and regular potato chips at amounts that would constitute the 95th percentile of intake.  Dwyer said she ate these potato chips in a single bolus amount for a meal on two separate days and subsequently recorded her own views of signs and symptoms of GI distress.  "I felt more GI distress when eating the regular potato chips, and did not record any differences in stool consistency in this brief experiment," Dwyer wrote.  She noted that very high chronic use might produce changes in the consistency of the stool, but it is "inappropriate to describe these changes as diarrhea."Dwyer said she concluded that the product "is safe and may provide a benefit to some consumers who wish to eat low fat, low saturated fat salty snacks."  She added that the FDA evaluation process and the advisory committee deliberations "were reasonable, thorough and helpful."Dr. Harry Greene, clinical professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said he attended the advisory committee meeting in November and was "extremely impressed with the presentations by the FDA scientists and the presentations by the expert consultants brought in by FDA in providing an unbiased and scientific approach to the relevant studies which have been performed with olestra."CSPI took data out of context, researcher chargesGreene criticized presentations by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, saying much of the data "was taken out of context" or "completely misinterpreted due to a lack of scientifically acceptable statistical evaluation, and in many instances was anecdotal."  In contrast, he said, "the data presented by Procter & Gamble scientists represented clear examples of well controlled, scientifically credible studies."Greene said the chairman of the advisory committee made sure that CSPI had an equal opportunity to present its objections.Also charging that CSPI took data out of context, Dr. Michael Davidson, medical director of the Chicago Center for Clinical Research at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, noted that the clinical studies by P&G "were purposely designed to assess the extreme intakes of olestra in subjects of various body sizes and dietary habits."  Davidson pointed out that olestra "was used to replace almost 50% of the daily fat intake for those in the 32-gram dose group," which he said "included petite young women who were unaccustomed to large intake of non-digestible food.""The vast majority of subjects with gastrointestinal events were women who would rarely consume 32 grams of olestra on a single day, yet were fed 32 grams daily for eight weeks," Davidson added.  He noted that approval of olestra "has significant health implications for the entire U.S. population," since high fat consumption is a leading cause of heart disease, diabetes, cancer and obesity.Researcher reports positive response to olestra in nutrition education studyDr. John Foreyt of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston said he conducted a study on the use of olestra in a nutrition education program.  Female adults were randomly assigned to either an olestra or non-olestra group, and various food products containing olestra, including shortening, potato chips, oven-ready french fries and a mayonnaise-type salad, were made available as part of an overall nutrition education program, Foreyt said.  "Response to the product was positive," he commented, noting that subjects in both groups reduced their dietary fat consumption to approximately 30% of total calories."Responses to our questionnaire suggested that subjects with access to the olestra products experienced less deprivation while reducing dietary fat intake than the subjects without access to the olestra products," Foreyt said, adding that the study is currently in press."Based on our study, and my reading of the olestra research, I believe that olestra can help consumers lower overall fat intake because it gives them a choice, without sacrificing taste," he said.Dr. Gail Harrison of the University of California School of Public Health in Los Angeles complimented the special consultants utilized by FDA as in-depth review experts on olestra, calling them "absolutely the best in the field."  Harrison added, "Their reports can be relied upon in terms of scientific validity and perspective."Recommending approval of the compound, Harrison said she is "quite thoroughly acquainted with the data base supporting the safety of olestra as it is proposed for use in savory snacks in the U.S. food supply, and am convinced on the basis of reasonable scientific judgment it is safe by the standard that FDA must apply."Other letters recommending approval came from Dr. Elijah Saunders of the University of Maryland's School of Medicine, Division of Hypertension, and Dr. George Bray, executive director of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center at the Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.A letter from Penny Kris-Etherton, professor of nutrition at Penn State University, reiterated conclusions she had presented for P&G at the advisory committee meeting -- that inclusion of olestra snacks would reduce dietary carotenoids over a period of seven days by approximately 10%.  The calculations assumed that all savory snacks included in  dietary records randomly selected from study subjects in target groups of interest were olestra-containing snacks, she said."Obviously, in a real world setting, not all savory snacks consumed will contain olestra.  Nonetheless, I believe that our estimates are reasonable as a means to gain a perspective about the average impact of olestra-containing snacks in different free-living population groups," Kris-Etherton added.  ((6FLN 1401, 26 pages, $11)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996RESEARCHERS QUESTION LINK BETWEEN TRANS FAT, HEART DISEASEThe alleged link between trans fatty acid intake and coronary heart disease risk is questionable, according to a critical review of research studies on Trans Fatty Acids and CHD Risk conducted by P.M. Kris-Etherton, Ph.D., and R.J. Nicolosi, Ph.D., for the International Life Sciences Institute.The report found that the effect of partially hydrogenated vegetable oils is relative to the fats or oils they are replacing.  Partially hydrogenated vegetable oils actually reduce blood total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol concentrations when substituted for animal fats (e.g., butter and lard) and vegetable fats rich in saturates (e.g., palm, palm kernel and coconut oil), the researchers said.  Hydrogenated vegetable oils, however, modestly raise blood cholesterol levels when substituted for the unhydrogenated native oil.  Therefore, the report said, the overall effect of hydrogenated fats on blood cholesterol concentrations in the population depends on the net change in the ingestion of saturated, trans, cis-monounsaturated, and cis-polyunsaturated fatty acids.These findings run contrary to the position of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, which filed a petition with FDA two years ago to require that trans fat be included with saturated fat on food labels, and to limit the trans fatty acid content of foods making fatty acid, cholesterol or vegetable oil claims (See FLN Feb. 24, 1994, Page 14).CSPI's position is based on evidence supported by studies such as one conducted by Judd et al., published by the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, which suggests that trans fat, at levels consumed by the average American, was found to raise LDL-cholesterol about the same as does saturated fat.  Another study supporting CSPI's stance on the issue is the recently presented Sundram et al. abstract, which found trans fat to be even more hypercholesterolemic than saturated fat (See FLN June 29, Page 5).Kris-Etherton and Nicolosi's review, however, found that epidemiological data are limited in that they may suggest relationships but cannot prove cause and effect.  Epidemiologic investigations conducted in the 1970s and 1980s found, for the most part, no significant associations between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk, they said.  Some investigation conducted in the 1990s found significant associations between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk.  But most of the study results, over the years, have illustrated inherent limitations of epidemiological research, according to the report.Investigations conducted in the '70s and '80s, which showed no significant association between trans fatty acid and CHD risk, examined concentrations of specific trans fatty acids in various body tissues or estimated dietary intake of trans fatty acids in comparison to various measures of CHD.  Some of the studies indicated that the trans fatty acid t-16:1 was associated with an increased risk of CHD -- the predominant source of this fatty acid is animal fat.  This suggests that any association between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk may be due more to trans fatty acids from animal sources than from partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, the report stated.Three studies published in the 1990s suggested a significant relationship between levels of trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk or risk factors, the report said.  One of the studies found that individuals with the highest and lowest intakes of trans fatty acids also had correspondingly lower and higher risks of suffering a heart attack.  The lowest risks occurred among individuals eating intermediate levels of trans fatty acids.  This finding suggests that other factors may be involved in the association, the report indicated, adding that lack of a dose-response relationship between trans fatty acid intake and risk of heart attack illustrates one of the limitations of epidemiological research.Current epidemiological data also appear limited in their ability to distinguish between the possibility that trans fatty acids cause CHD risk or that CHD risk causes increased trans fatty acid intake, the report said.  For example, individuals who perceive themselves to be at risk of CHD may increase their intake of products made with partially hydrogenated vegetable oils such as margarine, and decrease their intake of products with higher levels of saturated fat, which could induce a biased association between trans fatty acids and CHD or CHD risk factors.  A 1992 study that reported a significant relationship between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk factors attempted to control for this possibility.  The result showed that the relationship between trans fatty acids and lipids was indeed stronger for subjects who had been told that their blood cholesterol levels were high.  This study, the report said, supports the theory that those who perceive themselves to be at greater risk of CHD may increase their intake of trans fatty acids.Atherosclerotic properties of trans fatty acids in animals examinedTo define the impact of fatty acids on CHD risk, scientists have compared the atherosclerotic properties of saturated, unsaturated, and trans fatty acids in animals, the report said.  Numerous studies support the atherogenicity of saturated fats, and other studies indicate that the saturated fatty acids lauric, myristic, and palmitic acids appear to have similar arterogenic effects.  A similar association with trans fats, however, is not apparent, the report said, adding that data suggest that trans fatty acids do not increase risk of arteriosclerosis.  Studies conducted over the past 30 years on rabbits, monkeys and pigs have demonstrated little if any difference between the effects of nonhydrogenated and hydrogenated vegetable oils containing high concentrations of trans fatty acids on the incidence or severity of atherosclerosis, the report said.Clinical studies conducted over the past 40 years indicate that the effects of hydrogenated fats on blood cholesterol levels were intermediate between the unhydrogenated native oil and more saturated fats, the report said.  To verify these findings, metabolic studies of longer duration with a more appropriate number of subjects were conducted.  Ten of 11 studies confirmed that feeding hydrogenated fat produced higher total cholesterol concentrations than did unhydrogenated native oils. All of these studies also confirmed that the increase was less than that observed when butter, palm oil, or coconut oil was substituted for the native oil, the report said.  In addition, several outpatient feeding studies have confirmed the finding that consumption of hydrogenated fats resulted in lower blood cholesterol concentrations than typical intakes of butter or mixed animal and vegetable fats, according to the researchers.Inconsistent effects of trans fatty acids on HDL cholesterol levels have been found in other studies.  Three studies reported that the consumption of trans fatty acids was associated with significant reduction in HDL cholesterol.  However, three other studies in which trans fatty acids were fed at levels consistent with current intakes in the U.S. reported no such reduction in HDL cholesterol, the report said.The report indicated that because substituting hydrogenated fats for more saturated fats will lower LDL, and lowering LDL has been shown to decrease CHD risk, the overall effect of hydrogenated fats substituted for saturated fats in the food supply may still be beneficial, despite possible small reductions in HDL cholesterol concentrations.  This conclusion is supported by a large body of evidence that shows that populations with habitual low-fat diets have lower levels of both LDL and HDL cholesterol and a low incidence of heart disease, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996WARNING LETTER ISSUED TO CHICKPEA MANUFACTURER FOR UNDECLARED ADDITIVES An FDA warning letter was issued to a chickpea product manufacturer for the presence of undeclared FD&C Red #3 and FD&C Red #40, and for failing to declare net contents in metric as well as in inch-pound units.Chicago District Director Raymond Mlecko warned Eden International Inc. about undeclared FD&C Red #3 in "Eden's Red Chickpeas," and FD&C Red #40 in "Eden's Gourmet Mix," colors which are required to be declared by name in the statement of ingredients, he said.In addition, Mlecko advised Eden that the net contents should be declared in metric units and inch-pound units.  Because FDA has not published final regulations as to how the declaration is to be made, Eden may add the metric statements now, using guidance in the proposed regulations published in the Federal Register of December 21, 1993, Mlecko said.In the August 30 warning letter, Mlecko also told Eden that the violations mentioned are not necessarily an all-inclusive list of deficiencies on its labels.  Eden was advised to review all of its food labels to determine whether they are in compliance with all applicable statutes enforced by FDA.  ((6FLN 1402, 2 pages, $5)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES' EMPHASIS ON CAROTENOIDS CITED IN CSPI OLESTRA LETTERThe consumer group Center for Science in the Public Interest, continuing its quest to keep olestra out of the food supply, has reminded FDA that the newly revised Dietary Guidelines for Americans encourage consumers to eat foods containing carotenoids.  CSPI contends that the fat replacer inhibits the body's ability to absorb fat-soluble vitamins (See Page 3 and FLN Dec. 14, Page 3).In a Jan. 2 letter, intended as an addendum to earlier CSPI comments on Procter & Gamble's petition for olestra, CSPI Executive Director Dr. Michael Jacobson referred to the agency actions as "ironic."  "The National Cancer Institute is urging Americans to consume more carotenoid-rich fruits and vegetables, in part because of the probable benefits of carotenoids themselves," Jacobson said, adding that the guidelines stress the importance of carotenoids as follows:"Most fruits and vegetables are naturally low in fat and provide many essential nutrients and other food components important for health.  These foods are excellent sources of vitamin C, vitamin B6, carotenoids, including those which form vitamin A (see Box 7), and folate (Box 8).  The antioxidant nutrients found in plant foods (e.g., vitamin C, carotenoids, vitamin E and certain minerals) are presently of great interest to scientists and the public because of their potentially beneficial role in reducing the risk for cancer and certain other chronic diseases.  Scientists are also trying to determine if other substances in plant foods protect against cancer."Also included in the new guidelines is a special box (Box 7) that lists "Some Good Sources of Carotenoids," Jacobson said.  Considering the level of recognition carotenoids have received in the guidelines, it would be "extra ironic," Jacobson said, "if the FDA approves carotenoid-depleting olestra just weeks after the newly revised federal nutrition policy."Addressing the issue of whether carotenoids serve any biological purpose in humans other than beta-carotene's role as a provitamin A, CSPI also submitted an abstract of an intervention trial which CSPI said provides further evidence that beta-carotene has anti-cancer potential and "offers further basis for denying the food-additive petition for olestra," CSPI said. The study was conducted by Harinder Garewal, M.D., Ph. D., of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Tucson, Ariz., and his colleagues at three cancer-research centers, CSPI said.  "The key portion of the study involved giving 50 patients a daily dose of 60 mg of beta-carotene for six months.  Twenty-six (52%) of the patients responded to beta-carotene, with their oral leukoplakia diminishing.  The result is similar to that found in an earlier study by Garewal that used half as much beta-carotene," according to CSPI.The abstract is an addendum to earlier CSPI comments on Procter & Gamble's petition for olestra that included intervention trials demonstrating that beta-carotene causes regression of oral leukoplakia, CSPI said.  ((6FLN 1403, 2 pages, $5)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA REJECTS OPTIMAL HEALTH STANDARD FOR DETERMINING RDIsThe Food and Drug Administration has rejected the concept of "optimal health" -- a standard requested by dietary supplement groups -- as the standard for determining Reference Daily Intake values, opting to continue basing values on "nutrient adequacy" (See separate stories).In its Dec. 28 final rule establishing Reference Daily Intakes for vitamin K, selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum and chloride, FDA wrote that it was "not persuaded" that a change in the basis for determining RDIs is warranted, but noted that since the National Academy of Sciences is in the process of evaluating the basis by which it determines the Recommended Daily Allowances -- on which RDIs are based -- FDA will revisit the issue once NAS reports its findings."The agency believes that any action to change the basis for the RDIs should await completion of the NAS process to ensure that such an action reflects scientific consensus and to avoid the possible need for consecutive relabeling of foods that might occur if FDA were to proceed to revise the RDIs before NAS published new values," FDA said. The rule also modifies the units of measure used to declare the amount of biotin, folate, calcium and phosphorus in food.  FDA decided not to establish an RDI for fluoride because it found no scientific consensus determining that fluoride is an essential nutrient.Vitamin K to be considered in evaluating nutritional inferiority of substitute foodsFDA will consider vitamin K when it determines if substitute foods are nutritionally inferior to the foods for which they substitute, the agency said.  Although it received several comments expressing concern that vitamin K should not be included in such determinations because of difficulties in determining levels of vitamin K in foods,  FDA said it was "not persuaded by the comments that there is a lack of analytical methods for vitamin K, or that technological barriers to analyzing foods for vitamin K, or to adding vitamin K to foods, are insurmountable."The agency noted that many foods that are reformulated as substitute foods do not contain much vitamin K in the first place, such as foods made primarily of sugar and water, as well as many oils, drinks, fruits and fish.  Important sources of vitamin K, such as green leafy vegetables, legumes and soybean oil, are not generally reformulated, FDA noted."The primary categories of substitute foods that may need to be reformulated or relabeled appear to be those that substitute for foods containing eggs, milk, grains, or those oils that contain vitamin K," FDA said.  Leaving vitamin K out of a substitute food when it is present in the original food would make the substitute food nutritionally inferior, FDA said. The final rule makes the consideration of selenium, chromium, molybdenum and chloride optional in determining whether a food is nutritionally inferior to a food for which it substitutes.Companies that wish to add the new RDIs to their product's nutrition label may do so immediately, FDA said.  Others have until Jan. 1, 1997, which corresponds with the effective date of DSHEA regulations and should give industry time to do the appropriate analysis and implement the changes, FDA said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996STRUCTURE/FUNCTION CLAIMS, DISCLAIMER STATEMENTS PROPOSEDOne of the key proposals in FDA's triad on dietary supplement labeling (See separate stories) would establish rules for declaring percentages of nutrients not covered by current RDIs or RDAs.  The same proposal, as part of the implementation of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act, would:-- withdraw a provision of NLEA that dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals may not give prominence to any ingredient that is not a vitamin or a mineral;-- specify how the disclaimer required by DSHEA is to be presented along with "statements of nutritional support";-- remove the current NLEA definition of dietary supplements in health and nutrient content claims rules.FDA set a comment deadline of March 13 and proposed an effective date of Jan. 1, 1997.Summarizing in an analysis of impacts which expressed FDA's uncertainty as to whether the rule would provide any consumer benefit, the agency said, "The proposed rule does not significantly change the way in which claims are made, with three exceptions: "(1) Percentage claims for dietary supplements that do not have RDIs or DRVs are no longer prohibited;"(2) Dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals may now highlight an ingredient that is not a vitamin or mineral, and"(3) Labels or labeling of dietary supplements may include statements of nutritional support so long as those statements include an appropriate disclaimer and the manufacturer has substantiation that the statement is truthful and not misleading."New definitionThe agency's proposed new definition of the term "dietary supplement" in the section on nutrient content claims would apply to "foods that are intended for human consumption and that are offered for sale, including conventional foods and dietary supplements," eliminating the current reference to "vitamins, minerals, herbs and other similar nutritional substances (dietary supplements)."  The simplification was called for by DSHEA, FDA said.  Discussing the coverage of the nutrient content proposal, FDA said:-- "The broad range of substances that can be dietary ingredients under Section 201(ff) has the potential to create ambiguities as to the coverage of the nutrient content claim regime.  With respect to some substances that can be dietary ingredients, the context in which statements about them are made will determine whether they are nutrient content claims or not.  For example, garlic can be the dietary ingredient.-- "A claim on the label or in the labeling of a dietary supplement that it is 'high in garlic' or that it 'now contains more garlic' is a nutrient content claim within the meaning of the act, and the food is misbranded unless such a claim has been authorized by FDA through regulation....-- "On the other hand, a label statement on garlic bread, for example, that the product now contains more garlic would not be a nutrient content claim if the bread is not labeled as a dietary supplement and if it is clear from the context in which the claim is made that the claim refers to the taste of the product...."Percentage claims for non-RDI ingredientsFDA noted that DSHEA specifically permitted percentage claims for ingredients not covered by Reference Daily Intakes (RDIs) or Daily Reference Values (DRVs), using as an example "40% omega-3 fatty acids."  DSHEA also would allow statements that characterize the percentage of ingredients in relation to an equivalent in another food product.  Examples were "100% of the allicin in a bulb of garlic" or "twice the allicin as (product alternative) where 'twice' is another way of saying 200%.""Accordingly," FDA said in the preamble to the proposal, "percentage claims such as '40% omega-3 fatty acids' that do not in any way characterize the level of a nutrient in terms of defined claims such as 'high', 'low' or 'reduced' were permitted on dietary supplements as well as conventional foods before the enactment of the DSHEA."The agency said, however, that percentage statements would be misleading unless the ingredient is in a meaningful amount, continuing:  "Therefore, firms will need to determine on a case-by-case basis whether the stated amount of a dietary ingredient for which an RDI or DRV has not been established, and the difference between the amount of such a dietary ingredient in two products, is meaningful...."An example:  The statement "300% of the bioflavonoids in a large grapefruit" is permissible, but a claim such as "high in bioflavonoids" is not.  "FDA has concluded," the agency continued, "that if the defined term (i.e., the nutrient content claim) is to have any meaning, there must be a level that can be used as a reference in determining whether the claim is valid and appropriate.  The RDIs and DRVs provide such levels.  Thus, FDA has limited the use of 'good source', 'high' and other defined terms to use with nutrients for which RDIs or DRVs have been established."FDA said it considers that when a percentage comparison is made for ingredients for which no RDI or DRV has been established, information on the identity of the reference food and on the quantitative amount of the dietary ingredient in both products is necessary.  The proposal would require that the reference food be clearly identified, and the actual amount of the dietary ingredient in both foods be provided, adjacent to the most prominent claim or to the nutrient label.  When the nutrition label is on the information panel, the quantitative information may be placed elsewhere on the panel.Statements of nutritional supportTo escape characterization as a drug while making statements of nutritional support (so-called structure/function claims), manufacturers must, according to the proposal, have substantiation that the claim is truthful and not misleading and include on the label a disclaimer: "This statement has not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration.  This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease."A plural version of the first sentence would be allowed when more than one structure/function claim is made.  Prominence of the disclaimer is at issue.  Where one structure/function claim is made, FDA decided the disclaimer must appear immediately adjacent to the claim with no intervening material.  When multiple claims are made, however, the agency would allow asterisks on the claim, referring to a specific place on the label, such as the information panel, where the disclaimer would appear.  Allowing information panel placement, however, must be supported by comments, the agency said, noting the receipt of a petition on the subject from the Nutritional Health Alliance.  The agency said it is concerned that the placement of the disclaimer on another panel would not reveal material facts in conjunction with the statement of nutritional support.  The preamble's discussion continued:-- "... In addition, the requirement in the act for prominent display means that when the disclaimer does not appear immediately adjacent to a statement of nutritional support, it must be presented on the label or labeling in a manner that renders it as readily observable and as likely to be read as the statement of nutritional support itself....-- "Therefore, FDA is proposing in Section 101.94(c)(2) to require that a box be drawn around the disclaimer when the disclaimer is not immediately adjacent to the statement of nutritional support."Type size and style FDA proposed a minimum 1/16th-inch type size for disclaimer statements, saying it considers unworkable the NLEA provision for letters one half the size of the most prominent statement because nutritional support statements are likely to be long and, thus, of small type size.The proposal would remove for dietary supplements the NLEA restrictions on use of statements of levels of nutrients that are not vitamins or minerals.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FSIS ISSUES FINAL RULE REDUCING PRIOR LABELING APPROVAL REQUIREMENTSThe U.S. Agriculture Department's Food Safety and Inspection Service has issued its final rule, first proposed in 1992, amending the federal meat and poultry products inspection regulations by expanding the types of labeling which would not require submittal to FSIS for approval prior to use (See FLN Nov. 25, 1993, Page 19; Dec. 23, 1993, Page 27; Jan. 27, 1994, Page 14; February 10, 1994, Page 21, and Aug. 17, 1995, Page 7) in a notice published Dec. 29 in the Federal Register.The new rule also amends the federal meat and poultry products inspection regulations to permit the submission of only sketch labeling, except for temporary approvals, in those instances where labeling is required to be submitted for approval, and to require retention of certain labeling records.  This final rule is intended to eliminate unnecessary duplication in the labeling approval system and contribute to President Clinton's initiatives for greater efficiency in government services (as per the principles of the National Performance Review to cut red tape, put customers first and eliminate what is not needed).  The effective date of the rule is July 1, 1996.The effect of the new rule is that official establishments and foreign establishments certified by officials of foreign inspection systems will be allowed to use the following generically approved labeling without the submission of sketches for approval by FSIS:1. Labeling for a product which has a standard of identity or composition as specified in 9 CFR Part 319 or Part 381, subpart P, and which does not contain any special claims, such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees, or which is not a domestic product labeled with a foreign language;2. Labeling for single-ingredient products (such as beef steak, lamb chops, chicken legs or turkey breasts) which does not contain special claims such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees, or which is not a domestic product labeled with a foreign language; 3. Labeling for products marked "For Export Only" in U.S. establishments which does not contain any special claims, such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees;4. Labeling for containers of meat and meat food products and poultry products sold under contract specifications to federal government agencies, when such product is not offered for sale to the general public, provided the contract specifications include specific requirements with respect to labeling, and are made available to the IIC;5. Labeling for shipping containers which contain fully labeled immediate containers, provided such labeling complies with 9 CFR 316.13 or 381.127. 6. Labeling for products not intended for human food, provided they comply with 9 CFR Part 325 or 9 CFR 381.152(c) and 381.193, and labeling for poultry heads and feet for export for processing as human food if they comply with 9 CFR 381.190(b);7. Inspection legends, which comply with 9 CFR Parts 312 and 316 and 9 CFR Part 381, subpart M, and 8. Inserts, tags, liners, pasters, and like devices containing printed or graphic matter and for use on, or to be placed within, containers and coverings of products, provided such devices contain no reference to product and bear no misleading feature.The rule will also permit official establishments and foreign establishments certified by officials of foreign inspection systems to use final labeling, without further authorization from FSIS, that was approved by FSIS, FLD, in sketch form if the final labeling was prepared without modification or with the following modifications:1. All features of the labeling are proportionately enlarged or reduced, provided that all minimum size requirements specified in applicable regulations are met and the labeling is legible;2. A substitution of the abbreviation "lb." for "pound," or "oz." for "ounce," or of the word "pound" for "lb." or "ounce" for "oz.";3. A master or stock label has been approved from which the name and address of the distributor are omitted and such name and address are applied before being used (in such case, the words "prepared for" or similar statement must be shown together with the blank space reserved for the insertion of the name and address when such labels are offered for approval);4. During holiday seasons, wrappers or other covers bearing floral or foliage designs or illustrations of rabbits, chicks, fireworks, or other emblematic holiday designs are used with approved labeling (the use of such designs will not make necessary the application of labeling not otherwise required);5. A change in the language or the arrangement of directions pertaining to the opening of containers or the serving of the product;6. The addition, deletion or amendment of a dated or undated coupon, a cents-off statement, cooking instructions, packer product code information or UPC product code information;7. Any change in the name or address of the packer, manufacturer or distributor that appears in the signature line;8. Any change in the net weight, provided the size of the net weight statement complies with 9 CFR 317.2 or 381.121;9. The addition, deletion, or amendment of recipe suggestions for the product;10. Any change in punctuation;11. Newly assigned or revised establishment numbers for a particular establishment for which use of the labeling has been approved by the FLD; 12. The addition or deletion of open dating information;13. A change in the type of packaging material on which the label is printed; 14. Brand name changes, provided that there are no design changes, the brand name does not use a term that connotes quality or other product characteristics, the brand name has no geographic significance, and the brand name does not affect the name of the product;15. The deletion of the word "new" on new product labeling;16. The addition, deletion, or amendment of special handling statements, such as "Keep Refrigerated" or "Keep Frozen," provided that the change is consistent with 9 CFR 317.2(k) or 381.125(a);17. The addition of safe handling instructions as required by 9 CFR 317.2(l) or 381.125(b);18. Changes reflecting a change in the quantity of an ingredient shown in the formula without a change in the order of predominance shown on the label, provided that the change in quantity of ingredients complies with any minimum or maximum limits for the use of such ingredients prescribed in 9 CFR Parts 318 and 319, or 9 CFR 381.147 or 9 CFR Part 381, subpart P;19. Changes in the color of the labeling, provided that sufficient contrast and legibility remain;20. The addition, deletion, or substitution of the official USDA grade shield on labels of poultry products;21. A change in the product vignette, provided the change does not affect mandatory labeling information or misrepresent the content of the package, or22. A change in an establishment number by a corporation or parent company for an establishment under its ownership.As originally proposed, the rule had no provision for voluntary submission of labeling to FSIS for review and approval, and many commenters to the ANPR asked that the option be retained because many products have complex compositional and minimum content requirements.  The final rule now provides for the option of submitting sketch labeling for standardized products for review, an option FSIS says it may later propose to remove.According to the Federal Register notice, the role of the ICC (inspector in charge) will not change or be diminished as a result of this regulation.  Inspection personnel are to continue observing and monitoring product formulations and processing procedures to assure conformance with general labeling requirements.The regulation is expected to benefit consumers, the meat and poultry industry and FSIS itself, streamlining the label approval process from two steps (sketch and final) to one (sketch only).  Allowing meat and poultry manufacturers to make numerous labeling modifications without submitting certain labels for approval should, according to the notice, reduce the burden on industry by making the process more convenient and cost-effective, and save the meat and poultry industries (which will be submitting approximately 82,600 fewer labels a year to FSIS' Food Labeling Division at $37 per label) at least $3 million annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED  BY FSISWith some exceptions, USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service proposed Dec. 29 its expected modifications of food standards to allow substitute foods.  An interim policy had preceded the proposal (See FLN March 9, Page 16).A comment deadline was set as Feb. 27, but no effective date was noted.The terms "substitute" or "alternate" would not be required in product names for the new products.  FSIS said, "... These products will be appropriately named by use of an expressed nutrient content claim and the appropriate standardized term."The nutrient content claim, however, would have to be presented in the same style, color and size of type as in the original product.  Also, each of the ingredients must be listed, in general, by common or usual name in descending order of predominance by weight on either the principal display panel or the information panel.Permitted ingredients added at levels in excess of those allowed by the traditional standard must be appropriately identified as such, FSIS said, with an asterisk in the ingredients statement.  FSIS elaborated:-- "... The statement 'ingredients not in regular (name of the traditional standardized food)' or 'ingredients in excess of amount permitted in regular (name of the traditional standardized food)' or both statements as appropriate, shall immediately follow the ingredients statement in the same type size. -- "The asterisk statements must clearly distinguish between 'those ingredients not permitted' and 'those ingredients used in excess of amounts permitted' in a standardized product."Nutrient content claims would stand in for some requirements of current standards under the new definition as proposed by FSIS, which said:  "FSIS is proposing to define substitutes to processed meat and poultry products as: -- "Any processed meat and/or poultry product whose formulation has been minimally modified to enable it to be used as a substitute for another meat and/or poultry product that it resembles and which has a standard of identity in the regulations (9 CFR Parts 319 and 381, subpart P).-- "The meat or poultry product would be eligible to use an expressed nutrient content claim to identify it; would resemble the standardized product in appearance, form, taste and texture, and would use safe, suitable and approved substitute ingredients at proper levels and functions, i.e., the lowest level necessary to satisfy the criteria for use of the expressed nutrient content claim provided in regulations."The product would have to be labeled, according to the proposal, "in a manner that conveys allowable ingredient differences to consumers."  The agency elaborated:"The ingredient differences that will be allowed relate to the use of ingredients needed to make a product that complies with the specific expressed nutrient content claim related to a reduction in a constituent that has negative health implications ... i.e., fat, cholesterol and sodium."The substitute meat or poultry food product will be allowed to be named using a standardized term because it either will be similar to the standardized product in its performance characteristics and the ingredients used, or it will, through appropriate labeling terminology, describe how it differs from the standardized product for which it substitutes."Taboo practicesThe proposal outlined some instances, however, in which products will not be considered substitutes for standardized products, including:-- "... Modified versions of standardized products which purport to be substitutes of them must adhere to the original regulatory standards requirements ... regarding the use of meat and poultry from specified anatomical locations, the use of a specific kind and/or amount of meat or poultry tissue to prepare the product and the use of specified processing procedures....-- "For example, beef stew must contain at least 25% meat (i.e., beef).  Since the meat or poultry content of such product is integral to its identity, the label for a substitute of this product would be false or misleading if the substitute was named, in part, by a standardized term, but contained less than the amount of meat and/or poultry required by the standard....-- "For example, a product identified with the standardized name 'Chicken A-La-King' is required to contain a minimum of 20% cooked chicken meat and a substitute for this product would be required to contain the same amount....-- "... 'Turkey ham must be made from turkey thigh meat and be cured, and in 9 CFR 319.107, 'Bacon' must be made from pork bellies and be cured...."FSIS said it plans to invite comments on a broader reform of the standards in an upcoming advance notice of proposed rulemaking.Expressed nutrient content claimsFSIS proposed that "only expressed nutrient content claims, i.e., claims that have been defined and are related to reductions in constituents having negative health implications, be permitted in conjunction with the standardized name ... in substitute meat and poultry products."  Examples of approved claims were given as "low," "lower," "lite," "reduced," "lean," "extra lean" and "free."Performance characteristicsThe substitute foods also must "perform similarly to the traditional standardized products," FSIS said, "unless the product is specifically labeled to show any significant performance usage differences it has, such as a frankfurter not being suitable for freezing."Performance characteristics were listed as including physical properties (e.g., texture, cooking qualities, freezing qualities), its functional properties (e.g., body, spreadability) and shelf life.  However, the agency qualified these requirements with:-- "FSIS recognizes, however, that when a standardized product is modified so that its composition accurately supports the nutrient content claim intended to be made, it may not be possible in all cases to produce a substitute product that performs similarly in regard to all uses of the regulated standardized meat or poultry food product....-- "The product would be considered a substitute product allowed under this proposal if the limitation on use does not affect the fundamental nature of the product and is disclosed in labeling....-- "If there is a difference in performance characteristics that materially limits the use of the product, the product may still be considered a substitute if the label includes a disclaimer adjacent to the most prominent claim in accordance with 9 CFR 317.13(d) (1) and (2) and 381.413(d) (1) and (2), informing the consumer of such difference...."Elaborating with the example of a frankfurter having such characteristics as a "link" form, a cured pink color, a spongy texture and the ability for refrigeration or freezing, and the expectation that it could be prepared in a variety of ways, i.e., boiling, broiling, grilling and frying, FSIS said:-- "When fat, however, in a frankfurter or another standardized product is replaced by one or more other ingredients, it may not be possible in all cases to produce substitute products that perform identically to the traditional standardized meat and poultry products....  Fats exhibit unique physical properties in meat and poultry products, e.g., their ability to combine with protein to form emulsions and their ability to enhance tenderness.  -- "In order to make a substitute product that qualifies for a 'fat free' nutrient content claim, it may be necessary to replace fat with water and binders (i.e., additives that hold water and protein), which may result in a substitute meat or poultry food product with limitations in performance related to product uses....-- "Therefore, if a 'fat free' frankfurter does not tolerate frozen storage for long periods of time, because the ingredients needed to make the substitute product do not withstand the same conditions of storage as the standardized product ... a non- performance statement would inform the consumer of that fact, e.g., 'Do Not Freeze'."Tofu tabooThe proposal listed specific allowable and non-allowable ingredients.  Listed as allowable, although they have typically been restricted in standardized products, were:  Agar-agar, algin, sodium alginate, calcium carbonate, lactic acid and calcium lactate (or glucono delta-lactone), calcium-reduced dried skim milk, carrageenan, carboxymethyl cellulose (cellulose gum), dried milk, enzyme (rennet)-treated calcium-reduced dried skim milk and calcium lactate, food starch modified, gelatin, guar gum, methyl cellulose, isolated soy protein, sodium caseinate, dry or dried whey, reduced lactose whey, reduced minerals whey, whey protein concentrate, starchy vegetable flour (e.g., potato flour, rice flour and pea flour), vegetable starch (e.g., corn starch, potato starch and wheat starch), wheat gluten, tapioca dextrin, soy flour, soy protein concentrate and xanthan gum.Also, emulsifying agents to be permitted in combination with water and binders as part of a fat-replacement system were listed as lecithin, mono- and diglycerides and polyglycerol esters of fatty acids, commonly used as emulsifying agents in shortenings and margarines.  These are not to be considered as fat replacers when used alone.Humectants, also, would not be considered by themselves to be fat replacers, but would be allowed as part of a "fat replacement system" because of their water-binding enhancement.The proposal is not intended to allow replacement or exchange of any required ingredient or component, USDA emphasized, specifically listing as taboo under these replacement circumstances:  Textured vegetable protein, foods such as bread, rice, potatoes, cheese, fruits and vegetables.  The preamble to the proposal elaborated:"Because these food ingredients have virtually no fat, their presence in products would result in a finished product with a lowered fat content.  However, the lowered fat content would be a result of the food 'filling' or 'extending' the product rather than as a result of the food merely functioning as a fat replacer."Prohibited ingredientsIngredients prohibited in standardized foods would be prohibited also from the substitute foods, examples being poultry kidneys or sex glands in cooked sausages, because they are not approved as safe or suitable for use in meat and poultry.  FSIS continued, "For example, 9 CFR 318.7(d)(2) prohibits sorbic acid and its salts from use in formulating meat products and, thus, would continue to be prohibited in substitute products."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES GENERALLY RECEIVE FAVORABLE REVIEWSThe federal government's Dietary Guidelines for Americans, described this week as "the gold standard" for good nutrition and health, were unveiled Jan. 2 to generally favorable reviews by industry and consumer groups.  (The full text of the guidelines will be published in the Jan. 11 FLN.)The guidelines are little changed from the recommendations  issued last summer by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (See FLN Aug. 24, Page 3).  For the first time, they include information on physical activity and dieting, vegetarian diets and recommendations that adults maintain their body weight as they age.  The fourth edition also includes an expanded section on grains, fruits and vegetables.The guidelines recommend that Americans choose diets with plenty of grains, fruits and vegetables; eat a variety of foods; balance food consumption with physical activity; use moderate amounts of salt, sodium, sugar and alcohol, and choose a diet low in fat, saturated fat and cholesterol.  Industry generally called the guidelines balanced and reasonable.  The National Cattlemen's Association and the Beef Industry Council said they support them.  "For the 99% of Americans who enjoy meat, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans tell us we can continue to enjoy it and still be healthy," the groups said.The Grocery Manufacturers of America said, "The Dietary Guidelines provide guidance not only to consumers and health professionals, but to industry as well.  Many of the innovations in 'better-for-you-foods' over the last decade have been driven by the dietary guidelines."Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman and Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala said commodity and industry groups were "responsive" to the changes in the guidelines.  Shalala brushed aside criticism that the guidelines are too lenient on recommended consumption levels of sugar and fat.While the Council for Responsible Nutrition called the guidelines "a step forward," it said they need revision on several points regarding supplements.  The guidelines incorrectly state that supplements "usually" are not needed, inaccurately imply that the Recommended Dietary Allowances are the upper limit of safe nutrient intakes and disregard the importance of supplements in achieving recommended calcium intakes, said the supplement trade association.Michael Jacobson, director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, expressed disappointment about the guidelines, calling them only a "marginal improvement" from the previous edition issued in 1990.  The guidelines offer "bland statements" that fail to provide enough direction to help Americans improve their diets, he said.  "The government should tell people what is the best possible diet," he said.Dr. Andrew Nicholson, director of preventive medicine for the Physicians Committee for Responsive Medicine, also said the government should have offered more specific nutrition and dietary information.  "It's a placebo," he said of the guidelines, noting he is pleased they include information on vegetarian diets.  There are some "very positive statements," he said, "but the [Dietary Guidelines Advisory] Committee has not had the guts to stand up to the American Meat Institute, the pork board and the fisheries institutes and say which foods have the saturated fat and cholesterol so Americans know how to follow the recommendations."  "The important thing is to talk foods.  Don't talk nutrients.  People don't know where to find saturated fat and cholesterol," Nicholson said.HHS Secretary Shalala said 300,000 deaths and $250 billion in health costs and lost workdays annually are associated with poor diets.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA STRIVES FOR CONSISTENCY IN DSHEA NUTRITION LABEL RULESFDA's proposal for nutrition labeling of dietary supplements has sought to balance the specific requirements of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act with existing regulations for nutrition labeling of conventional foods in order to achieve some consistency -- especially in format.In the preamble to the proposal, published Dec. 28, FDA acknowledged that despite its desire for consistency in the appearance of nutrition information on dietary supplements and conventional foods, "the requirements adopted in DSHEA, such as the listing of the names and amounts of other dietary ingredients and the optional listing of source information, necessitate that there be some differences in format."  In order to signal to consumers that nutrition labeling on dietary supplements differs from that on conventional foods, FDA proposed that the title for the nutrition information be "Supplement Facts," rather than the "Nutrition Facts" title on conventional foods.  The agency asked for specific comment on the appropriateness of this title.Asking that comments be submitted by March 13, FDA said any final rule that is issued based on the proposal would become effective Jan. 1, 1997.  It specifically asked for comments to focus on the provisions in which changes are being proposed from FDA's January 1994 final rule for nutrition labeling of dietary supplements that had been published under the Dietary Supplement Act of 1992.  After passage of DSHEA in October 1994, FDA stayed enforcement of the nutrition labeling rule for supplements until it had a chance to conform the rule to the specific provisions of DSHEA.'Dietary supplement' term to be part of statement of identityIn many cases, FDA found the DSHEA statute to be vague and had to guess at its meaning.  For example, the agency noted that while DSHEA requires the identity statement "dietary supplement" on labels, it did not explicitly address where on the food label the term must appear.  However, when reading the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act as a whole, FDA decided that the term "dietary supplement" needs to appear as part of the common or usual name of the food, and proposed that the term appear in the statement of identity of dietary supplement products.Use of this term, FDA explained, "will distinguish this potentially broad class of products from other types of food."  In addition, under the broad DSHEA definition of dietary supplement, there may be supplements for which the presence of the term "constitutes the primary, if not the only, means by which consumers will be able to determine that the food is a dietary supplement," the agency said, especially when supplements are in other than tablet, capsule, powder, softgel, gelcap or liquid form.FDA concluded that no major changes in the 1994 dietary supplement final rule are needed on the listing of dietary ingredients for which Reference Daily Intakes and Daily Reference Values have been established, and proposed that the 14 nutrients that must be listed in the nutrition labeling of a conventional food, when present in a supplement "in amounts greater than that, can be declared as zero," be listed on the nutrition label.  They referred to these 14 nutrients as "(b)(2) dietary ingredients," since they are listed in proposed Section 101.36(b)(2), and to all other dietary ingredients as "other dietary ingredients."The 1994 dietary supplement rule was silent on the listing of the  "subcomponents," such as saturated fat, soluble fiber and sugar alcohols that may be declared but are not required except when claims about them are made.  Since the 1994 rule applied only to vitamin and mineral supplements, and DSHEA now includes other products such as fiber supplements to be covered by the same nutrition labeling rules, FDA said it concluded that it is appropriate to provide for the optional listing of the subcomponents.  Subcomponents not already specified in the nutrition labeling regulations for conventional foods, such as amino acids and omega-3 fatty acids, must be listed as dietary ingredients for which RDIs and DRVs have not been established, rather than as subcomponents of protein or fat.  FDA said this would provide more consistency between nutrition labeling of supplements and conventional foods and would minimize consumer confusion.Although DSHEA requires that all dietary ingredients and their amounts be listed, FDA said that requiring the listing of all vitamins and minerals with RDIs or DRVs that are present in some products, such as herbal products, would be "unduly burdensome" and in conflict with the current rules which require the mandatory listing only of sodium, vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium and iron.  FDA concluded that it is appropriate to follow the approach used for conventional foods and to require the  listing of vitamins and minerals only when they are added to the product for purposes of supplementation or when a claim is made about them.  The agency asked for comment on this approach.Noting that it did not declare in the 1994 dietary supplement final rule the amounts of vitamins and minerals that do not have to be declared because they are so small, FDA said it included an explicit statement in the proposal that the amounts of vitamins and minerals corresponding to less than 2% of the RDI shall not be declared.  FDA said this statement "does not represent a change from the 1994 dietary supplement final rule but is merely a clarification of its provisions."The proposal specified that protein not be declared in the nutrition label of dietary supplements that contain only individual amino acids.  FDA said it is misleading to declare the protein content in the nutrition label of a dietary supplement that contains free amino acids because protein, by definition, is composed of chains of amino acids connected together by peptide bonds.Use of the heading "amount per serving" is required as it was in the 1994 rule, but the agency proposed to allow it to be used either over the column of amounts or the column of names of ingredients. Requesting comment on this change, FDA said it was proposing flexibility in the placement of the heading "because space constraints may make placement over the column of amounts impractical in some cases."FDA proposed that instead of listing calories above the column of names, as is the case for conventional foods, they be listed first in the column of names, under a bar that separates the list from the heading, "amount per serving."  FDA said that giving calories prominence over other nutrients is not appropriate for supplements, which usually do not contain many calories.  In addition, this change will save space, FDA noted.  The agency also specified the synonyms that may be added in parentheses following the names of the (b)(2) dietary ingredients, which is identical to the current regulation on synonyms in dietary supplement labeling except that the agency proposed to permit the use of "folic acid" as a synonym for "folate."  While current nutrition labeling rules do not permit the term "folic acid," FDA said this was an omission and added that it intends to revise the rule for conventional foods to permit the listing of folic acid as a synonym for folate.Quantity declarations to be in column to the right of names of nutrientsSince DSHEA allows an optional listing of the source of the ingredient, FDA proposed requiring that the quantity of each ingredient, per serving, be listed in a column to the right of the column of names.  FDA said it considered continuing to have the weight of the dietary ingredient placed immediately after the name of the ingredient or its source, "but tentatively concluded that the wide variation in placement that could result when some dietary ingredients are listed by name only, while others include the source ingredient, would make it difficult for some consumers to find the declaration of weight."  FDA asked for comment on this decision and its possible impact on space requirements.FDA noted that the weight declared for any dietary ingredient "is to be the weight of the dietary ingredient rather than the weight of the source of the dietary ingredient."  For example, the agency noted, the weight of calcium would be declared for calcium carbonate, rather than the weight of calcium carbonate.  While DSHEA is unclear as to the basis for reporting the quantitative information, FDA concluded that it is appropriate to require it be provided on a "per serving" basis.  Interpreting the provision this way means there need only be one list of the quantitative amounts of dietary ingredients in a supplement, FDA pointed out.  Requiring information on a per dosage unit basis might mean that for dietary supplements whose serving size is two capsules, there would have to be two lists of dietary ingredient amounts, one per capsule and the other per serving, which would result in overcrowded labels.  However, "the rules of statutory construction" do not generally favor the FDA interpretation, the agency acknowledged, since it would make two sections of the act redundant, and specifically requested comment on its proposed interpretation.Discussing the declaration of percent daily values for each (b)(2) dietary ingredient,  FDA said it clarified that the actual amount is to be used in the calculation for vitamins and minerals, except sodium and potassium, and that either the actual amount or the rounded amount may be used for other nutrients, such as fat.  FDA said it also reworded a provision to make clear that the phrase "less than 1%" is to be used when the dietary ingredient is present in an amount by weight that requires declaration, yet the amount is so small that the percent Daily Value when rounded to the nearest percent comes to "0%." 'Less than' symbol may be used, FDA saysThe symbol "<1%" may be used in place of "less than 1%" to provide more flexibility when space is limited on the label, FDA said, noting that it did not permit the use of the symbol in the first set of nutrition labeling regulations because of concerns that many people would not understand its meaning.  However, the agency said it has received numerous requests for its use "and is aware that it is being used on some nutrition labels with tight space constraints."  FDA asked for comments on use of the symbol "and the submission of any available data that would demonstrate consumers' comprehension of it." If FDA permits the use for dietary supplements, it intends to provide for such use on conventional foods as well, the agency said.The column for "% Daily Value" may be omitted when there are no numerical values declared beneath it, FDA said.  When this happens, and the footnote "Daily Value not established" is required, the asterisk symbol must immediately follow the quantitative amount by weight for each dietary ingredient listed under "amount per serving," FDA said.In considering requirements for the listing of other dietary ingredients, FDA proposed that they be listed in the nutrition label by their common or usual name in a column that is underneath the column of names of (b)(2) dietary ingredients and that a "heavy bar" be used to separate the listing, which would enable consumers to distinguish between the two types of ingredients.Comments requested on order of dietary ingredients listingsWhile FDA said it considered specifying that the other dietary ingredients be listed in a particular order, such as alphabetical order or descending order of predominance by weight, FDA said it tentatively concluded that specifying a particular order is not justified, but requested comments on the issue.For herbs and other botanicals, FDA encouraged manufacturers to use common or usual names that are found in botanical data bases and that are widely used. While many of these names "are part of our everyday language and are easily recognized," FDA acknowledged that arriving at an appropriate name for botanicals "may be a problem because some plants have more than one common or usual name, or one name is used to describe many different species."  In other cases, a particular species may not even have a common or usual name, the agency said.  FDA said it considers the term "botanical" to include fungi and algae.FDA proposed to require that the quantitative amount listed in the nutrition label for a declared dietary ingredient be the total weight of that dietary ingredient and not the weight of a component of that dietary ingredient or of the source of that dietary ingredient.  For example, if a dietary supplement lists garlic as a dietary ingredient and makes no reference to a component of garlic, then the weight specified should be the weight of garlic.  However, if the nutrition label lists allicin as the dietary ingredient, with the garlic noted as the source ingredient, the weight specified ought to be the weight of allicin only.  Liquid extracts of dietary ingredients "are not to be treated any differently," FDA said, noting that such determinations may be difficult and asking for comment on the issue.FDA said it is giving the manufacturer the option of deciding what to list as a dietary ingredient, noting that either the botanical or one or more constituents of a botanical may be declared as the dietary ingredient.  FDA requested comment on whether it should consider allowing manufacturers to declare both the botanical and one or more constituents as dietary ingredients within a single product, with a requirement that the constituents of the botanical be indented beneath the listing of the botanical.  FDA said it rejected this approach because it could be potentially confusing to consumers, but asked whether there are alternative approaches and whether this flexibility is consistent with DSHEA.The agency proposed to require that manufacturers express the amounts of other dietary ingredients in metric units that are appropriate.  The provision requires that any declaration of 1,000 or more units be declared in the next higher set of units.Other dietary ingredients must bear an asterisk in the column under the heading of "% Daily Value" that refers to another symbol placed at the bottom of the nutrition label that is followed by the statement, "Daily Value not established."  When no (b)(2) dietary ingredients are declared and the heading of "% Daily Value" is not used, the agency proposed that the symbol follow the declaration of the quantitative amount for each dietary ingredient listed.  FDA said it gave "extensive consideration" to the most appropriate wording for the statement to which the symbol refers, considering statements such as "not currently determined essential," which was suggested by a dietary supplement trade association.  FDA said it is "unsure if such a statement would be more useful to consumers," but noted that the "Daily value not established" statement is consistent with that currently used on nutrition labels, and asked for comments on an appropriate statement.Provision outlines requirements for proprietary blendsA section of the regulation provides for the listing of dietary ingredients in proprietary blends, in order to implement the DSHEA provision that permits the listing of the total quantity of all ingredients in a blend labeled proprietary.  FDA proposed that the dietary ingredients in the proprietary blend be indented under the term "proprietary blend," or a modification of the term, and be listed in a column or in a linear fashion.The proposal would require that the total weight of the dietary ingredients listed as components of the proprietary blend appear on the same line as the name of the blend, to make it clear that the weight represents the total weight of the dietary ingredients listed.   The proposal also requires that the list of other dietary ingredients in a proprietary blend be given in order of predominance by weight, since the weights of the individual dietary ingredients need not be specified.  FDA noted that this is consistent with ingredient labeling of conventional foods and "is intended to give consumers an indication of the relative amounts of the other dietary ingredients present in the absence of information on their actual amounts."If the proprietary blend furnishes more than insignificant amounts of any required (b)(2) dietary ingredient, that ingredient must be declared, as well as the amount of the ingredient and the percent of the Daily Value, FDA said.  The agency said it would be contrary to the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act not to require such a listing.Dietary ingredients in nutrition label exempt from ingredient declarationWhile noting some ambiguity in the statute, FDA said it interpreted DSHEA to mean that any ingredient listed in the nutrition label need not be listed a second time in the ingredient statement.  FDA proposed to revise its regulations on ingredient listings to allow for this, citing a legal analysis from the law firm of Covington and Burling that agrees with its interpretation.FDA proposed that the source of any dietary ingredient may be added in parentheses immediately following or indented beneath the name of the dietary ingredient, and the words "as" or "from" must precede the name of the source ingredient, such as "calcium (as calcium carbonate)."  If the name of the dietary ingredient is itself the source ingredient or its synonym, then the listing of the dietary ingredient will fulfill the requirement for the listing of the ingredient, the agency explained.  Noting that many manufacturers already use the terms "as" or "from," FDA said these words will help to convey to consumers the understanding that such compounds are the source of the dietary ingredients.When a source is not identified within the nutrition label, the proposal provides that it shall be listed in the ingredient statement.  The ingredient statement on a dietary supplement must appear outside and immediately below the nutrition label, or, if there is insufficient space below the nutrition label, immediately contiguous and to the right of the nutrition label, FDA said.  This provision is in accordance with DSHEA, the agency explained.The agency proposed to require that the ingredients list be preceded by the word "Ingredients," unless some ingredients are identified within the nutrition label, in which case the ingredients listed outside the nutrition label shall be in a list preceded by the words "Other Ingredients."   This will indicate to consumers that some ingredient information appears in the nutrition information that precedes the ingredient list, FDA said.Ingredients that are not dietary ingredients, such as fillers and artificial colors, must be listed in the ingredient statement, FDA said, noting that a 1942 Trade Correspondence which had exempted such ingredients from dietary supplement declaration is being revoked since it has been overturned by more recent agency statements of policy on the subject.Latin form of botanicals in parentheses required for ingredientsIngredients would have to be listed by common or usual name, as is required for conventional foods. In order to ensure correct identification of herbs or other botanicals, including algae and fungi, FDA proposed that the botanical name in Latin binomial form be included in parentheses following the common or usual name.  To ensure there is consistency and clarity in declaration, the agency proposed that any botanical name declared should be "in accordance with internationally accepted rules on nomenclature, such as those found in the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature," FDA said, requesting comments on this issue.Recognizing that it is possible to have more than one acceptable botanical name in Latin form, FDA advised manufacturers "to choose the name that is most currently used in commerce and in appropriate references and, in cases of confusion, to consult with the agency."FDA also proposed to require that the part or parts of the plant, such as leaf, flower, root, fruit, seed or bark, be presented in parentheses immediately following the Latin name of the botanical ingredient, noting that DSHEA requires identification of any part of the plant from which the dietary ingredient is derived.  Whenever such information is presented, the agency said, the name of the part of the plant must be expressed in English, since the pharmaceutical names would not be recognized and their meanings would not be commonly understood by American consumers.  "When the entire plant is used, the label should specify 'entire plant' to meet the requirements of the act," FDA said.The botanical name requirements apply whether the ingredient is listed in an ingredient statement or in the nutrition label, FDA said.  Since the FD&C Act does not require ingredients to be listed when the food contains only one ingredient, FDA proposed that for single-ingredient dietary supplements, the Latin binomial name and the part of the plant from which the dietary supplement is derived may be prominently placed on the principal display panel or the information panel, or included in the nutrition label.When two or more sources are listed within parentheses, they should be listed in descending order by weight, "which is consistent with the way ingredients are to be listed" in the ingredient labeling regulations, FDA said.  Since the amounts by weight of the ingredients are listed in the nutrition label, these ingredients did not have to be listed in descending order by weight, the agency noted.Reference to official compendium permitted for individual ingredientsIndividual dietary ingredients that conform to an official compendium may be listed as such by a reference to the compendium, FDA said, citing as an example "Calcium (from carbonate USP)."  If such a representation is made and the ingredient does not comply with the specifications of the compendium, the supplement would be misbranded, the agency noted.Discussing format requirements, FDA said it is proposing to maintain the same graphic requirements in the nutrition labeling regulations, including those on type size, since DSHEA does not necessitate any changes in type size.  FDA requested comment on the requirement for a hairline rule between the listings of each dietary ingredient, noting that it had received complaints about the hairline rule's effect on space and legibility on supplements with a long listing of ingredients when this requirement was issued in the 1994 regulations.  Such comments "will be particularly helpful if actual sample labels are included as well as suggestions for when relief from such a requirement should be provided," FDA said.The proposal clarified the size of bars that are to be used to separate the various headings, FDA said, noting that there was confusion about this issue when the 1994 rule was published.A section of the proposal addressing how nutrition information is to be presented on products that contain two or more separately packaged dietary supplements is analogous to the section in the regulations for conventional foods, FDA said.Compliance will be determined using the procedures for nutrition labeling of conventional foods, according to the proposal.  FDA discussed whether to alter its longstanding compliance criterion requiring added vitamins, minerals, protein, dietary fiber or potassium to be present in amounts at least equal to the value for the declared nutrient, since USP monographs for several nutrition products require a minimum nutrient content of 90% of the label declaration.  FDA said any deviation from the criterion that is attributable to reasons other than variability of analytical methods would be a material fact that would need to be disclosed on the label, and said such a message could diminish consumer confidence.  The agency also confirmed that it is keeping its 80% criterion of the declared value for calories, sugars, total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium.FDA requested comments on appropriate analytical methods for dietary ingredients for which official methods do not exist, and also asked about information on organizations that establish such procedures.Discussing exemptions, FDA noted that it proposed a rule in March 1994 to establish a new exemption for low-volume food products from manufacturers, packers, distributors and retailers that are small businesses, and said it is proposing to cross-reference the small business exemption already in the nutrition labeling rule along with the proposed exemption.  The rule also incorporates the exemption for foods shipped in bulk that are not distributed to consumers, and cross-references special labeling provisions in the nutrition labeling rules for smaller type size for supplements in small and intermediate-sized containers.FDA said it has also cross-referenced the special provisions to allow the use of 4.5 point type size on packages with less than 12 square inches of available label space and the use of six-point type on packages with 12 to 40 square inches of label space. Multi-ingredient products may use smaller type size, FDA saysIn response to a petition from a trade association, FDA proposed to provide additional flexibility for multi-ingredient dietary supplements in packages with less than 20 square inches of available label space.The agency said it was persuaded by the petition that it is not feasible to use six-point type on many products containing multiple dietary ingredients on such packages, and concluded that it is reasonable to require the six-point type on packages with 12 to 20 square inches of available label space to bear labeling when eight or fewer dietary ingredients are used.  The use of a smaller type size of at least 4.5 points could be used when there are more than eight dietary ingredients.  Without smaller type, more than 30% of the total surface area of the package would have to be devoted to FDA-required information, the agency explained.FDA said the trade association had surveyed its member companies, who agreed that eight or 10 would be an appropriate cutoff number, triggering the smaller type size for multi-nutrient products.Primary container must bear nutrition labeling, even in small typeA special labeling provision was proposed in the rule for supplements in packages that have a surface area of 40 or less square inches available to bear labeling.  FDA said under the provision, when the nutrition information on packages of this size is presented on a label panel other than the principal display or information panels, the ingredient information must move in conjunction with the nutrition label.  In addition, for supplements of this size, when it is not possible for primary inner containers to comply with the type size requirements, the agency proposed that type as small as needed may be used in the nutrition label as long as the primary container is securely enclosed in outer packaging that bears nutrition labeling in the required type size.FDA noted that in the 1994 rule, it "erroneously advised that it considered outer packaging that securely encloses a primary container and that is not intended to be separated from the primary container under conditions of retail sale to be the equivalent of the product label."  FDA said these statements were inconsistent with the FD&C Act, and therefore nutrition labeling is required to appear on the label of the primary container.While cross-referencing current misbranding provisions for foods, FDA proposed to delete two provisions currently in Section 101.9(k) that conflict with DSHEA.  One provision states that a food is misbranded if the labeling suggests or implies that a balanced diet of ordinary foods cannot supply adequate amounts of nutrients.  FDA acknowledged that scientific and consensus groups have agreed that there are certain situations in which the use of dietary supplements may be needed for persons to obtain adequate nutrient intakes, such as pregnant women or the elderly.  The other provision, which states that a food is misbranded when the labeling implies that the food has special dietary properties when such properties are of no significant value or need in human nutrition, would conflict with DSHEA, which permits statements of nutrition support, according to FDA.FDA says nutrition labeling would cost $52 to $85 million to implementDiscussing the economic impact of the rule, FDA said it would cost manufacturers between $52 and $85 million to implement.  The agency requested comment on whether dietary supplement products will undergo analytical testing as a result of the regulations, noting that FDA assumes that manufacturers of vitamin and mineral supplements are already aware of the nutritional content of their products.  It is possible, however, that herbal and other botanical products may undergo additional testing, FDA noted, estimating that between 4,000 and 20,000 products may undergo testing once every five years.If adopted, the rule "will benefit consumers by ensuring that nutrition labeling is provided on dietary supplements in a manner that will help consumers to follow healthy dietary practices," FDA said.FDA estimated that the majority of manufacturers of dietary supplements meet the Small Business Administration definition of a small business because they have fewer than 750 employees. Noting the exemptions from mandatory nutrition labeling proposed for small businesses in the rule, FDA said some botanical product manufacturers will have unit sales and firm sizes low enough to meet the definition for low-volume products.  FDA asked for information on the impact of the regulation on small firms.  It noted that the estimated cost of the nutrition labeling regulations is 1% to 3% of industry annual sales, which range from $2.9 to more than $4 billion.  "In relation to the volume of sales, this amount does not appear to represent a significant cost," the agency said.FDA also solicited comments on whether the proposed collection of information is necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the agency, under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995. Comments on information collection must be sent "by Jan. 29, 1996, but no later than Feb. 26, 1996" to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs of the Office of Management and Budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA SUPPLEMENT PROPOSAL DEFINES 'HIGH POTENCY ANTIOXIDANT' TERMSThe Food and Drug Administration's implementation of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act will include definitions for the claims "high potency" and "sugar free" used in supplement labeling, as well as the term "antioxidant" when used in nutrient content claims on labels of dietary supplements and conventional foods (See separate stories).In one of three proposals published Dec. 28, the agency chose to limit the term "high potency" to supplement labels rather than permit the claim to be used in connection with conventional foods, noting that the term is rarely used in food labeling.  "In contrast, the term 'high potency' was in widespread use on the labels of dietary supplements before the enactment of the 1990 (nutrition labeling) amendments, continues to be used on dietary supplements, and appears to convey information to the consumer about the level of nutrients in dietary supplements," FDA said.The agency said it has tentatively concluded that 100% of the Reference Daily Intake per serving is a "reasonable definition" for the term because that level is high enough "to meet the needs of practically all healthy people."  FDA emphasized, however, that this does not mean that the agency is opposed to the presence of nutrients exceeding the 100% of RDI level.  FDA went on:"Manufacturers can formulate and describe the level of a nutrient as multiples of the RDI (e.g., using the terminology 'Daily Value' to represent RDIs on the label, a vitamin C tablet containing 500 mg would declare '833% of the Daily Value of vitamin C').  Nonetheless, because the purpose of nutrient content claims is to assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices, and given the recommendations of the NAS (National Academy of Sciences) on which the RDIs are based, FDA tentatively concludes that it is appropriate to tie a 'high potency' claim to the RDI itself."In addition to the nutrients for which RDIs have been established, FDA proposed to permit "high potency" claims to describe protein and fiber, both of which are measured with Daily Values.  Those nutrients must be present at 100% of the DRV per reference amount customarily consumed in order to qualify for the claim.The agency added that it would not propose to allow the claim to be used for nutrients such as total fat, saturated fat, sodium, cholesterol, total carbohydrate and potassium.  Tablets containing 100 mg or more of potassium are considered drugs, according to FDA.Agency sets "two-thirds" standard for multivitaminsAddressing the subject of using the "high potency" claim on labels for multivitamins, FDA stated:  "FDA tentatively concludes that it is not necessary to prohibit the use of a 'high potency' claim on multinutrient dietary supplements if the supplements do not contain 100% or more of the RDI for each vitamin and mineral that is present, or 100% of the DRV for protein or dietary fiber when present.  The agency is persuaded by the comments that the public will be better served from a public health perspective if some nutrients are allowed to be present in such products at levels that are below 100% of the RDI or DRV.""Without such an allowance," the agency said, "those nutrients that cannot be included at 100% levels because of technological difficulties could not be included at all if the dietary supplement is to bear a 'high potency' claim.  The exclusion of these nutrients will not necessarily help consumers to engage in healthy dietary practices."The agency said that out of the 33 nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established, there are 11 nutrients (calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, dietary fiber, total carbohydrate, total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium, chloride and potassium) for which it would be "impracticable or imprudent" to require that they adhere to the 100% RDI/DRV threshold.  This amounts to one-third of the total nutrients, the agency noted."Accordingly, the agency believes that it would be reasonable to expect that the remaining two-thirds of the nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established could be present at 100% of the RDI or DRV in a dietary supplement product that contained all 33 nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established," the agency said.FDA then agreed to expand the two-thirds standard to include products that do not contain all 33 nutrients for which DRIs or DRVs have been established.  "FDA tentatively concludes that two-thirds represents a reasonable standard; it provides flexibility for supplements that do not contain all 33 nutrients, and it provides a consistent standard for all supplement products.  Finally, it is a familiar fraction that is easy to use," the agency said, continuing:"With a two-thirds standard, the manufacturer would have the latitude to decide, in formulating a product that will qualify to bear a 'high potency' claim, which nutrients to include at 100% of the RDI or DRV."FDA went on:  "The agency recognizes that dietary supplements that consist of an assortment of dietary ingredients are widely available in the marketplace.  FDA agrees with the comment that stated that the presence or absence of dietary ingredients for which RDIs or DRVs have not been established (e.g., omega-3 fatty acids, choline, boron) ... should not affect the claim so long as those nutrients with RDIs or DRVs are present at levels required for the claim.""It is important to note that because the definition that FDA is proposing is based on the presence of a nutrient at 100% of the RDI or DRV, dietary supplements that do not contain nutrients for which RDIs or DRVs have been established will not be able to use the term 'high potency,'" the agency said.FDA also requested comment on whether "full potency" or similar wording may be used as a synonym for "high potency."FDA addresses nutrient content claims for antioxidantsThe agency also proposed to define the term "antioxidant" as a collective term for vitamin C, vitamin E and beta-carotene when used in nutrient content claims (such as "good source of antioxidants") on labels for supplements or conventional foods."The levels of vitamin C and vitamin E and the level of vitamin A present as beta-carotene in the food that bears the claim must all be sufficient to qualify for the claim (i.e., for 'high in antioxidants,' the product must contain 20% or more of the RDI for vitamin C and vitamin E per reference amount customarily consumed, and 20% or more of the RDI for vitamin A must be present as beta-carotene per reference amount customarily consumed)," FDA said, continuing:"The term 'antioxidants' may only be used on the label or in labeling of a food that does not contain each of the three antioxidants ... in sufficient amounts to qualify for the claim if the food contains at least one of these nutrients at the requisite level, and the claim discloses which antioxidants in the food meet the required level (e.g., 'High in antioxidant vitamins C and E)."The agency added that a "collective claim" about antioxidant nutrients -- such as "complete antioxidant formula" or "antioxidant complex" -- may be used in labeling provided that the vitamins are present at 10% or more of the RDI per reference amount customarily consumed.Agency corrects "sugar free" omissionFinally, FDA corrected an inadvertent regulatory omission that barred certain supplement products from making "sugar free" and "no sugar" claims.  "Section 101.60(c)(1) states that consumers may reasonably be expected to regard terms that represent that the food contains no sugars or sweeteners as an indication that a product is low in calories or is significantly reduced in calories," FDA said.The agency referred to its 1994 nutrient content claims final rule, in which FDA added a paragraph to Section 101.60(a) to state that "calorie free" and "low calorie" claims may not be made on dietary supplement products, "except when an equivalent amount of a dietary supplement that the labeled food resembles and for which it substitutes (e.g., another protein supplement) normally exceeds the definition for 'low calorie' in Section 101.60(b)(2)."  FDA continued:"This change in Sections 101.13(b)(5) and 101.60(a)(4) had the unintended effect of limiting the use of 'sugar free' or 'no sugar' claims on dietary supplements that would otherwise meet the requirements for 'low calorie' in Section 101.60(b)(2) but are not permitted to bear the claim because they do not substitute for a similar dietary supplement that normally exceeds the definition for 'low calorie.'""Therefore, FDA is proposing to revise Section 101.60(c)(1)(iii)(A) to excuse only dietary supplements that otherwise meet the definition of 'low calorie' under Section 101.60(b)(2), but that are prohibited by Sections 101.13(b)(5) and 101.60(a)(4) from bearing the claim," the agency said.The comment deadline is March 13, 1996.  "The agency proposes that any final rule that may issue based upon this proposal become effective Jan. 1, 1997," FDA said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996WARNING LABEL ON CURED MEATS SOUGHT IN PETITION TO FSISJeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends and the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine have filed a petition with USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service seeking removal of the "wholesomeness" seal, stronger language on safe handling labels and a warning label on cured meat products.USDA received the petition Oct. 26 but did not place it on file in the hearing clerk's office until recently.  The groups had been considering suing USDA to stop use of the "wholesomeness" seal; the petition cited legal precedents and the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) as the basis for the groups' claims.The petition, written by FET's Theodore Waugh and the Physicians Committee's Andrew Nicholson, cited the risk to consumers from E. coli O157:H7 as the basis for the groups' requests.  "The risk of serious permanent physical injury and death, USDA's inability to safeguard the meat supply and the lack of medical preparedness indicate both the seriousness and extent of the E. coli problem," the petition said, adding, "Until effective control measures are developed to eliminate E. coli contamination, USDA needs to take further actions to protect consumers and conform with its statutory obligations."The petitioners misstated the scope of USDA's declaration that E. coli O157:H7 was an adulterant.  The USDA declaration applied only to raw ground beef; the petition said that "USDA has determined that E. coli-contaminated meats are 'adulterated.'"The petition quoted the FMIA as saying, "It is essential in the public interest that the health and welfare of consumers be protected by assuring that meat and meat food products distributed to them are wholesome, not adulterated ...""Thus, according to USDA's own regulations, only meats lacking E. coli contamination can be labeled 'Inspected and Passed,'" the petition said, adding, "Because the FMIA prohibits misleading and false labeling, the USDA must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from meat products until it can conclusively determine that the meat is uncontaminated with the adulterant E. coli."Nicholson and Waugh said that USDA's baseline survey of steers and heifers found that "approximately 15% of all raw beef samples contain one or more species of pathogens."The petition also said that USDA has admitted that its sampling program for E. coli O157:H7 in raw ground beef "cannot eliminate E. coli from the food supply.""It is clear the number of outbreaks has remained high or continued to grow, even with USDA's safe care and handling labels," the groups said, adding, "In light of the continuing number of E. coli outbreaks, it is necessary for USDA to improve the current safe handling labels."The labels should state the consequences of undercooking, the petition said, adding:"How can consumers adapt their behavior to meet the seriousness of the health risk when they are uninformed of the potential consequences?  For all a purchaser knows, the only illness resulting from contamination is an upset stomach.  If individuals knew that kidney failure and death were potential side effects, they would take the warnings with the degree of seriousness that the hazard requires."The petitioners recommended a new safe handling label that would begin:  "WARNING:  This product may contain E. coli bacteria, which can cause serious illness, including:  death, strokes, seizures, bloody diarrhea, renal failure, red blood cell destruction."  Anyone suffering from abdominal cramps or diarrhea a few days after consumption should consult a physician immediately, the proposed label said.  The proposed label also stated that the product should be cooked until no red color remains, to a minimum temperature of 155 F.  The labels should be bigger and in larger type than the current ones, the petitioners said.They called for a similar warning for cured meat products, noting that "it has become clear that E. coli contamination can survive the curing process. ... In light of this potential danger, USDA should warn consumers of cured meat's potential dangers, and at the very least, the agency must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from cured meat products until it can be certain that the meat is not adulterated with E. coli.""If USDA ignores this request, the agency will have acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act," the petitioners said.  ((6FLN 1404, 16 pages, $8)Back to Headline List WT02-B40-11IA074-000493-B045-204http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb14.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013217 text/html 31318HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:30:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:35 GMTContent-length: 31131Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb14.html Sample Issue Copyright FOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * NEWS/NOTES * ORE-IDA DEVELOPS SNACK ZONES FOR MINI-MEALS (178 words) HEINZ EXPANDS EUROPEAN FOODSERVICE BUSINESS (136 words) WENDY'S COMPLETES MERGER WITH TIM HORTONS (152 words) NY RESTAURANT AND FOODSERVICE SHOW FLOOR 90% SOLD (185 words) NORTHEAST FOODSERVICE AND LODGING EXPO & CONFERENCE (188 words) INTERSTATE BAKERIES CLOSES NJ BAKERY (148 words) CHECKERS ELECTS KINSEY TO SERVE ON BOARD OF DIRECTORS (71 words) RYKOFF-SEXTON ELECTS VAN STEKELENBURG AS COB (169 words) FOODQUEST TO REVIEW STRATEGIES LEADING TO THE SALE OF ALL OF ITS KENNY ROGERS ROASTER'S RESTAURANTS (186 words) PIZZA HUT HIRES PETER O'TOOLE TO DEBUT IN TV AD (156 words) IMMUDYNE SELLS NEW AQUACULTURE PROCUCTS (148 words) TACO BELL DRAFTS PRO FOOTBALL PLAYERS AND ESPN ANNOUNCER (172 words) MCDONALD'S JINGLE MAKES COMEBACK (124 words) * FROM WASHINGTON * JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD ADDITIVES PERMITTED IN FEED AND DRINKING WATER OF ANIMALS; MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE (105 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD LABELING: HEALTH CLAIMS; OATS AND CORONARY HEART DISEASE (126 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 WHITE CHOCOLATE DEVIATING FROM IDENTITY STANDARD; AMENDMENT OF TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR MARKET TESTING (120 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 REPORT OF THE FLUOROQUINOLONE WORKING GROUP; AVAILABILITY (111 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 SUBSTANCES APPROVED FOR USE IN THE PREPARATION OF MEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTS (162 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING; NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS: DEFINITION FOR "HIGH POTENCY" CLAIM FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND DEFINITION OF "ANTIOXIDANT" FOR USE IN NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND CONVENTIONAL FOODS (144 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING: REFERENCE DAILY INTAKES (210 words) * FDA ENFORCEMENT REPORT * RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS: FOODS -- CLASS II: KELLOGG'S LOW FAT POP-TARTS, FROZEN YELLOW FIN TUNA (322 words) RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS: FOODS -- CLASS III: POPE BRAND TOMATO PASTE (89 words) CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ORE-IDA DEVELOPS SNACK ZONES FOR MINI-MEALS01/04/96 - Boise, ID -- Ore-Ida Foods announced that as a consequenceof the busy lifestyles that people today are leading, eating habits arechanging. This is causing more people to eat on the run and consumeseveral mini-meals throughout the day, creating "the fourth meal"occasion. This trend is also evident in restaurant settings, where moreand more families are ordering an array of appetizers instead of fullentrees. In order to capitalize on these trends, Ore-Ida Foods has helpedretailers develop a destination shopping section in grocery store frozenfood aisles across the country. This section, known as the "Snack Zone,"is anchored by Ore-Ida frozen snacks such as Bagel Bites, Cheese Bitesand Dyna Bites. The philosophy underpinning the "Snack Zone" is toposition an assortment of frozen snack items together in one section sobusy shoppers can easily find satisfying and nutritional snackingsolutions for parties, after school or the midnight munchies. Boise, IDbased Ore-Ida Foods is an affiliate of the H.J. Heinz Company and oneof North America's largest frozen food processors.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996HEINZ EXPANDS EUROPEAN FOODSERVICE BUSINESS01/04/96 - Pittsburgh, PA -- H.J. Heinz Company announced that it hasexpanded its European foodservice business through the acquisition ofBritwest Ltd., which markets single-serve condiments, beverages andsauces in Britain and France. Britwest, based in Telford, UK, operatesSingle Service Ltd., a leading supplier to UK foodservice operators; andDosette Servis, which sells condiments, beverages and sauces inFrance. Heinz affiliates in the UK, the Netherlands, France, Spain andItaly offer a broad array of foodservice items, ranging from the ubiquitousHeinz tomato ketchup to canned salads, soups and vegetables. In thepast three years, Heinz has acquired a number of Italian foodservicesuppliers, including Arimpex, Dega and Bevidea. In North America, Heinzis one of the top foodservice companies. Heinz is also a leadingfoodservice purveyor in the rapidly growing markets of Asia/Pacific.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996WENDY'S COMPLETES MERGER WITH TIM HORTONS01/04/96 - Dublin, OH -- Wendy's International, Inc. has completed themerger with Tim Hortons, a privately-owned Canadian restaurant chain ofnearly 1,200 units. Wendy's agreed to issue 16.45 million shares ofcommon stock in exchange for all of the outstanding shares of Hortons'Canadian parent company. The transaction will be treated as a pooling-of-interests. Tim Hortons has 1,170 company and franchise restaurants,primarily in Canada. It is Canada's largest national chain in the coffeeand fresh baked goods segment, and second largest in the quick serviceindustry. The merger is a continuation of a successful businessrelationship begun in 1992 when Wendy's and Tim Hortons first built acombo unit - a freestanding building with a shared dining room andseparate kitchens and staffs. Development costs are about 25% less foreach than traditional units. About 35 combo units are open, with plans forat least 30 more in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996NY RESTAURANT AND FOODSERVICE SHOW FLOOR 90% SOLD01/03/96 - Norwalk, CT -- The New York Restaurant and Foodserviceshow will serve 23,000 anticipated attendees an array of seminars andpanel discussions featuring experts on a wide range of industry topics.Sponsored by the NY State Restaurant Association, the show isscheduled for February 25-27, 1996 at the Jacob Javits ConventionCenter in New York City. Seminars include a feature presentation byRuth Fertel, founder of Ruth's Chris Steak House. Developing MenusThat Attract Business will look at the latest in menu trends withcommentary by some of the most prominent restaurateurs in NY. Also onthe topic of menu offerings will be Preparing Healthy Recipes with theAmerican Heart Assoc. There will also be a discussion on how todevelop, manufacture, market and distribute your own cookbook. A fullschedule of events are in store for attendees, including the 7th AnnualPatisfrance Pastry Competition, La parade de Chefs, where chefscompete in a working restaurant on the show floor and the New ProductShowcase returns. World renowned Chef Paul Prudhomme will also beback to entertain the crowd with his cooking expertise.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996NORTHEAST FOODSERVICE AND LODGING EXPO & CONFERENCE01/03/96 - Norwalk, CT -- Growth is a key focus of the NortheastFoodservice and Lodging Expo & Conference, scheduled for April 21-23,1996 at the Bayside Expo Center in Boston, MA. The convention,sponsored by the Massachusetts Restaurant Association, is one of thelargest regional foodservice exhibitions in the country and carries thedistinction of offering one of the most comprehensive conferenceprograms in the industry at not charge to attendees. The expo andconference features a show within a show - The Foodservice EquipmentShowcase, the second largest collection of Foodservice EquipmentCompanies and distributors in the country. More than 1/3 of the showfloor is dedicated to foodservice equipment. A new Lodging pavilion,highlighting a broad spectrum of products and services specifically forthe lodging industry, will debut this year. Other popular eventsanticipated to return with the show include the New Product Showcase,the Culinary Arts Salon and the Canadian and Italian Pavilions. Morethan 26,000 buyers, owners/operators, chefs, dietitians and buyers fromcafes to large chains and institutional feeders are expected to shopnearly 1,000 booths for foodservice products, equipment and alliedservices.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996INTERSTATE BAKERIES CLOSES NJ BAKERY01/03/96 - Kansas City, MO -- Interstate Bakeries Corporationannounced that it will close its East Brunswick, NJ bakery effective March2, 1996. Production of Wonder Bread and Hostess snack cakes at theEast Brunswick facility will be consolidated at IBC bakeries in nearbyPhiladelphia, PA and Jamaica, NY. Distribution and sales operations willcontinue in East Brunswick without change. The 30 year old EastBrunswick bakery was one of 36 bread, roll and snack cake bakeriesacquired by IBC in the July 1995 acquisition of St. Louis-basedContinental Baking Company. Operation of the Philadelphia and Jamaicabread and snack cake bakeries, both located within 60 miles of the EastBrunswick facility, had made the New Jersey bakery redundant.Interstate Bakeries Corporation, through its operating subsidiary,Interstate Brands Corporation, is the nation's largest wholesale bakingcompany with 65 bread and cake bakeries located in strategic marketsfrom coast-to-coast.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CHECKERS ELECTS KINSEY TO SERVE ON BOARD OF DIRECTORS01/02/96 - Clearwater, FL -- Checkers Drive-In Restaurants announcedthat Keith Kinsey, current Chief Operating Officer and Chief FinancialOfficer of the Company, was elected to serve on the Company's Board ofDirectors. Checkers Drive-In Restaurants, Inc., one of the largest doubledrive-thru restaurant chains in the United States, develops, owns,operates and franchises restaurants that offer high-quality food, fastservice and  everyday value prices. CHECKERS is headquartered inClearwater, FL.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RYKOFF-SEXTON ELECTS VAN STEKELENBURG AS COB01/02/96 - Lisle, IL -- Rykoff-Sexton, Inc. announced the election of MarkVan Stekelenburg to the position of chairman of the board. He willcontinue in his role as president and chief executive officer. VanStekelenburg, 44, had been acting in the capacity of chairman since hewas elected president and chief executive officer of the company inDecember 1992. He has been a member of Rykoff-Sexton's board ofdirectors since September 1992. Van Stekelenburg joined Rykoff-Sextonin March 1991 as executive vice president. He previously was presidentand chief executive officer of G.V.A., the largest foodservice distributor inthe Netherlands and a subsidiary of Royal Ahold, N.V. Rykoff-Sexton is aleading nationwide distributor and manufacturer of high-quality foods andrelated non-food products and services for restaurants, institutions andother locations where food is prepared away from home, as well as oneof the country's largest restaurant equipment, supply and contract designcompanies. The company has distribution centers, sales offices andcontract design facilities located throughout the United States.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996FOODQUEST TO REVIEW STRATEGIES LEADING TO THE SALE OFALL OF ITS KENNY ROGERS ROASTER'S RESTAURANTS01/02/96 - North Miami, FL -- FOODQUEST, Inc. announced that theBoard of Directors has decided to review various strategies leading to thesale of all of its Kenny Rogers Roaster's concept restaurants to potentialthird parties. FOODQUEST will immediately engage an outside valuationconsultant to determine the potential value of these concept units in themarketplace. Pursuant to this strategy change, the Company has helddiscussions with Roasters Corp., the franchisor of Kenny RogersRoasters, and has received indications that Roasters Corp. would bewilling to purchase some or all of the Roasters concept units previouslysold and financed by Roasters for a purchase price equal to net bookvalue, subject to certain other conditions of closing.  The Board believesthat it is in the best interest of shareholders to offer the assets to thirdparties as well, so as to receive the highest potential valuation for theseassets. The Company will continue to aggressively pursue and negotiatefor acquisition or merger candidates, such as the recent Paradise Bakeryacquisition target, that offer the best potential for net income growth andmaximization of shareholder value.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PIZZA HUT HIRES PETER O'TOOLE TO DEBUT IN TV AD01/02/96 - Dallas, TX -- Pizza Hut announced that British actor PeterO'Toole will make his commercial debut in a television ad for Pizza Hut'sStuffed Crust Pizza. The accomplished theatre actor and star of theclassic "Lawrence of Arabia," O'Toole returns to the stage in his firstcommercial, this time sharing the spotlight with Pizza Hut's Pepperoni &Cheese Stuffed Crust Pizza. The Peter O'Toole ad was created by PizzaHut's agency of record, BBDO Worldwide, NY. The Peter O'Toole spotdebuted nationally on New Year's Day. In less than a year, Pizza Hut'sStuffed Crust Pizza line has set record company sales in becoming abillion dollar brand, representing approximately 20% of all Pizza Hutsales. Pizza Hut, a division of PepsiCo, Inc., is the world's largest pizzadistribution system and delivery company, with more than 8,900restaurants and delivery units in the U.S., and more than 3,300 units inmore than 90 countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996IMMUDYNE SELLS NEW AQUACULTURE PROCUCTS01/02/96 - Houston, TX -- ImmuDyne Inc. announced the initial sales ofits newly developed aquaculture products. Early product developmentactivity has resulted in the first new product, ImmuStim(TM)PX-5000,which is a non-specific immune enhancing shrimp feed premix. Othernew products, designed for specific applications are under development.Burris Feeds Inc., a large aquaculture feed distributor, has orderedImmuStim(TM)PX-5000 to be used by their shrimp farming clients inCentral America. These initial sales of ImmuStim(TM)PX-5000 will beemployed in large scale field trials to protect farmed shrimp fromopportunistic infections by bacteria, fungi and viruses. ImmuDyne, Inc. isa Texas-based biotechnology company specializing in macrophagetechnology. Its patented Immune Stimulation or Biological ResponseModification technology has numerous applications in the health market.In addition to effectively combating the Taura Syndrome in crustaceans,it has been shown to be effective in treating both bacterial and viralinfections in fish.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996TACO BELL DRAFTS PRO FOOTBALL PLAYERS AND ESPN ANNOUNCER01/02/96 - Irvine, CA -- Taco Bell has drafted America's favorite profootball players, along with ESPN announcer Chris Berman, to promotethe company's roster of popular bacon products and to introduce arookie, the Ultimate Bacon Pizza. The bacon product line will besupported with a 30-second television commercial that began airing onJanuary 1 during prime time on network television. In the newcommercial, America gets to see a humorous side of their favorite sportspersonalities and heroes including: Chris Berman, ESPN anchor, HowieLong, color commentator for FOX-TV, retired Defensive Lineman,Raiders Bruce Smith, Defensive Lineman, Buffalo Bills Jim Kelly,Quarterback, Buffalo Bills Lawrence Taylor, retired Linebacker, New YorkGiants Phil Simms, commentator for NBC Sunday Football, retiredQuarterback, New York Giants. Taco Bell Corp. is a division of PepsiCo,Inc. and is the nation's leading Mexican-style quick-serve, restaurantchain with more than 25,000 points of access and $4.5 billion in annualSystem-wide sales. The Company has 4,600 restaurants nationwide andserves more than 50 million customers each week.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MCDONALD'S JINGLE MAKES COMEBACK01/02/95 - Oakbrook, IL -- "Twoallbeefpatties-specialsaucelettucecheesepicklesonionsonasesameseedbun(R)."McDonald's(R) "two all-beefpatties" jingle made a comeback December 26 in a national advertisingcampaign promoting special Big Mac values. The return of the jingleincludes an all new series of Big Mac commercials. One spot features amedley of characters: NBA superstar Charles Barkley, Daffy Duck,rappers and singing nuns - all contribute to the tongue twister. The jinglefirst debuted in 1975 - seven years after the creation of the Big Mac.There are 250 McDonald's restaurants in the Delaware Valley, serving ahalf million people each day. McDonald's is the world's leading foodretailer with more than 15,000 restaurants in 83 countries. Eighty percentof McDonald's restaurants are locally owned and operated byindependent entrepreneurs.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD ADDITIVES PERMITTED IN FEED AND DRINKING WATEROF ANIMALS; MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITEVolume 61, Number 1[Rules and Regulations, Page 5-6]21 CFR Part 573[Docket No. 94F-0283]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Final rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending thefood additive regulations to provide for the safe use of menadionenicotinamide bisulfite as a nutritional supplement for the preventionof vitamin K deficiency and as a source of supplemental niacin inchicken and turkey feed when used at a rate not to exceed 2 grams perton (g/t) of complete feed. This action is in response to a food additivepetition filed by Vanetta (U.S.A.) Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD LABELING: HEALTH CLAIMS; OATS AND CORONARYHEART DISEASEVolume 61, Number 3[Proposed Rules, Page 296-337][[Page 296]]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 95P-0197]RIN 0910-AA19AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toauthorize the use, on food labels and in food labeling, of health claims onthe association between oat products, i.e., oat bran and oatmeal, andreduced risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). FDA is proposing thisaction in response to a petition filed by the Quaker Oats Co. (thepetitioner). The agency has tentatively concluded that, based on thetotality of publicly available scientific evidence, diets high in oatmeal andoat bran and low in saturated fat and cholesterol may reduce the risk ofCHD.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 WHITE CHOCOLATE DEVIATING FROM IDENTITY STANDARD;AMENDMENT OF TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR MARKET TESTINGVolume 61, Number 3[Notices, Page 352-353][Docket No. 93P-0310]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Notice.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing thatit is amending an extended temporary permit issued to Hershey FoodsCorp. (Hershey) to market test products identified, in part, as "whitechocolate" that deviate from the U.S. standards of identity for chocolateproducts, e.g., chocolate liquor, sweet chocolate, milk chocolate,buttermilk chocolate, skim milk chocolate, or mixed dairy productchocolates. The purpose of the amendment to the extended temporarypermit is to allow Hershey to collect data on consumer acceptance of adifferent product, containing white chocolate, that also containschocolate cookies, and to identify mass production problems.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996REPORT OF THE FLUOROQUINOLONE WORKING GROUP; AVAILABILITYVolume 61, Number 3[Notices, Page 353][Docket No. 95S-0199]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Notice.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing theavailability of the report of the Center for Veterinary Medicine's (CVM's)Fluoroquinolone Working Group (FQWG). The report addresses issuesand contains recommendations regarding policies and proceduresrelated to approval of fluoroquinolone (FQ) antimicrobial drugs in foodanimals. The report of the FQWG is in response to concerns thatapproval of FQ drugs for use in food animals may result in increaseddevelopment of FQ resistance in zoonotic organisms harbored by foodanimals that are transmitted to humans and cause disease.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 SUBSTANCES APPROVED FOR USE IN THE PREPARATION OFMEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTSVolume 60, Number 250[Proposed Rules, Page 67489-67492][[Page 67489]]21 CFR Part 71, et al.Substances Approved for Use in the Preparation of Meat and PoultryProducts; Food Standards of Identity, Quality and Fill of Container;Common or Usual Name Regulations; Proposed Rules[[Page 67490]]21 CFR Parts 71, 170, and 171[Docket No. 95N-0220]RIN 0910-AA66AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toamend its regulations governing the review of petitions for the approvalof food and color additives and substances generally recognized as safe(GRAS) to provide for joint review of such petitions by the Food Safetyand Inspection Service (FSIS), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA),when meat or poultry product uses are proposed. By agreement betweenUSDA and FDA, such listings would eliminate the need for a separateFSIS rulemaking to allow the use in meat and poultry products of FDA-approved substances.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING; NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS: DEFINITION FOR"HIGH POTENCY" CLAIM FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND DEFINITION OF"ANTIOXIDANT" FOR USE IN NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTSAND CONVENTIONAL FOODSVolume 60, Number 249[Proposed Rules, Page 67184-67194]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 95N-0347]RIN 0910-AA23AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toamend its regulations to define the term "high potency" as a nutrientcontent claim for dietary supplements; define the term "antioxidant"for use in nutrient content claims on labels or in labeling of dietarysupplements and conventional foods; and correct an omission pertainingto the use of "sugar free" claims on dietary supplements. FDA is takingthese actions to provide for the use of additional nutrient content claimsin response to provisions of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of1990. This proposed rule will benefit consumers by providing establisheddefinitions for use in food labeling for the terms "high potency,""antioxidant," and "sugar free."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING: REFERENCE DAILY INTAKESVolume 60, Number 249[Rules and Regulations, Page 67163-67175][[Page 67163]]Part II21 CFR Part 101Food Labeling; Final Rule and Proposed Rules[[Page 67164]]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 90N-0134]RIN 0910-AA19AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Final rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending itsregulations to establish Reference Daily Intakes (RDI's) for vitamin K,selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, and chloride, but not forfluoride. The agency is also amending its regulations to modify the unitsof measure that are used to declare the amount of biotin, folate, calcium,and phosphorus in food. In addition, the agency is amending itsregulations to make consideration of selenium, chromium, molybdenum,and chloride optional in making a determination as to whether a food isnutritionally inferior to a food for which it substitutes and that itresembles. These actions are intended to assist consumers inunderstanding the nutritional significance of foods in the context of a totaldaily diet and are in recognition of the fact that the National Academy ofSciences (NAS) established Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA's)and Estimated Safe and Adequate Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDI's) forvitamin K, selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, and chlorideeither in 1980 or 1989.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS:  FOODS -- CLASS II: KELLOGG'S LOW FATPOP-TARTS, FROZEN YELLOW FIN TUNA_______________PRODUCT        Kellogg's Low Fat Pop-Tarts with Smucker's Real Fruit               Frosted Strawberry with Natural and Artificial Flavors.               Recall #F-138-6.CODE           Retail cartons are imprinted 06055GA1.MANUFACTURER   Keebler Company, Grand Rapids, Michigan.RECALLED BY    Kellogg Company, Battle Creek, Michigan, by press release on               August 4, 1995.  Firm-initiated recall complete.DISTRIBUTION   Nationwide.QUANTITY       7,875 cases of 12 cartons each were distributed.REASON         The strawberry Pop-Tarts cartons actually contain chocolate               fudge pop-tarts._______________PRODUCT        Frozen Yellow Fin Tuna:  (a) IQF Tuna Pieces;               (b) 4 ounce Tuna Steaks; (c) 6 ounce Tuna Steaks;               (d) 8 ounce Tuna Steaks; (e) 4 ounce Tuna Sandwich Cuts.               Recall #F-139/143-6.CODE           First four digits involved are: 2615, 2265, 2275, and 2285.               Last four digits involved are: 7734 and 7658.MANUFACTURER   Tyson Seafood Group, Seattle, Washington.RECALLED BY    Tyson Foods, Inc., Springdale, Arkansas, by letter faxed on               November 30, 1995.  FDA-initiated recall ongoing.DISTRIBUTION   Nationwide and international.QUANTITY       Two raw material lots were commingled to manufacture the               below listed lot totaling 14,640 lbs.               Lot 2615SEA03__-7734               Product Code   Description              Cs made   Cs dist               98575-895      Sysco 8 oz. stks 1/10#   358       358               98574-895      Sysco 6 oz. stks 1/10#   492       384               98575-036      8 oz. steaks 1/10#        73        0               98573-895      Sysco 4 oz. stks 1/10#   150       149               98574-036      6 oz. steaks 1/10#        76        76               98573-036      4 oz. steaks 1/10#        83        0               98572-538      IQF tuna pieces 1/40#     58        58               Two raw material lots were commingled to manufacture the               below listed lots totaling 33,730 lbs.               Lots 2265EA03__7658, 2275SEA03__7658, and 2285SEA03__7658               Product Code   Description              Cs made   Cs dist               98577-036      4 oz. sand. cuts 1/10#   164       149               98574-895      Sysco 6 oz. stks 1/10#   800       800               98575-895      Sysco 8 oz. stks 1/10#   905       905               98575-036      8 oz. steaks 1/10#       170        55               98574-036      6 oz. steaks 1/10#       241       241               98572-538      IQF tuna pieces 1/40#    144       144               98573-895      Sysco 4 oz. stks 1/10#   150       150               98573-036      4 oz. stks 1/10#         367       367REASON         Product is decomposed and contains hazardous levels of               histamines.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS:  FOODS -- CLASS III: POPE BRAND TOMATO PASTE_______________PRODUCT        Pope brand Imported Tomato Paste in 6 ounce cans.               Recall #F-137-6.CODE           Can Code: APE 4 R 048.MANUFACTURER   T.E.C., Pompeii, Italy.RECALLED BY    Pope Foods, Inc., Oradell, New Jersey, by telephone followed               by fax on June 30, 1995, .  Firm-initiated recall complete.DISTRIBUTION   New York, New Jersey, Connecticut.QUANTITY       10,565 cases (48 cans per carton) were distributed.REASON         The label of the product showed "Product of Italy" on the               bottom label and "Product of Hungary" on the top label.  The               label also had different brand namesBack to Headline List WT02-B40-12IA074-000493-B045-220http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013230 text/html 29513HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:30:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:37 GMTContent-length: 29326Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb04.html Sample Issue Copyright ICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Frozen dessert year in review (1699 words) ...And a look at the year ahead (390 words) Haagen-Dazs testing cafe concept (328 words) Dairy legislation remains in turmoil (450 words) Baskin-Robbins continues convenience store expansion drive (316 words) Pascobel makes U.S. push (360 words) Last Licks (801 words) CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Frozen dessert year in reviewTea-flavored ice creams and ice cream pizza piesproliferated in 1995, but the sudden flurry ofcompetition in these segments ran second to thedevelopments in another product category, that ofsorbets, where Ice Cream Reporter's top story for theyear is the decision by Haagen-Dazs to proceed with anational rollout of its sorbet line.  The move by theworld's leading superpremium frozen dessert marketer issignificant on several levels.  Most importantly, a large-scale advertising and promotion campaign by Haagen-Dazs created an awareness of sorbets among masses ofconsumers who were previously unaware that this typeof product even existed.  But the Haagen-Dazs blitz alsofocused attention on the disparity between the marketingpower of the industry's deep-pocketed leaders and theprecarious position of the smaller frozen dessertcompanies that struggle along on a shoe-string tomaintain their hold on hard-won market niches.  Some ofthose smaller companies felt the pinch as soon as theHaagen-Dazs rollout began, losing distribution and shelfspace as retailers opted for the big-name brand.  Butother sorbet marketers argued that the public awarenesscreated for the category by Haagen-Dazs would help allparticipants.  Because of its impact on the market,Haagen-Dazs Sorbet is not only the story of the year for1995 but also the product of the year.Encouraged by the entry of Haagen-Dazs, or at least notdiscouraged by it, was The Mattus Group, whichintroduced a line of sorbets under the Monterey label(ICR 11/95).  Admitting to being encouraged by theHaagen-Dazs entry was International Yogurt, which isnow offering its Sorbet...by Yo Cream to its foodservicecustomers (ICR 10/95).  Looking for a slightly differentniche is Lafayette Foods, which introduced Frubet, anultra-rich sorbet that is being positioned as an upscalecompetitor to single-serve Italian ices rather than goinghead-to-head with the pint-packed sorbets (ICR 12/95).Domestic Moves:  The most important event in thedomestic frozen dessert industry, after the Haagen-Dazssorbet rollout, was the decision by Brice Foods to end itstraditional franchise practice and switch to a royalty-freefranchise plan for is 200-unit I Can't Believe It's Yogurtchain (ICR 11/95).  The progress of the new plan, whichwill have franchisees purchase their goods from thefranchisor on an as-needed basis, is sure to be watchedclosely by other frozen dessert chain operators.Also making franchise news was TCBY, which announcedin December that it was planning to trnansform all itscompany-owned units to franchisees (ICR 12/95).  Themove was part of an overall reorganization of the frozenyogurt marketer.  Increasing its presence in thefoodservice arena was Dannon, which launched a turn-key, modular vending concept under the name YogurtCravings (ICR 4/95).Other major stories on the domestic front included thereturn to the black of Ben & Jerry's, after suffering thefirst loss in the company's history in the 3rd quarter of1994 (ICR 12/95); the agreement by the InternationalDairy Foods Association and the Dairy and FoodIndustries Supply Association to join forces and create anew International Food and Dairy Show (ICR 2/95); andthe elimination of package size restrictions on frozendesserts by the National Conference on Weights andMeasures (ICR 8/95).  Also noteworthy was the decisionby Grand Metropolitan to close Haagen-Dazs' long-termheadquarters in Teaneck, NJ and consolidate thecompany's operations with those of Pillsbury inMinneapolis (ICR 10/95).Product Trends: Following on the flood of coffee-flavoredfrozen desserts that hit the market in 1994 came a slewof tea-flavored products beginning with a line of Iced TeaPops produced by H.P. Hood under a licensing agreementwith the highly popular tea marketer Celestial Seasonings(ICR 3/95).  Also in March was the announcement of aLipton Original Iced Tea Bar from Good Humor-Breyers,with Unilever synergizing two of its most popular brands.Next up was Frozfruit, which joined the tea party with aLemon Iced Tea fruit bar (ICR 4/95).  In another bit ofsynergy, Nestle borrowed from its popular tea brand tocreate the Nestea Iced Tea Bar (ICR 9/95).If three makes a trend, then ice cream pizza became atrend in 1995.  Good Humor-Breyers kicked off themovement with its Freeza Pizza novelty (ICR 3/95), thenDairy Queen upped the ante with a full-sized ice creampie which it called the DQ Treatzza Pizza (ICR 5/95).Baskin-Robbins weighed in a few months later with itsPolar Pizza (ICR 9/95), available in both single slicesand whole pie form.New Products: The Good Humor-Breyers itemsmentioned above were part of a massive 50-productlaunch by the company this past spring (ICR 3/95) whichalso included Romantica, a follow-up to the company'sViennetta ice cream cake, and Reese's Peanut Butter IceCream Cups, made under a licensing agreement withHershey Food Co.Eskimo Pie made several new product announcementsthat involved licensing agreements, beginning with a dealwith Nabisco to create a line of frozen desserts based onthe four most popular cookie brands in the country (ICR1/95).  The next licensing deal called for Eskimo Pie totake over the poduction and marketing of the popularWeight Watchers frozen desserts (ICR 2/95), and a thirdsaw Eskimo Pie entering into a long-term agreement tomanufacture, distribute, and market Realfruit Sorbets(ICR 4/95).In other new product news, Clarke Ice Cream licensed theA&W root beer brand for a line of novelties (ICR 11/95);and Healthy Choice added a superpremium low-fat lineunder Special Creations label (ICR 3/95).  Alsonoteworthy was the launch of Haagen-Dazs Cordials, aline of liqueur-flavored ice creams (ICR 1/95).One other new product of significance announced in 1995,though not due out on the market until 1996, is thecoffee ice cream from Dreyer's and Starbucks (ICR11/95).  This launch caps the coffee ice cream trend thatbegan in 1994 by pairing two market leaders in a jointventure that goes beyond the usual licensing agreement.Pricing Down:    Two other product introductions ofinterest were the Blue Ribbon line of ice cream cakesfrom Carvel (ICR 10/95) and the Chiqui i.i. ice creams andsorbets from Out of a Flower (ICR 11/95).  The twolaunches shared a common importance in that they wereboth lower-priced versions of products the companieswere already marketing.  In the case of Carvel, the lower-priced introduction reflected pressure from competingproducts; while Out of a Flower was looking to broaden itsdistribution to outlets that would not handle its primaryultra-high-priced line.Mergers & Acquisitions:    No deal in 1995 came closeto 1994's story-of-the-year, the acquisition by Nestle of22% of Dreyer's stock.  But among the more interestingmoves in 1995 were the acquisition of Bresler'sIndustries by the Canadian marketer Yogen Fruz World-Wide (ICR 7/95); the acquisition of the rights to theColombo frozen yogurt brand by Integrated Brands(formerly Steve's Homemade) (ICR 9/95); themanagement buyout of Nestle Dairy Sytems, renamedNorse Dairy Systems (ICR 11/95); and Pfizer's sale of itsFood Science Group to the Finnish ingredient companyCultor, Ltd. (ICR 11/95).Following upon its acquisition in 1994 by Kohlberg,Kravis, & Roberts (ICR 9/94), Borden announced that itwas planning to sell its dairies east of the Mississippi inorder to focus on its western dairy operations (ICR 6/95).The first sale took place shortly thereafter, with a Bordenunit in West Virginia going to United Dairy, Inc. (ICR7/95).  Later in the year Borden amended its policyslightly with the sale of one of its key western units, itsHouston frozen dessert plant, to Dreyer's (ICR 12/95).The acquisition helped strengthen Dreyer's expansion intothe Southwest.International News:  U.S. frozen dessert marketerscontinued to find room for expansion overseas in 1995.Bresler's Industries reached two licensing agreements inChina (ICR 1/95 and 5/95), and one in Brazil (ICR 6/95);Baskin-Robbins opened its first shop in Vietnam (ICR2/95) and expanded its existing operations in Russia (ICR12/95); TCBY expanded its franchising into India and theCayman Islands (ICR 10/95) and Russia (ICR 11/95); andBrice Foods licensed manufacturing rights for its productsto companies in Europe, Brazil, and Australia to facilitatesupplying of its overseas ICBIY shops (ICR 12/95).While not contracting in terms of business, Haagen-Dazsdid shrink its overseas operations, closing its Parisheadquarters and consolidating its management into thatof parent Grand Metropolitan (ICR 1/95).  Thisanticipated a similar move noted in the Domestic Movessection above.People in the News:    Among the people making news inthe frozen dessert industry in 1995, the most prominentwas Bob Holland, who won the job of replacing companyfounder Ben Cohen as CEO of Ben & Jerry's following amuch-publicized search and contest (ICR 2/95).  Holland,who was also named president of the company, is givenmuch of the credit for getting Ben & Jerry's back on trackin 1995.Steve Herrell, one of the founding fathers of thesuperpremium movement, was also in the news this pastyear as he began to expand his latest chain of ice creamshops (ICR 3/95).  Making news of a less positive naturewas Robert Peltz, former chairman of Chipwich, who wasaccused of using almost $700,000 in company funds forpersonal expenses (ICR 10/95).BST:    The battle over the use of the synthetically-produced growth hormone bovine somatropin (BST)continued in 1995.  Early on, the pro-BST forces claimed anumber of victories by blocking legislation in statesacross the country (ICR 5/95).  In June, Ben & Jerry's, oneof the most prominent foes of BST use, resigned from theInternational Ice Cream Association in protest against thegroup's pro-BST stance (ICR 6/95).  Later in the year thepro-BST movement suffered a setback when a Vermontjudge rejected a request for an injunction against thestate's mandatory BST labeling law (ICR 8/95).Advertising & Promotions:    With reduced-fat, low-fat,and fat-free frozen desserts claiming a growing share ofthe market in 1995, Unilever introduced a new labelingformat for its Good Humor-Breyers light alternativeproducts, with logos reminding consumers to "EatHealthy, Eat Well" and "Eat Better, Eat Well" (ICR 12/95).Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996 ...And a look at the year aheadAs with many other facets of American life, legislationnow pending in the 104th Congress could have asignificant impact on the frozen dessert industry in 1996.As explained in an article further on in this issue, therecould be a major increase in frozen dessert prices ifCongress makes changes in current dairy policy.  But, asthe article also explains, it is simply too early to knowwhether the changes will be made and, if they are, howbig they will be.An increase in frozen dessert prices could have the effectof making it easier in 1996 for the larger companies inthe industry to use discounting and other forms of pricepromotion as competitive weapons against smallerplayers.  Price competition has been an ongoing factor,albeit to a relatively small degree, in the frozen dessertindustry.  But it would not be surprising to see morecompanies do what Carvel did this past year, i.e.,introduce a lower-priced line in the face of pricecompetition from its rivals.Something that will definitely be lower in 1996 will bethe fat content of more and more frozen dessert products.Sales of light alternative products were up significantly in1995 and the trend will continue into 1996.  More andmore marketers will follow the Good Humor-Breyersexample and add logos or other labeling marks that willmake it easier for consumers to identify these products.The desire for light alternative frozen desserts, coupledwith the rollout of the Haagen-Dazs line of sorbets, our1995 story of the year, should lead to increased sales forthe sorbet category.In last year's look ahead we predicted, for the secondtime, that Unilever would make a bid for Haagen-Dazs.With Grand Metropolitan pulling the reins in on Haagen-Dazs's management this past year, it seems less likelythan ever that the British comglomerate would be willingto let the superpremium marketer go.  So instead, we'llfocus on the Nestle-Dreyer's connection and suggest thatif the frozen novelties marketer does not make anoutright move to acquire the Oakland-based Dreyer's, itwill definitely seek to improve on its 22% holding.  And ifit doesn't go for Dreyer's, Nestle could make a bid onEskimo Pie, perhaps even finding itself in a bidding warwith Unilever for the Virginia-based novelties marketer.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Haagen-Dazs testing cafe conceptTesting of a broader, cafe-type menu concept isunderway in a handful of Haagen-Dazs shops around thecountry.  The shops, all franchise operations, haveexpanded their offerings beyond the traditional line offrozen desserts to include such items as sweet bakedgoods, sandwiches, and salads.  A Haagen-Dazsspokesman told Ice Cream Reporter that Rthe company isinterested in seeing how the extended menu will affectthe shops' business.S  He noted that the test is open-ended, with no specific time-table as to when or whetheradditional units will be converted to the cafe concept,despite some published reports that 25 out of the 250Haagen-Dazs shops in the U.S. would eventually bechanged over to cafe.The testing of the cafe concept began last May with asingle shop in Boulder, CO.  A second franchiseeintroduced the concept in October at a single unit inCoconut Grove, FL.  Conversion of a third unit has justbeen completed in Tysons Corner, VA.The new unit has 1,300 square feet of floor space.  TheHaagen-Dazs spokesman explained that the cafe conceptwould only be introduced in shops that were between1,200 and 1,500 sq. ft.  The aim, he noted, was to create aRcozy environment,S but that any shop smaller than thanthe 1,200 sq. ft. minimum would not be able toacommodate any tables comfortably or provide enoughfloor space for the self-service customer traffic.The responsibility for the menu expansion rests with thefranchisees who are testing the cafe concept.  TheHaagen-Dazs spokesman indicated that the companyconsidered the introduction of baked goods as the toppriority with sandwiches, salads, and other foodssecondary.  He reported that the company has not giventhe franchisees strict guidelines as to what foods they canoffer, but would draw the line if someone tried tointroduce a line of fried chicken, to use one example.RThe main parameter,S he explained, Ris whether itenhances the Haagen-Dazs concept.SBack to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Dairy legislation remains in turmoilThe new year begins with U.S. dairy policy in a state offlux.  Efforts to reach a decision on whether to retain,drop, or in some way alter price supports for dairyproducts remain unresolved as the larger issue of theoverall budget continues to be worked out.  Despite theuncertainty, one strong possibility is that the price ofmilk will be allowed to go up, sending the price of otherdairy products, including frozen desserts, up with it.According to the International Dairy Foods Association(IDFA), a plan proposed by Rep. Steve Gunderson (R-WI),and supported by the National Milk Producers Federation,could Rdramatically increase the prices consumers nowpay for milk and other dairy products by billions ofdollars.S  The Gunderson plan is described as aRcompromiseS because it allows for both an increase anddecrease of government control of dairy at the same time.The plan follows the current political trend of reducinggovernment interference in the marketplace byeliminating price supports for some dairy products.  Butthe IDFA points out that what it takes away with onehand it gives back with interest with the other by lockingin higher minimum price levels to producers for fluidmilk.  These higher prices would be paid by dairyprocessors and food manufacturers and then passed alongto consumers.  The government would also be paying thehigher price when purchasing milk and dairy productsfor needy citizens.  With budget allotments fixed, thiswould result in smaller purchases and fewer peoplehelped.An IDFA representative told Ice Cream Reporter that theGunderson plan is on the table as a result of PresidentClinton having vetoed the budget passed by Congress inNovember.  In that budget, dairy policy was to remainunchanged, a compromise between those conservativeidealogues who wanted to eliminate all governmentagricultural supports, including dairy, andrepresentatives from dairy-producing regions, led byJerry Solomon (R-NY), who were defending the interestsof their constituents.  The presidential veto opened thedoor to further legislative discussion and thedevelopment of the Gunderson plan.The IDFA representative noted that passage of theGunderson plan was far from being a certainty.  For onething, there are strong regional disagreements, chieflybetween producers in the West and the Northeast overwhether the benefits would be distributed equitably.  Inaddition, the loss of price supports might lead to the"dumping" of some U.S. dairy products on world marketswhich could be in violation of U.S. trade agreements.With so many details such as these to be worked out, it ispossible that the budget compromise plan of November,i.e., leaving current dairy policies in place, will once againbe chosen.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Baskin-Robbins continues convenience store expansiondriveBaskin-Robbins has announced that it is expanding itsconvenience store operations through an agreement withH.N. Funkhouser, operator of the Virginia-based HandyMart chain.  The franchise co-branding agreement, whichalso includes Baskin-Robbins' sister company Dunkin'Donuts, calls for Funkhouser to retro-fit seven of its 14units to accomodate the frozen dessert and donutoperations.  The Handy Mart units to be converted arelocated in Frederick, Warren, and Clarke counties.  Thefirst unit is expected to be ready by late February, with a150-square-foot space devoted to the sale of a full line ofBaskin-Robbins ice creams and frozen yogurts, includingpre-packed and hand-packed items, frozen dessert cakes,and the fountain items typically available in a Baskin-Robbins shop.  Table space is included, as well.The Handy Mart deal is the latest in a series reached byBaskin-Robbins with regional gas station/conveniencestore operators over the last two years.  It also continuesthe company's ongoing co-franchising effort with Dunkin'Donuts.  Each of the two companies, owned by the Britishconglomerate Allied Domecq, is the largest franchisorworldwide in its category.  By teaming up, they offerconvenience store operators and other franchisees theopportunity to offer products that complement each otherseasonally.  In addition, operators can cross-trainemployees for both operations.Funkhouser president Robert Claytor explained that hiscompany wants to attract a more diverse clientele to theconvenience stores through the addition of thenationally-known brand name chains.  The Handy Martsstarted out as gas stations when they opened in the1930s, with auto parts sales added in the 1970s, and theconvenience stores in the 1980s.  The inclusion of theBaskin-Robbins and Dunkin' Donuts operations is inkeeping with a national trend that has seen about 2,000gas stations across the country add some type of fast foodoperation in recent years in order to attract moretravelers to stop at their locations.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Pascobel makes U.S. pushLooking to develop a niche in the U.S. market for frozendessert ingredients is the Pascobel Corporation.  Anoffshoot of the Montreal-based Pascobel, Inc., thecompany offers natural, highly functional milk proteinproducts that are designed to replace non-fat dry milkand skim milk powders in a variety of processed dairyproducts including ice creams and frozen yogurts.The products, marketed under the Nollibel and Belcoverlabels, have been used for many years by over 300 foodmanufacturers in Canada and more than a dozenEuropean nations.  The long-term acceptance of theproducts in Europe is due, in part, to the fact that thetechnology for producing the dairy proteins wasdeveloped on the continent over 25 years ago by theFrench dairy company Bel Cheese.Ted Fisch, National Sales Manager for the New Jersey-based Pascobel, explained that the company had launcheda major effort to acquaint American manufacturers withits products through an appearance at the 1995MegaShow in Chicago.  At the show, Pascobel conducted ablind taste test using a 3% low fat vanilla ice cream.  Onesample was made using skim milk powder while inanother, 50% of the skim milk powder was replaced withthe company's Nollibel 1450 functional milk proteinproduct.  According to Fisch, over 65% of those who triedthe ice creams preferred the one with the Nollibel.Fisch noted that the particular variety of Nollibel used inthe taste taste, the least functional in the line, sells forabout half the typical price of skim milk powder.  Thetop-of-the line products offer savings closer to 10% offthe typical price of skim milk powder.  Fisch pointed outthat in addition to being less expensive than non-fat drymilk or skim milk powder, the Pascobel milk proteinproducts, because of their processing, have greaterconsistency and more body and texture than thecompeting products.The company makes a variety of standard productsspecifically intended for use in economy ice creams,premium ice creams, and reduced-fat ice creams andfrozen yogurts.  It also reports that it can customizeproducts at the manufacturer's request to suit them tospecific applications.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Last Lickso       Borden has released some additional information onthe sale of its Houston ice cream plant to Dreyer's, whichwe reported on in the December ICR.  Under the terms ofthe agreement, which became effective December 31,about 100 hourly workers and 29 salaried employees willbe given severance packages and assistance in findingnew work.  Approximately 35 distribution workers willbe retained by Borden and will continue to be involved indelivering the company's branded frozen desserts whichwill be co-packed by Dreyer's.  Borden also reports that itwill supply the distribution area previously served fromthe Houston plant with products manufactured at otherBorden plants in the region.o       Another item from the December ICR, on theexpansion of Baskin-Robbins operations in Russia,requires amending.  We reported that the company'sproduction facility in Moscow would not be open until thespring.  The day after we went to press, we wereinformed that the plant had become operational onDecember 11th.  In addition, the facility will serve thecompany's Russian stores only, although deliveries toother countries may follow in the future.  ICR hadindicated that the plant would begin serving EastEuropean countries immediately.o       In another follow-up on our December issue, theDecember 4 issue of Crain's Cleveland Business reportsthat Pierre's French Ice Cream has followed its Lysteria-related product recall of late October/early Novemberwith a major coupon campaign intended as a Rthank youSto loyal customers.  The $2-off coupons appeared onNovember 29th in The Plain Dealer, The Beacon-Journal,and some 20 newspapers throughout northern Ohio andwestern Pennsylvania.o       Back in October, ICR reported that Denver-basedMeadow Gold Dairies was scoring big with its ColoradoRockies Ice Cream, named for the city's baseball team.Now it has followed up with another sports-related line,this time named for the local National Hockey Leagueteam, the Colorado Avalanche.  Individual flavors featuresuch rink-related names as Slap Shot Vanilla, Hat TrickSundae, and Chocolate Power Play.o       The December 8 Financial Times reported thatNestle Philippines would be taking a greater role in theoperations of Magnolia Nestle, its ice cream company jointventure with San Miguel, the largest food company in thePhilippines.  Magnolia holds a 56% share of the ice creammarket in the Philippines, but that represents asignificant loss from previous years.o       Catching up on some other overseas news, theSeptember 12 edition of Euromarketing reported thatUnilever subsidiary GB-Glace Sweden is withdrawingfrom the Norwegian market after failing in its efforts totake share away from frozen dessert market leader NorskIskrem.  GB-Glace has accumulated about $8 million inlosses since entering that market in 1991.  Norsk Iskremholds a 49% share of the Norwegian market, with HennigOlsen second at 34%, and Drammens Is third with a 13%share.o       And catching up on some domestic news from thesame month, the September 22 edition of theBirmingham News reported that newly-arrived Blue BellIce Cream had taken the lead in that city's ice creamsales, surpassing Barber Dairies, a hometown favorite for75 years, by garnering a 32.3% market share.  Texas-based Blue Bell had expanded distribution into theBirmingham market only a few months earlier, asreported in the February 1995 ICR.o       Jerseymaid Dairies announced on December 14 thatit was recalling half-gallon containers of the Select brandLight Rocky Road Ice Cream it co-packed for the Safewaysupermarket chain following the discovery of Listeriacontamination during a sampling of the product.  Thecontainers had been distributed from the company's basein City of Commerce, CA to stores in northern California,Arizona, Nevada, and Hawaii.o       Happier news on that same date of December 14cmme from TCBY which  announced that its board ofdirectors had declared a $0.05 per share dividendpayable on January 15 to all shareholders of record as ofDecember 29.o       The Sealright Company has announced third quarterresults for the period ending September 30, 1995 withsales of $76.2 million, down 4.5% from the same period in1994.  Net income was $1.05 million, down almost 77%,with income per share down from $0.41 to $0.09.  CharlesF. Marcy, Sealright's President and CEO, describing theresults as Runacceptable,S explained that they reflectedbelow-plan sales of the company's frozen dessertpackaging business to regional customers who werelosing market share to aggressive national competitors.o       The International Dairy Foods Association will beholding its Ice Cream Technology Conference on February21-23 at the Red Lion's La Posada Resort in Scottsdale,AZ.  Among the topics to be discussed are frozen dessertstandards and composition, production technologies,ingredient selection, product safety, and labeling.  Formore information call the IDFA at 202-737-4332 or faxto 202-331-7820.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-13IA074-000493-B045-237http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013244 text/html 22470HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:30:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:37 GMTContent-length: 22283Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb06.html Sample Issue Copyright KANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DIETARY GUIDELINES OKAY MODERATE DRINKING; CSPI HEAD CALLS THEM APPROPRIATE (402 words) British Study Okays Moderate Drinking, Sets Higher Limits than U.S. (89 words) Budget Impasse Threatens CSAP, But May Also Imperil Industry Programs (219 words) ATF Proposes Malibu Viti Area (59 words) Sazerac to Rep Chateau Roubine (49 words) Vermont Adopts a Liquor "Fee" (184 words) Pataki Vetos Reciprocal Shipping Bill In New York, Questioning Benefits (190 words) Beer Production Rose in August (43 words) Fazi Battaglia, Fattoria dei Barbi Name Palm Bay U.S. Importer (121 words) * NEW PRODUCTS * Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood, (48 words) Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces its first ale, (36 words) Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, that (62 words) * SPIRITS NEWS BRIEFS * Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music Cares (47 words) Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicional (34 words) Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (Paddington (57 words) Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom to (64 words) Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers a (27 words) * WINE NEWS NOTES * Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 at (35 words) Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity to (47 words) Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the first (61 words) * BEER AND MALT BEVERAGE NEWS NOTES * Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas" (57 words) Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania" (86 words) * WHO'S WHERE * Buckles Named ATF Deputy Director (34 words) Allied Domecq Sets Development Unit (68 words) CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES OKAY MODERATE DRINKING;CSPI HEAD CALLS THEM APPROPRIATE     Last week's release of the 1995 "Dietary Guidelines forAmericans" marked the end of a change in official attitude towardbev/al.  Where a decade ago, bev/al was the target of aneo-Prohibitionist crusade, now moderate consumption is viewed asappropriate.     Indeed, the attitude in Washington had so changed thatMichael Jacobson, executive director of Center for Science in the PublicInterest and a long-time opponent of the bev/al industry, was overheardtelling a Knight-Ridder reporter:  "I think it's okay to mention alcohol.The Guidelines clearly don't encourage excessive drinking.  You'd haveto be inebriated to think the Guidelines encourage excessive drinking."     In a major departure from the 1990 Guidelines, the new versioneliminates previous commentary that alcohol consumption "has no nethealth benefit" and "is not recommended."     They note "current evidence' that suggests moderate drinking is"associated with a lower risk for coronary heart disease."  And in itsadvice section, the Guidelines state:  "If you drink alcoholic beverages,do so in moderation, with meals, and when consumption does not putyou or others at risk."     The significance of the change was emphasized by Dr. PhilipLee, assistant secretary of health:  "In my personal view, wine with mealsis beneficial.  There was a significant bias in the past against drinking.To move from anti-alcohol to health benefits is a big change."     Donna Shalala, secretary of health and human services, addedthat the guidelines acknowledge "what most of us have known all along:food is not just fuel, it is one of life's greatest pleasures."     Needless to say, publication of the Guidelines brought joy toJohn DeLuca, president, Wine Institute, who seven years ago developeda strategy of dealing with anti-alcohol sentiment by researchingscientific information showing health benefits of moderate consumption.     He praised the Guidelines for more clearly distinguishingmoderation from abuse, noting harmful effects when alcohol is"consumed in excess" and listing dangers associated with only "higherlevels of alcohol intake," "too much alcohol" and "heavy drinkers."     Meanwhile, Fred A. Meister, president/ceo, Distilled SpiritsCouncil of the U.S., praised the Federal Government for "recognizingthat distilled spirits plays a role in the lifestyle and diet of adultAmericans."     He said removal of language that drinking has "no net healthbenefit" and inclusion of the potential health benefit of moderatedrinking "of distilled spirits or other bev/al is an importantacknowledgment of the growing body of scientific studies on thesubject."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996British Study Okays Moderate Drinking, Sets Higher Limits than U.S.     Less than three weeks before the new Dietary Guidelines werereleased in Washington, the British Government's Department ofHealth reported that "it is now established that the main specificpathology which benefits from alcohol consumption is coronary heartdisease."  There is, it said, "very likely" a protective effect from alcohol.     The report offers daily, rather than the previous weekly,benchmarks for safe drinking.  The benchmarks are higher than theU.S. version:  eight to 12 ounces of wine for women 12 to 16 ounces aday for men.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Budget Impasse Threatens CSAP,But May Also Imperil Industry Programs     Industry executives are hardly shedding tears that the Centerfor Substance Abuse Prevention has been virtually shut down by thecurrent budget impasse.  Most executives view CSAP, a unit of theSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Administration, as a hotbed ofbiased anti-alcohol activity, an agency many view as playing fast andloose with the facts and the law.     But we talked last week with a highly respected politicaloperative who -- while he certainly was shedding no tears for SAMHA-- warned that the budget battle, which has nearly closed theDepartment of Health and Human Services, could hurt the industry too.     He fears the result will be that every nook and cranny of thefederal budget will be examined, imperiling such things as the MarketPromotion Program, studies on the health effects of alcohol, researchfor viticulture, proposed changes in the Internal Revenue Code dealingwith phylloxera and the industry's quest to roll back that big tax increasefive years ago.     While the House Republicans are widely believed not to want abudget deal -- unless they get everything they want -- the simple fact isthat a lot of rank and file House Democrats don't want a deal, either.They believe the current standoff will bolster their changes of regainingcontrol of the House.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ATF Proposes Malibu Viti Area     Responding to a petition from George Rosenthal, president,Rancho Escondido Inc., the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearmsproposed (60 Federal Register 66535) establishment of theMalibu-Newton Canyon Viticultural Area in Los Angeles County.     Comments due: Feb. 20 to Chief, Wine, Beer and SpiritsRegulations Branch, BATF, PO Box 50221, Washington, DC20091-0221 (Attn: Notice No. 817).Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Sazerac to Rep Chateau Roubine     Chateau Roubine named Sazerac Co. its exclusive distributor,succeeding Carillon Importers.     Peter Bordeaux, Sazerac president, said Chateau Roubine isamong the Cote de Provence vineyards producing wine under the AOCstatus.  Production consists of 60% rose, 30% and 10% white and islargely in the Cru Class.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Vermont Adopts a Liquor "Fee"     Vermont Liquor Control Board imposed a 20 cents a bottle"fee" on four sizes of distilled spirits, effective Jan. 1.     The increase, levied without industry or consumer consultation,applies to 200 ml,  375 ml, 750 ml and 1 liter bottles.     Fred A. Meister, president/ceo, Distilled Spirits COuncil of theU.S., said he was "extremely disappointed and puzzled by this ill-advisedand discriminatory price increase on distilled spirits.  This decision wasmade without the input of the people who will be most affected --Vermont consumers and the producers and suppliers of distilled spirits.We urge them to reconsider."     State and local taxes paid on a typical purchase in Vermont are111% greater than in neighboring New Hampshire.     Monita Fontaine, DISCUS state government relations director,wondered why, if the Board's goal was to raise additional revenue,should it focus on distilled spirits, which represent less than 29% ofalcohol purchased in the state.  The revenue burden on distilled spiritsin Vermont is 108% more than the burden per alcohol gallon on beerand 65% greater than the burden on table wines, Fontaine said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Pataki Vetos Reciprocal Shipping BillIn New York, Questioning Benefits     A bill to permit out-of-state wineries, individuals or licensees toship wine for personal use into New York State was vetoed by Gov.George Pataki.     Pataki noted that supporters had said the bill would encouragethe sale of wine from New York wineries, benefit the tourism industry,and enhance New York's reputation as a wine-producing state.     "I am not convinced the bill would, in fact, benefit New York'sreputation as a wine-producing state.  And I am extremely concernedabout the potentially negative impact this bill, if enacted, would have onexisting, licensed New York State businesses relying on wine sales, aswell as its impact on New York wineries and jobs."     Indeed, Pataki said he thought the result would be increasedmail-order sales of California wines, leading to lower sales for NewYork liquor stores and distributors, a shrunken market share for NewYork wineries within the state.     New York tax authorities estimated the bill would result in theloss of $1 per case in excise tax revenue, $10 per case in sales taxrevenue and local governments would also lose $10 a case in sales taxrevenue.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Beer Production Rose in August     U.S. production of beer in August was 18,819,013 barrels, up1.5% from the like 1994 month, according to the Bureau of Alcohol,Tobacco and Firearms.     Taxable removals in August fell to 16,844,658 barrels, a 1%decline from the like year-earlier month.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Fazi Battaglia, Fattoria dei BarbiName Palm Bay U.S. Importer     Palm Bay Imports, Boca Raton, Fla. (407-362-9642) picked uptwo key distribution assignments.     Fazi Battaglia, the Italian wine producer, named Palm Bay itsexclusive U.S. importer.  Fazi Battaglia is credited with recastingVerdicchi, once an obscure white wine, into a graceful contemporarystyle.     And Fattoria dei Barbi, a leading producer of Brunello diMontalcino, one of Italy's most costly red wines, appointed Palm Bay tohandle its exclusive U.S. marketing and distribution agent.     Michael Petteruti, vp-marketing, said the addition of FaziBattaglia underscores Palm Bay's commitment to be a major importerof Italian wines.     Dennis Delaney, vp-sales, said the firm "looks forward tobringing about a fresh and dynamic approach toward preserving andenhancing the reputation of Fattoria dei Barbi."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood,     Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood,sparkling wines which "project the spirit of California elegance andcraftsmanship with an Italian flourish."  Marwood Brut, a crisp dryChardonnay blend, and Marwood Select, with a floral aroma and fruitflavor, will retail for under $9 a bottle.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces  its first ale,     Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces  its first ale,Leinenkugel's Auburn Ale, in 10 select markets.  Brewed with caramelbarley malts, it has a deep auburn color.  It's positioned as anabove-premium, specialty beer.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, that     Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, thatwill meet beer drinkers' desires for "fuller-flavored beers which areeasy-to-drink and not bitter or filling," according to David Ryder, MillerBrewing Co.'s master brewer.     Neil Harrison, vp-marketing, said the premium beer category"is again growing.  This resurgence provides significant opportunity forus in the heart of the beer category."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music Cares     Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music CaresConcert '95 to help raise more than $100,000 for Nashville Cares, acomprehensive AIDS/HIV community agency.  Meanwhile, at Aspen,Colo., Absolut sponsored  the first annual Absolut Skiwear DesignerAward to benefit the Aspen Art Museum.                   * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicional     Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicionalare co-sponsoring the celebrity ski race at the 1996 Country In theRockies celebrity ski weekend, Jan. 17-21.  Heublein Inc. distributesboth brands.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (Paddington     Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (PaddingtonCorp.) is seeking to build on-premise business with a gear kit thatincludes 12 shot glasses, six hats, six t-shirts and key chains.  MikeGriffin, brand manager, notes that a holusion party kit is also available."No one can resist the eye-catching appeal of 3-D holusion art," he says.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom to     Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom toboost sales with the Rumple Minze Primal Real Estate kit.  It includestwo plaques that can be put on restroom doors and a highly polishedmirror for the men's room emblazoned with the Rumple Minze logo inblack and the politically incorrect tag line:  "Don't worry, by 1 a.m. she'llbe beautiful."                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers a     Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers aceramic Deruta Rooster water pitcher.  Retailers will receive a pitcherfor display, a themed casecard with a take-one pad.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 at     Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 atFirestone Meadow in the Santa Ynez Valley.  Only 1,500 tickets (at $60each) will be sold for each day.  For info: 800-218-0881.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity to     Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity tosubscribe to Appellation: The Magazine of Wine Country for $11.97(regular subscription price: $18).  It's a beautiful book focusing on winecountry heritage and lifestyle.  Appellation is reachable at PO Box 516,Napa, CA  94559.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the first     Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the firsthalf with innovative seminars and trade and consumer tastings.  LindaReiff, NVVA executive director: "One of our goals is to reach out to anew generation of wine consumers through events such as the one we'replanning at a club with the `Wine Brats' during our Los Angeles visit."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas"     Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas"that maps out the "125 best beer miles" in the U.S.  The folder is adescriptive listing of pubs in 20 cities across the U.S.  Send aself-addressed, stamped envelope to:  Amstel Light Beer Atlas, PO Box731, Radio City Station, New York 10101-0731.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania"     Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania"promotion for basketball fans with special offers for basketballmerchandise aggressive merchandising.  "Fans nationwide knowFebruary and March is the time to tune in and cheer for their favoritecollege basketball teams," says March Duchovic, director, customermarketing.  "The Old Milmania promotion gives retails a great programto generate incremental beer sales."     In another development, Old Milwaukee is sponsoring the"Race with the Legends" sweepstakes to coincide with the 1995NASCAR racing season, from February through June 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Buckles Named ATF Deputy Director     Bradley A. Buckles was named deputy director of the Bureauof Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, succeeding Daniel R. Black, whoretired Jan. 3.  Buckles was ATF's chief counsel prior to the promotion.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Allied Domecq Sets Development Unit     Donald Coe, president, Allied Domecq Spirits & Wine(Americas) Business Development Group, named his managementteam.     Jim Flaherty continues as vp-corporate on-premise.  HaroldHeller continues as vp-special markets, with Larry Guerra, generalmanager, reporting to Heller.  Beth Oliver assumes an expanded role asvp-corporate communications and events. Dennis Stoakes continues asvp-corporate marketing services; Nancy Jessick remains vp-governmentrelations and Patrick Terrail will continue to provide hospitality support.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-14IA074-000493-B045-253http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb15.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013255 text/html 16596HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:31:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:34 GMTContent-length: 16409Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb15.html Sample Issue Copyright LEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BEVERAGES ARE FOOD CATEGORY PURCHASED MOST OFTEN BY MASS RETAIL SHOPPERS, SURVEY SHOWS (1050 words) MORE COMBINATION GROCERY/MERCHANDISE STORES OPENED IN 1994, FMI STUDY SHOWS (273 words) COCA-COLA SOLD 3.8 BILLION UNIT CASES IN U.S. LAST YEAR; FOUNTAIN SALES UP, TOO (326 words) * LEGISLATION * MAINE BOTTLE BILL WOULD IMPOSE FEES, PAPERWORK, ON BEVERAGE MAKERS (244 words) * BEVERAGE NEWSBRIEFS * Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line of (75 words) Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themed (102 words) Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Award (45 words) CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996BEVERAGES ARE FOOD CATEGORY PURCHASEDMOST OFTEN BY MASS RETAIL SHOPPERS, SURVEY SHOWS     Carbonated soft drinks and juice are the two food itemsconsumers are most likely to buy at mass retail stores, according to anew study published by the International Mass Retail Association(IMRA). The study was prepared by the Gallup Organization forIMRA's membership, which includes discount department stores,warehouse/club stores, specialty discounters, deep discount drug stores,off-price stores, variety stores, and dollar stores, among others.     The study, entitled Consumer Shopping Behavior on FoodMerchandise and In-store Food Services, includes the responses of 1,011adults aged 18 years and older, who were surveyed by telephone inSeptember 1995. Among the findings of the study were the followinghighlights.Profile of Survey Participants     * Nearly one-fourth of all respondents (23 percent) said theyvisited mass retail or discount stores more than once a week in a typicalmonth. Thirty-one percent said they visited such stores twice (16percent) or three times (15 percent) a month. Only seven percent of allrespondents said they never visited mass retail stores.     * Females  were significantly  more likely to be the primaryshopper  in  the  family  for  clothing  and  household goods (92percent), and food (89 percent), than  were males (70 percent).     * Accordingly, females were more frequent visitors to massretail stores than males, with 19 percent of the female respondentssaying they went to mass retail stores at least once a week in a typicalmonth, compared to only 12 percent of males who visited such storesthat often.     * Older respondents appeared slightly less likely to visit massretail stores than were the younger respondents. Only six percent ofthose aged 18 to 34 years said they never visited mass retail stores, whiletwice as many of those 55 years or older (13 percent) never visited thesestores.     * Respondents were most likely (73 percent) to express apreference for shopping at one store that carried a complete selectionof groceries as well as general merchandise.     * Slightly more than one in six (17 percent) of all respondentssaid that they always make some type of packaged food purchase duringa visit to a mass retail store. Another 27 percent said that theyfrequently make such purchases. About three in ten respondents saidthey rarely (20 percent) or never (nine percent) purchase packagedfoods at mass retail stores.     * Older respondents appear less likely to purchase packagedfood at mass retail stores than do younger respondents. One third (32percent) of those respondents age 55 and older said they rarely (21percent) or never (nine percent) purchased packaged foods at massretail stores, compared to only 25 percent of those respondents aged 18to 34 who rarely (18 percent) or never (seven percent) purchased suchfood items.     There were no significant regional or income differences interms of purchase frequency for packaged foods.Soda and Juice Purchases     The survey participants were asked how often they boughtthese particular food items at mass retail stores: soda; juice; canned ordried foods; snack foods; cookies; candy; alcoholic beverages; and babyfood.     * Of all the food products that were specified in the survey,soda and juice were the two products most often reported to be "verylikely" to be purchased at mass retail stores. Each product was ratedby 39 percent of the respondents to be a product they would be "verylikely" to buy at a mass retail store.     * Respondents aged 55 years and older (32 percent) and thoserespondents in the northeast (33 percent) showed a slightly lowertendency to purchase soda.     * Thirty-four percent of the respondents said they would besomewhat likely to purchase soda; 26 percent said they were not at alllikely to purchase soda. One percent responded "don't know."     * Respondents aged 35 to 54 years (36 percent) said they wereslightly less likely to purchase juice at a mass retail store, compared tothose respondents aged 55 years and older (42 percent). Respondents inthe south central region of the U.S. (43 percent), and those withincomes of less than $20,000, were slightly more likely to purchasejuice.The Decision To Purchase     When asked to indicate their typical weekly packaged foodexpenditures at mass retail stores, respondents indicated their averageexpenditure was slightly less than $32 a week. Forty-four percent of allrespondents, however, indicated that they spend $20 or less in a typicalweek for packaged food purchases.     Respondents in the western region of the U.S. had the largestweekly expenditures for packaged foods, while single respondents, those55 years and older, and those in the north central region, spent the leaston average.     Respondents were asked to characterize their food purchasesas either "planned" or "impulse" purchases. In the categories of bothpackaged and prepared food, respondents were more likely to make thedecision to purchase after they were at the stores. Respondents were,however, significantly more likely to view prepared food purchases asimpulse purchases, as opposed to packaged food purchases.     Respondents were asked to rate various factors they considerwhen deciding to buy food at mass retail stores. Quality was rated themost important factor by 71 percent of respondents; price was secondmost important, with 61 percent of participants citing it as a factor.Selection of brands was third, at 38 percent; followed bycoupons/special promotions, 34 percent; advertised specials, 33 percent;availability of specialty foods, 31 percent; and availability of storebrands, 21 percent.     Females (77 percent) and respondents in the northeast (78percent) were most likely to rate quality as very important, while males(64 percent) and those in the west (66 percent) and north central (67percent) regions were least likely to rate quality as very important.     Price  was  most important to  18-to-34  year-olds (67 percent),those with household incomes of less than $20,000 a year (67 percent),and females (65 percent). Respondents aged 55 years  or  older (52percent),  those  with  household  incomes of $60,000 or greater (52percent), and males (56 percent), were least likely to rate the price of anitem as extremely important.     For further information on this study, contact the InternationalMass Retail Association (IMRA), phone (703) 841-2300.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MORE COMBINATION GROCERY/MERCHANDISESTORES OPENED IN 1994, FMI STUDY SHOWS     Although conventional supermarkets continue to account forthe single largest percentage of food stores in operation, the percentageof combination grocery/merchandise stores rose significantly in 1994,according to a new study by the Food Marketing Institute (FMI). Thestudy, entitled 1995 Facts About Store Development, revealed that in1994, for the first time, conventional stores accounted for less than half(48.9 percent) of all stores. The number of combination stores, bycontrast, rose seven percentage points to a 21 percent share.Superstores continued to represent about 25 percent of food stores,while warehouse and limited assortment stores accounted for less thanfive percent.     Supermarket construction grew at a modest rate during 1994,when 3.3 percent of stores were new and 3.4 percent were closed --figures similar to the previous year. According to FMI, this trendindicates that new stores continue to replace older ones, rather thangaining a greater share of the U.S. supermarket mix.     The median size of new stores was 48,200 square feet in 1994,up from 38,000 square feet the previous year. This increase wasattributed to the growth in construction of larger-sized combinationstores and superstores. More than six percent of stores underwentmajor remodeling during the survey period, with competition cited bythree in 10 survey respondents as the primary reason, and half reportingthat the store needed it. Of the stores that were remodeled, four in 10were also expanded, by an average of about 5,300 square feet.     To order a copy of 1995 Facts About Store Development,contact the FMI Publication and Video Sales Department, phone (202)429-8298. Price: $44 for non-members.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996COCA-COLA SOLD 3.8 BILLION UNIT CASESIN U.S. LAST YEAR; FOUNTAIN SALES UP, TOO     Coca-Cola Co. has reported that 1995 was a record-setting yearfor the company, which sold 3.8 billion unit cases of soft drinks andnon-carbonated beverages in the U.S. In addition, for the first time,Coca-Cola Co. sold one billion unit cases more than any other soft drinkcompetitor in the country.     Jack L. Stahl, president of Coca-Cola USA, commented that"the combined strength of our brand portfolio, our contour packagingand our bottler system has allowed us to grow twice as fast as theindustry in 1995. We intend to build upon that momentum in 1996."     Fountain sales contributed significantly to the company's robustresults. Coca-Cola Fountain added more than 500 new chain accountsand 8,000 net new outlets last year, including the conversion ofcompetitive outlets such as Steak 'N Shake restaurants and Harrah'sEntertainment, as well as the addition of new outlets owned by existingcustomers. According to the company, Coca-Cola products are currentlyavailable in 92 of the top 100 fountain accounts in the U.S., outsellingthe leading competitor by a 3-to-1 margin in the channel.     The company also entered a unique agreement withBlockbuster Entertainment in 1995, which places Coca-Cola products in5,000 retail outlets worldwide.     "We are extremely pleased with our 1995 success, even thoughwe experienced some disappointments -- losing some volume withcustomers like Sbarro's, with some Jack-in-the-Box franchisees or withCircle K, for example," noted Stahl. "We enter 1996 determined tocapture even more of the industry growth and to do all we can to helpour customers profitably build their soft drink businesses."     Coca-Cola products are also widely available at recreationalfacilities across the U.S., including 90 percent of sports venues, themeparks and amphitheaters, and 85 percent of movie theaters and zoos.Entertainment accounts that were added or renewed in 1995 includedthe Sony movie theater chain, the Houston and Cincinnati zoos, and theFremont Street Experience in Las Vegas, Nev.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MAINE BOTTLE BILL WOULD IMPOSE FEES,PAPERWORK, ON BEVERAGE MAKERS     The International Bottled Water Association (IBWA) hasreported that the Maine Bottle Bill Task Force has proposed legislationthat would require all manufacturers to pay an annual $500 registrationfee to the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and RuralResources if their products are packaged in beverage containers subjectto the state's deposit system. The purpose of the bill is to reducefraudulent redemption of containers originating in neighboring states.The annual fee would be used to pay for the department's enforcementactivities related to the administration of the bottle bill.     But the proposal goes beyond a mere fee -- it would also createa new paperwork burden. The bill would require manufacturers toreport:     (1) each product brand name that requires a deposit;     (2) the name and address of any distributor the manufactureruses to sell the products;     (3) the number of "filled" beverage containers sold todistributors in Maine;     (4) the names and addresses of the manufacturer's third-party"pick-up agents," which is defined as a person who has assumed thecontainer pick-up responsibility imposed on the deposit initiator; and     (5) the number of beverage containers redeemed by themanufacturer.     To enforce these requirements, the bill provides the agriculturedepartment with broad powers to refuse to issue, revoke or suspend theregistration of a manufacturer, which would limit its ability to sellproducts in Maine. Any manufacturer failing to register would be fined$100 per day.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line of     Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line ofnon-carbonated, fruit-flavored waters called Fruit Refreshers, which areavailable in five flavors: kiwi strawberry, lemon, banana raspberry,orange apricot, and wild berry. The line is lightly sweetened withfructose and natural fruit extracts, and packaged in 20-oz. plastic bottleswith pull-up sports caps. Fruit Refreshers are available everywhereCascade Clear bottled waters are distributed: Washington state,Oregon, California, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota andAlaska.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themed     Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themedcross-promotion this month with the Neiman Marcus department storechain. Neiman Marcus shoppers who spend $50 or more will receive asa free gift a 1-liter bottle of Evian, a Neiman Marcus backpack and thenew exercise video Perfectly Fit, which features supermodel ClaudiaSchiffer. In addition, all the Neiman Marcus stores nationwide will serveonly Evian in their restaurants, and Evian kiosks will be locatedthroughout each store. The promotion is supported by in-store windowdisplays and signage, newspaper and radio ads, and direct mail piecessent to 750,000 Neiman Marcus customers.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Award     Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Awardby the Glass Packaging Institute for its Smooth Moos Smoothies dairydrink. The product's 9.5-oz. glass bottle, which is shaped like anold-fashioned refillable milk bottle, won the award in the "new beverageproduct" category.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-15IA074-000493-B045-272http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013307 text/html 14959HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:31:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:23 GMTContent-length: 14772Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb22.html Sample Issue Copyright US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNet October 28, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - BEANS, PEAS, & LENTILS ORGANIC (103 words) EGYPT: TRADE OPP'TY - CATTLE DAIRY (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FROZEN AND IN PARTS; WEIGHT 1-1.2 KG. EACH (101 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FEEDGRAIN (FOR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION) (99 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - CUTTLEFISH & SQUID (102 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FOR CATS, POULTRY & SWINE (103 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SHAR PEI, YORKSHIRETERRIER, MINI SCHNAUTZER, ETC (102 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - HOLSTEIN BREED (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SEASONFRUIT (GRAPES, NECTARINES, ETC.) (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - PSYLLIUMPLANTAGO, OVATA, HUSK (93 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - IN GRAINS & FLAKES (94 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - EDIBLE (96 words) ECUADOR: TRADE OPP'TY - PADDY RICE, LONG GRAIN, GRADE 2 (95 words) CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - BEANS, PEAS, & LENTILS ORGANICfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning BEANS PEAS AND LENTILS ORGANICIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961026-0005-MX2QUANTITY:    1,000 MT of each variety.QUALITY:     95/96 crop.PACKAGE:     50 kg. Polypropylene bags.DELIVERY:    60 days.OTHER:       Certificates of Origin and Phytosanitary.QUOTE:       CIF MexicoCity.BANK REF:    Banamex, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Carlos A. D.Fuentes, Lafuracolp, S.A., Felipe Angeles 90, Col.             Ampliaci.nPresidencia Mexico City, D.F., 02440 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525)394-8788FAX:         (011-525) 394-0150.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996EGYPT: TRADE OPP'TY - CATTLE DAIRYfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CATTLE DAIRYIssued from EGYPTUSDA Ref: 19961025-0017-MX2QUANTITY:    400 cattles.QUALITY:     withoutregistration.PACKAGE:     live in a trailer.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Sanitary Certificates; need to choose thempersonally.QUOTE:       CIF Acambaro, Guanajuato.BANK REF:    National Bank of Interior Trade,  Acambaro, Gto.CONTACT:     MVZFernando Lopez, Veterinaria "El  Rancho", J. Aldama             39-B,Acambaro, Guanajuato, 38600 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-417) 2-5476FAX:         (011-52-417) 2-3107.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FROZEN AND IN PARTS; WEIGHT 1-1.2 KG. EACHfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CHICKEN MEAT WHOLEIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0002-MX2QUANTITY:    1,000 MT.QUALITY:     whole and parts.PACKAGE:     Plastic bags.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Labels according to customs.QUOTE:       CIFPrague, Checoslovaquia & some port in Polonia.BANK REF:    BancaSerfin, Inverlat; both in Leon, Gto.CONTACT:     Ing. OldrichVerner, COMERSA, S.A., Paseo de los Insurgentes             1001, Leon,Guanajuato, 37300 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-47) 17-2750FAX:         (011-52-47) 73-0516.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FEEDGRAIN (FOR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION)from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CORN FIELD YELLOWIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0009-MX2QUANTITY:    50,000 MT.QUALITY:     U.S. 2 or U.S. 3.PACKAGE:     Bulked.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Required certificates for export to Europe.QUOTE:       CIFStetein, Polonia.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Banco Inverlat, Leon,Guanajuato.CONTACT:     Ing. Oldrich Verner, COMERSA, S.A., Paseode los Insurgentes             1001, Leon, Guanajuato, 37300 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-47) 17-2750FAX:         (011-52-47) 73-0516.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - CUTTLEFISH & SQUIDfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CUTTLEFISH AND SQUIDIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0004-MX2QUANTITY:    2-5 MT.QUALITY:     110 calories,totalfat 2 gr., sodium 50 mg.PACKAGE:     Carton boxes.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Spanish labels, quality factorsavailables.QUOTE:       CIF Mexico City.BANK REF:    Banca Confia,Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. Juan Antonio Camarena, Fornos, S.A.de C.V., Rodolfo Gaona             86, Col. Lomas de Sotelo Mexico City,D.F.,11200 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 395-5738FAX:         (011-525)395-5905.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FOR CATS, POULTRY & SWINEfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning DOG FOODIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0006-MX2QUANTITY:    1,500 boxes or one container.QUALITY:     First quality.PACKAGE:     Canned, cartons or bags.DELIVERY:    Negotiable.OTHER:       Certificates; labels in Spanish.QUOTE:       FOB Laredo, TX.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Ricardo Mondragon, Abarrotes y Semillas Mondragon Nu1ez,Bodega             B-53 B, Interior Central de Abastos Mexico Mexico City,D.F.,             09040 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 694-3584FAX:         (011-525)694-3687.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SHAR PEI, YORKSHIRETERRIER, MINI SCHNAUTZER, ETCfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning DOGSIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961003-0012-MX2QUANTITY:    6 to 10 puppies.QUALITY:     Pedigree from the American Kennel Club.PACKAGE:     Cages.DELIVERY:    Bi-weekly or monthly.OTHER:       SanitaryCertificates from USDA.QUOTE:       CIF Mexico City.BANK REF:    Banamex, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Sylvia Vald(s, Mascotas Leo's,S.A. de C.V., Soles No. 55, Col.             Pe1on de los Ba1os Mexico City,D.F., 15520 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 751-5133FAX:         (011-525)751-3775.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - HOLSTEIN BREEDfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning EMBRYOS CATTLEIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    According to price.QUALITY:     dried.PACKAGE:     Plastic bags orcartons.DELIVERY:    According to availability and price.OTHER:       Phytosanitary certificates.QUOTE:       FOB Mexican border.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. MaximilianoDamm, Globotek, S.A. de C.V., Tepozan 3, Col.             Ampliaci.n TepepanMexico City, D.F., 16020 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 653-1442FAX:         (011-525) 653-1442.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SEASONFRUIT (GRAPES, NECTARINES, ETC.)from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning FRUIT ORGANIC FROZENIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0014-MX2QUANTITY:    According to price.QUALITY:     frozen.PACKAGE:     plastic bags or cartons.DELIVERY:    Monthly and according to availability.OTHER:       RequiredCertificates.QUOTE:       FOB Mexican border.BANK REF:    BancaSerfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. Maximiliano Damm, Globotek,S.A. de C.V.,  Tepozan 3, Col.             Ampliaci.n Tepepan Mexico City,D.F., 16020 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 653-1442FAX:         (011-525)653-1442.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - PSYLLIUMPLANTAGO, OVATA, HUSKfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning MUSHROOM SPAWNIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0003-MX2QUANTITY:    2 MT.QUALITY:     U.S.PACKAGE:     Bulked.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       U.S. Certificates.QUOTE:       FOB any border point.BANK REF:    Banamex, Guadalajara,Jalisco.CONTACT:     Dr. Juan Carlos Lizarraga, Importadora yComercializadora de             Uncaria Torment, Hector Berlioz 5472, Col. LaEstancia  Zapopan,             Jalisco, 45030 MexicoPHONE:       (011-523)629-3407FAX:         (011-523) 673-0629.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - IN GRAINS & FLAKESfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning OATSIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    800-1,500 MT.QUALITY:     PBSY.PACKAGE:     Bulked in railroadtanks.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Certificates.QUOTE:       C&FLaredo, TX.BANK REF:    Banamex, Bancomer, Mexico City.CONTACT:     C.P. Gregorio Melendez, Productos de Maxz, S.A.  de C.V.,Av. Rio             Consulado 721, Col. Santa Maria Insurgentes Mexico City,D.F.,             06430 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 325-0920FAX:         (011-525)541-0785.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - EDIBLEfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning OIL SOYBEANIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    8,000,000 lbs.QUALITY:     fresh.PACKAGE:     Bulked in 50 kg. bags.DELIVERY:    Monthly from Novemberto April.OTHER:       Phytosanitary Certificates.QUOTE:       FOB anyborder point.BANK REF:    Banamex, Culiacan, Sinaloa.CONTACT:     Sr. Jose Abraham Lichter, AGRICOLA LICHTER Y ASOC.,             EpitacioOsuna1202 Pte., Culiacan, Sinaloa, 80200 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-67) 14-9002FAX:         (011-52-67) 14-8700.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996ECUADOR: TRADE OPP'TY - PADDY RICE, LONG GRAIN, GRADE 2from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning RICEIssued from ECUADORUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    500 doses.QUALITY:     High fertility.PACKAGE:     Jarswith liquid nitrogen.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Firstpurchase in the U.SQUOTE:       According to place.BANK REF:    National Bank of Internal Trade, Acambaro Guanajuato.CONTACT:     MVZ Fernando L.pez, Veterinaria "El Rancho", J. Aldama             39-B,Acambaro, Guanajuato, 38600 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-417) 2-5476FAX:         (011-52-417) 2-3107.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List WT02-B40-16IA074-000493-B046-19http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb02.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013318 text/html 11594HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:31:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:37 GMTContent-length: 11407Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb02.html Sample Issue Copyright WASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNet January 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 1996 BEVERAGE INDUSTRY LEGISLATIVE AGENDA WILL BE SHAPED BY ELECTIONS (537 words) SUGAR PROGRAM OPPONENTS AWAIT HOUSE ACTION ON FARM BILL (256 words) SUGAR IMPORT QUOTA IS INCREASED 28%, BUT LITTLE AFFECT ON PRICES SEEN (110 words) FDA REQUIRES FAT SUBSTITUTE APPROVED FOR SNACK FOODS TO CARRY WARNING (241 words) CLINTON'S STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH GIVES REPUBLICANS WAKE-UP CALL (153 words) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WIN PLACE IN UNITED STATES' DIETARY GUIDELINES (107 words) CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 19961996 BEVERAGE INDUSTRY LEGISLATIVE AGENDA WILL BE SHAPED BY ELECTIONSAs the government affairs specialists for the soft drink and alcoholicbeverage industries shape up their legislative priorities for 1996, thedominant factor will be the upcoming congressional and presidentialelections.Neither Congress nor the White House will take any action withoutconsidering its November impact, and this is a recipe for continued anddeepening gridlock with even less accomplished legislatively than in1995.Nevertheless, the Washington associations representing the beverageindustry, and industry members active in lobbying, will seekopportunities to advance their causes whenever possible.The soft drink industry's highest priority goal is to amend farmlegislation to eliminate or greatly modify the current sugar program.Opportunities to achieve this goal may be presented in this session ofCongress. (See following story)Other soft drink industry priorities include: reform of the Delaneyclause, streamlining FDA's food additive approval process and achievingnational uniformity in food labeling. NSDA is working with a foodindustry coalition on these objectives.Delaney clause nullification is contained in the dormant balanced budgetlegislation, and its chances for passage grow dimmer. Several bills havebeen introduced to improve FDA's food additive approval process--butnone meeting the food industry coalition's requirements.Action on new legislation to reauthorize the Clean Water Act is possiblein this session, and NSDA is monitoring how it could impact onbottlers' waste water discharge practices and on control of storm waterrunoff.How reauthorization of the Safe Drinking Water Act could affect thequality of water available to soft drink plants and its cost is also beingstudied should this legislation resurface this year.Legislation to replace the dollar bill with a dollar coin suffered a setbackat the end of the previous session, but the effort continues despite itsunlikely chances for passage in an election year.Lesser priorities are given to legislative relief in several tax areasincluding estate taxes, Subchapter S Corporate taxes and retaining thePuerto Rican manufacturing tax credit. National forced depositlegislation did not make the soft drink legislative priority list for the firsttime in decades.The alcoholic beverage industry had a quiet legislative year mostly spentmonitoring developments. Enough industry support could be generatedin Congress to block adverse legislation on taxes and limitations onadvertising, but not enough was available to generate new initiatives.The same can be expected in 1996.With election considerations placing a continuing damper on theprogress of legislation in this Congress, the government affairsspecialists may soon turn their attention to the election campaigns andtheir candidates.This year's elections could be the most decisive for American businessin recent memory. It is a rare opportunity for industry-oriented leadersto control both houses of Congress and the White House.If the opportunity is muffed and the pendulum begins to swing back, thegridlock of 1995-96 may be as close as business will come for a longtime to enacting much needed government reforms.Because of the importance of the 1996 elections, WBI will expand itscoverage during the year beyond beverage industry issues to issues ofimportance to industry in general, particularly as they pertain to theelections.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SUGAR PROGRAM OPPONENTS AWAIT HOUSE ACTION ON FARM BILLRep. Pat Roberts (R-Kan.), House Agriculture Committee Chairman, hasscheduled a meeting on Tuesday to consider farm legislation for Housefloor action on Wednesday. The coalition to kill or amend the sugarprogram is ready to have its amendment offered if the opportunityarises. (See WBI Nov. 10, 1995)Immediate legislation is needed because federal programs for corn,wheat and other grains have expired, and farmers have to know whatprogram they are operating under before they can begin planting.Rep. Roberts introduced a comprehensive farm bill on January 9,incorporating "Freedom to Farm" provisions of the farm bill now stalledin the balanced budget stalemate, but he has no immediate plans to bringit to the floor because it has many opponents who would offer a raft ofamendments to it.With Congress scheduled to recess on Thursday, it is unlikely that anytype of farm legislation could be passed next week. Without legislation,many crop programs will revert to statutes written in 1938 and 1949which provided high price supports but restricted plantings. This isunacceptable to the Administration.Therefore, farm legislation is likely to be considered when Congressbegins work again in March. If Roberts introduces his full-featuredseven-year farm bill, the coalition against the sugar program again willbe poised to act.If, however, he introduces a bill only to solve the grain growers'problems for the next one or two years, he may convince the leadershipto restrict amendments in the interest of passing "emergency" legislation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SUGAR IMPORT QUOTA IS INCREASED 28%, BUT LITTLE AFFECT ON PRICESSEENHeeding requests from the Sweetener Users Association, USDA hasincreased the import quota for raw sugar by 400,000 tons to prevent ashortage and higher prices, but sugar farmers charged there was no needfor the increase.U.S. cane sugar refiners, who had complained that the U.S. sugarprogram was driving companies out of business, will be helped by theincrease. They predict the quota will have to be increased again later inthe year after USDA monitors sugar supplies and import requirements.While the current increase is not expected to lower sweetener prices toindustrial sugar users, a further increase in the quota could produce pricereductions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996FDA REQUIRES FAT SUBSTITUTE APPROVED FOR SNACK FOODS TO CARRYWARNINGDiet soft drinks soon will not be the only snack foods displaying healthwarnings. Olestra, a substitute for conventional fats developed byProcter & Gamble and approved for snack food use this week by FDA,will carry the warning:"This Product Contains Olestra. Olestra may cause abdominal crampingand loose stools. Olestra inhibits the absorption of some vitamins andother nutrients. Vitamins A, D, E, and K have been added."P&G will use the fat substitute in its Pringle potato chips expected to beon the market within nine months, and license it under the name"Olean" to other companies including PepsiCo's Frito-Lay which plansa test marketing.Michael Jacobsen, executive director of the Center for Science in thePublic Interest predicted that olestra "in the short run will certainlycause diarrhea and gastrointestinal problems, and in the long run almostcertainly will cause cancer, heart disease and blindness for many whoconsume it regularly."The Center can be expected to wage a continuing campaign to reverseFDA's approval, which came after three decades of development andtesting by P&G at a cost estimated to be more than $200 million.FDA took the unusual step of requiring the company to conduct moretests of the product's long-term safety. The agency will review itsapproval within 30 months, and could revoke it "if there is no longer areasonable certainty of no harm" from olestra's use.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CLINTON'S STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH GIVES REPUBLICANS WAKE-UPCALLIf anyone ever bearded the lion in its own den, President Clinton did itto the Republicans in his State of the Union Message delivered Tuesdayin the House of Representatives, den of the "in-your-face" freshmen.The President began the speech sounding like an anti-big-governmentRepublican, ended the speech giving something to everybody like aDemocrat, nailed the Republicans for closing down the government, andwon bi-partisan applause for the job his wife is doing as First Lady.Forced by Republican budget constraints to avoid promises of significantnew government programs, a staple for Democratic messages, headvocated only the popularly-rated issues on which Democrats of allstripes agree.While the President's speech seemed to unite Democrats, RepublicanCandidate Robert Dole's businesslike response to the President drew apoor second in the ratings, raised again the "charisma" issue, and gavehis Republican presidential opponents ammunition to split the party.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WIN PLACE IN UNITED STATES' DIETARYGUIDELINESAfter considering a barrage of scientific data on alcohol consumptionwhich suggests that moderate drinking is associated with a lower risk ofcoronary heart disease, the drafters of the 1995 Dietary Guidelines forAmericans for the first time included a favorable reference to alcoholicbeverages. (See WBI Sept. 8, 1995)The Guidelines advise moderate alcohol consumption--defined as nomore than one drink a day for women and two a day for men. A drinkis defined as 1.5 ounces of hard liquor, 12 ounces of beer and 5 ouncesof wine. The 1990 Guidelines concluded that alcohol consumption hasno net benefit and "is not recommended."Back to Headline List WT02-B40-17IA074-000493-B046-124http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb55.html 205.156.212.5 19970122013505 text/html 442512HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:31:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:56 GMTContent-length: 442324Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb55.html Sample Issue Copyright BUSINESS WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1996 Number 3457 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INSIDE WALL STREET FAY'S DRUGS: FIT TO BE SWALLOWED? (348 words) THE WAY THE OLD RUBBER CRUMBLES (260 words) CHINA TIRE MAY BE UNDULY DEFLATED (314 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BUSINESS WEEK/HARRIS EXECUTIVE POLL A TOUGH YEAR TO FOLLOW (693 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: AUTOS CRUISE CONTROL? Car sales should remain strong, though high sticker prices are worrisome (1302 words) A SHRINKING SUPPLY OF SUPPLIERS (346 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: MACHINERY THEY'RE HAVING A CAPITAL TIME Savoring solid demand here, machine makers also are expanding abroad (795 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: METALS METALS NEED A FEW SUPPORT BEAMS For steelmakers, falling prices and labor issues loom large in '96 (816 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: DEFENSE READY-ALL JOIN ARMS Cash-Rich and eager to merge, defense companies are thriving (763 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: ENERGY `UNEXCITING MIGHT BE GOOD' Few surprises in the oil patch. but with profits so healthy, who cares? (807 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: AGRICULTURE A TIME TO REAP GLOBAL REWARDS With demand and output growing, the U.S. could again dominate world markets (837 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: FOREST PRODUCTS IT'S A GOOD YEAR TO GET HITCHED '96 could be tough, so papermakers will continue to merge (813 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: SOFTWARE THE WEB KEEPS SPREADING The new market should grow 100% and create even greater opportunities (1281 words) YOUR DATA SHOULD MEET MY DATA (349 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: COMPUTERS THIS YEAR, SERVERS WILL BE KING PCs are everywhere. Now the spotlight is on machines that can link them (792 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: SEMICONDUCTORS SILICON GOES FROM PEAK TO PEAK In a boom that could last a decade, turning out enough chips is the big problem (792 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS THE NOT-SO-CALM BEFORE THE STORM All hell will break loose when deregulation hits. For now, business is strong (787 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: PHARMACEUTICALS ROBUST AND READY TO BRAWL Drugmakers are flush, so more mergers--even hostile ones--may be on the horizon (793 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: MEDIA/ENTERTAINMENT THE MEDIA CIRCUS IS STILL IN TOWN Thrills and chills as global demand keeps the buying frenzy going (1358 words) THE BABY BELLS TAKE THEIR FIRST STEPS IN TINSELTOWN (343 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: HEALTH CARE THE PATIENT IS STABLE-FOR NOW Health-care costs are in check, but the industry's upheaval isn't over (788 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: TRANSPORTATION PICKING UP SPEED Airlines are finally in the clear--and railroads may link up (811 words) PERSONAL BUSINESS: PLANNING WHERE THERE'S A WILL, THERE ARE MISTAKES (1927 words) PERSONAL BUSINESS: REAL ESTATE STEERING CLEAR OF TITLE TROUBLE (966 words) BOOKS A PANGLOSS FOR THE MILLENNIUM (1070 words) BOOKS: BOOK BRIEF INTERNET 101 FOR BUSINESS (332 words) LETTER FROM ALBANIA `I WANT BLOOD FOR BLOOD' (766 words) TECHNOLOGY & YOU IT'S FOR YOU--ON THE PC Voice calling via the Internet is here and it's cheap-but don't toss your phone yet (805 words) ECONOMIC VIEWPOINT WHY IS THE U.S. SETTLING FOR STUNTED GROWTH? (768 words) ECONOMIC TRENDS FED FEAR OF THE JOBLESS RATE It may be a faulty inflation signal (454 words) WHAT'S STALLING MONETARY UNION Europe's economies are out of sync (155 words) A MILESTONE FOR BLACK FAMILIES Fewer out-of-wedlock births (95 words) WHEN LAWYERS ARE LOOKERS Attractiveness boosts earnings (224 words) UP FRONT: READER SURVEY YOU MADE THE CALL (339 words) UP FRONT: TRIVIA QUIZ LET'S PLAY 30 QUESTIONS (498 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: BANKING A FEW NEW BLOTS ON THE LEDGER Delinquent consumer loans and skinny margins may temper an otherwise bully year (839 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: INTRODUCTION JOHN DEWEY, MEET PETER DRUCKER (723 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK (2439 words) UP FRONT TALK SHOW (53 words) TEA LEAVES, ANYONE? (563 words) SMARTEST MOVES OF 1995 (179 words) DUMBEST MOVES OF 1995 (166 words) BUSINESS OUTLOOK: U.S. ECONOMY FROM CHRISTMAS BLAHS TO NEW YEAR'S EASE (1154 words) BUSINESS OUTLOOK: ARGENTINA A HARD-WON VICTORY IN A SOFT ECONOMY (355 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: WASHINGTON HERE COMES GRIDLOCK '96 Dug-in liberals and GOP zealots spell election-year paralysis (1189 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: GERMANY THE ECONOMY THAT FELL TO EARTH Germany's slowdown is scaring its neighbors (793 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS NOW JUPPE HAS TO PICK UP THE PIECES (616 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: PEOPLE FROM BLUEPRINTS TO GRAND DESIGN Ex-engineer John Correnti now must recast Nucor (792 words) SHE IS THE NRA Its first female chief is out to oust Clinton and lure women (456 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TELECOM: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE WALLS FALL Once reform passes, a frenzy of pair-ups is sure to follow (748 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: FOOD ALL TOGETHER NOW: `MAKE THAT TO GO' Insatiable demand for convenient, ready-to-eat meals has the food biz scrambling (800 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: SERVICES: UTILITIES MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER REARRANGERS Deregulation will transform the industry--and continue to pinch profits (783 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: SERVICES: BUSINESS SERVICES WHO SAYS YOU CAN'T FIND GOOD HELP? Business-service firms boom as companies around the globe retool (770 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: SECURITIES WILL WALL STREET HIT A WALL? It will be tough to match '95, but low rates could keep the market robust (814 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: REAL ESTATE/CONSTRUCTION A YEAR OF HIGH-RISE EXPECTATIONS The office market expects a banner year, while other markets look less robust (816 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: INSURANCE LOOKING FOR SAFETY IN NUMBERS Consolidation--and competition from other investments--are changing the business (778 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): INTRODUCTION THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995 What did it take for an executive to succeed in the past year? (717 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): THE BEST MANAGERS THE BEST MANAGERS (46 words) BERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW's (73 words) GERALD GREENWALD (81 words) PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995. (75 words) STAN SHIH (78 words) MICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do it (86 words) ARTHUR C. MARTINEZ (75 words) SCOTT G. MCNEALY (75 words) ROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world's (93 words) ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment. (72 words) TADASHI SEKIZAWA (66 words) JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995 (65 words) C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great new (68 words) WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of a (93 words) JEAN-PIERRE ROSSO (77 words) PAUL H. O'NEILL (89 words) WILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he's (77 words) ALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazing (69 words) ANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being the (76 words) WILLIAM C. STEERE JR. (84 words) GEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's core (71 words) JOHN J. MACK (72 words) RALPH S. LARSEN (82 words) GEORGE A. DAVID (76 words) CASEY G. COWELL (82 words) LEWIS E. PLATT (88 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): MANAGERS TO WATCH MANAGERS TO WATCH IN 1996 (1012 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS): THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS (52 words) SHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allows (93 words) STEVE JOBS (115 words) JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, AND DAVID GEFFEN. (77 words) JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSEN (67 words) DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneurs (82 words) ROBERT PRIDDY (71 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS): THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS (51 words) A BIKE FOR ALL MOUNTAINS (33 words) FITS IN A TIGHT SPOT (36 words) AN EXEC MARCHES ON HIS SEAT (28 words) FOR THE TROUT IN YOUR LIFE (57 words) ONE FOR THE MONEY (42 words) FLOPPIES MAY BE ENDANGERED (48 words) HARD WORK, BIG FUN (48 words) JOLTIN' JAVA (27 words) A GIANT LEAP FOR MINIVANS (71 words) THE BEST WEB SITES (78 words) A MULTIMEDIA MAC FOR ALL SEASONS (73 words) THE EYE HAS IT (48 words) NET GAINS (85 words) SO WHO NEEDS A PHONE? (85 words) THE LONG, LONG RACKET (100 words) COLOR COPIES FOR A SONG (68 words) HANDS UP, YOU LOUSE! (48 words) MOVE OVER, MR. ANDRETTI (55 words) THE BEST CD-ROMS (78 words) ONE PRETTY PICTURE (43 words) FLEXIBLE FLYER (48 words) SNAPPY SHOTS (45 words) NOTEBOOK NONPAREIL (40 words) DOUBLE-DUTY DRIVER (87 words) BOOMING BOX (49 words) NO TOY BOAT (32 words) PRODUCTS TO WATCH IN 1996 (107 words) RELIVING YESTERDAY'S TRIUMPHS (64 words) READERS REPORT HAS CADDY TURNED THE CORNER? (810 words) `TERRORISTS SHOULD NEVER BE CONFUSED WITH DISSIDENTS' (211 words) EXPORT DIVERSION, MAYBE. DUMPING, ABSOLUTELY (138 words) TRAVELERS DOESN'T TRAFFIC IN HARD SELLING (124 words) CORRECTIONS & CLARIFICATIONS WHERE TO INVEST IN 1996: PHONE NUMBERS (DEC. 25) (26 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: BRITAIN A WINNING NUMBER FOR THE LABORITES? The national lottery flap may further undermine the Tories (736 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: MEXICO TOSSING A LIFELINE TO MEXICO'S BIGGEST BANKS Even Banamex and Bancomer are getting a state bailout (752 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: COMPUTERS APPLE: ANOTHER BOUT OF BAD TIDINGS Profit pressure may bring layoffs and suitors (824 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: RUSSIA THE COMEBACK KID OF RUSSIA? Yeltsin has no charismatic rival, and the economy looks better (716 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: TOBACCO NO SMOKE, BUT PLENTY OF HEAT Why the smokeless tobacco biz is starting to hack (795 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: DEALS WILL FLIPPER PLAY IN ESTONIA? Why John Kluge is on a buying binge in Hollywood (902 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: CORPORATE GIVING THE NAACP BETS ON A NEW BREADWINNER Kweisi Mfume hopes to show donors the crisis is over (826 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: MARKETING REPACKAGING THE POST OFFICE Facilities are getting face-lifts, clerks are getting friendlier (481 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: RESEARCH A HEAVYWEIGHT CONTENDER This breakthrough may be the key to a fat pill (266 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK: HEADLINER: WHITNEY HOUSTON EXHALE BLOWS 'EM AWAY (188 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK A TRUNKFUL OF PINK SLIPS AT BUDGET (139 words) PIER 1'S $20 MILLION QUESTION (97 words) IS CYRIX LOOKING AT A DEFAULT? (97 words) A DESERT DEAL FOR BRITISH PETROLEUM (117 words) CALLING CORPORATE AMERICA'S BLUFF (110 words) ET CETERA... (65 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK: CLOSING BELL THE JOBS MARKET (98 words) WASHINGTON OUTLOOK ARTHUR LEVITT SPEAKS SOFTLY AND CARRIES A LITTLE STICK (593 words) WASHINGTON OUTLOOK: CAPITAL WRAPUP WHAT'S BUGGING THE FEDS (106 words) BALKANIZED AID PACKAGE (71 words) BUDGET SLOW BOAT (87 words) INTERNATIONAL OUTLOOK JAPAN'S SHADOW KINGMAKER IS BIDDING FOR THE SPOTLIGHT (627 words) INTERNATIONAL OUTLOOK: GLOBAL WRAPUP PRIVATIZING A BRAZILIAN GIANT (262 words) EDITORIALS HOW TO EVALUATE TAX REFORM (486 words) DON'T TREAD ON FREE TRADE (393 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: HEALTH CARE NEWBORN BABIES, BAWLING MOMS They want laws to make insurers pay for longer hospital stays (705 words) BUSINESS WEEK INDEX BUSINESS WEEK INDEX (571 words) THE WEEK AHEAD (294 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: SPOTLIGHT ON CHILE HEALING THE SOIL IN A LUSH VALLEY...BUT JUST IN TIME FOR AN URBAN FLOOD? (728 words) INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEK INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEK (624 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK (SERVICES): RETAILING GLOOMY DAYS ARE HERE AGAIN DEPARTMENT STORES SHOW PROMISE, BUT SLUGGISH SALES COULD SINK MANY MERCHANTS (761 words) CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FAY'S DRUGS: FIT TO BE SWALLOWED?By:BY GENE G. MARCIALThe ``shakeout'' investors--who buy into companies whose industries are inthe throes of consolidation--are convinced that Fay's (FAY), the nation's13th-largest drugstore chain, is ripe for picking. The shares have droppedto 7, down from 9 3/8 in late April, partly because of investors'disappointment that a rumored takeover has not yet materialized. And aflurry of yearend tax-loss sell-offs may be adding to the downwardpressure.But the focus, insists one big investor, should be on what's happening toall drug chains. ``A shakeout in the industry is under way,'' notes analystMaurice Levenson of Value Line. This is being fostered, he explains, by theemergence of managed-health-care plans and stiff competition from giantdiscounters such as Wal-Mart Stores and Target Stores. Analysts note theindustry could also shed a lot of duplication and costs by buyouts ofweaker companies. A recent example is Rite Aid's agreement to acquire Revcofor $1.8 billion.   Fay's--with its sales sluggish, its earnings down, and the stock on theropes--is regarded as one of the industry's weak sisters. ``It's similar tothe Revco situation. The likes of such possible suitors as Walgreen's couldswallow it up just like that,'' says investment manager Mike Kicera of MRKCapital Management.   Kicera figures that Fay's shares are worth 12 to 15 in a buyout--basedon what Rite Aid agreed to pay for Revco. With 276 outlets in NewHampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, and Vermont, Fay's is streamlining itsoperations by getting rid of noncore businesses. It sold off WheelsDiscount Auto Supply Div. to Sears Roebuck's Western Auto Supply for $37million. Management is also expected to unload the 30 Paper Cutterdiscount-office-supply stores.   ``Without Wheels and Paper Cutter, Fay's would be a much more attractivetakeover target,'' says one money manager accumulating shares.   Providing added inducement for Fay's to sell: Management and directorsown about 31% of the stock--including the holdings of the family ofChairman Henry Panasci Jr. Fay's didn't return calls.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: WEAK SISTERERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WAY THE OLD RUBBER CRUMBLESBy:BY GENE G. MARCIALNot everything in today's hot IPO market is Internet-related. One issuethat some pros like--GreenMan Technologies (GMTI)--is nowhere nearcyberspace: It's in tire recycling. GreenMan went public on Oct. 3 at 5 ashare. On opening day, the stock jumped to more than 8 and stayed there foreight trading days--until profit-taking spoiled some of the fun. But somemoney managers still think it's worth loading up on GreenMan--now at 6.   What's the allure of tire recycling? GreenMan uses a patented cryogenic(low-temperature) technology to make used tires brittle, thus yieldingcrumb-rubber granules. These granules are a low-cost source of rubber andplastic waste, according to one money manager who has a sizable stake.GreenMan's chief product is a proprietary thermoplastic rubber materialthat uses crumbs from discarded tires. GreenMan uses it to produce waterfilters, pumps, stereo components, and computer accessories.   On Dec. 14, Browning-Ferris Industries, a major player in solid-wastecollection and recycling, signed an exclusive contract for GreenMan tobuild and operate a crumb-rubber processing facility on Browning's site inJackson, Ga. It will convert a minimum of 32,000 tons a year of shreddedtires into high quality crumb rubber. Browning-Ferris may buy an equitystake in GreenMan, speculates one analyst.   Revenues for the year ending May 31, 1996, are expected to be $7 millionto $10 million, in part from a $2 million contract with Coca-Cola--forGreenMan to make display racks of recycled rubber. One analyst seesGreenMan going into the black in 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CHINA TIRE MAY BE UNDULY DEFLATEDBy:BY GENE G. MARCIALOn the Big Board, China Tire Holdings (TIR) behaves as if it were aretread. In early summer, shares of this major Chinese tiremaker werearound 12. They're now at 6, and even Morgan Stanley downgraded its ratingin November to ``neutral'' from an earlier ``buy.'' That's quite a blow:Morgan Stanley was one of China Tire's major underwriters when it wentpublic--in July, 1993, at 17 a share. And it owns 5.7% of the stock.Constantly shifting U.S.-China relations are part of the Street's aversionto the stock. And there has been concern about China Tire's earningspredictability.   But not everyone is down on the stock. Investment manager Bill Harnischhas been buying since the stock hit 8 in September--and bought even morewhen it dropped to 6. How come?   ``For a company with an estimated book value of more than $15 a share,the stock is very cheap,'' says Harnisch, president of Forstmann-Leff, aNew York investment firm managing about $3 billion. And in spite of thepoor performance of most other Chinese tire biggies--caused in part by adrop in car sales--China Tire's revenues in most of 1995 jumped by morethan 33%, and its earnings grew by 10%, he notes. Harnisch estimates 1995earnings at 50 cents a share. For 1996, he foresees earnings of 75 cents.   And then, there is the ``bonanza that we expect China Tire could winfrom its lawsuit filed against Goodyear in the U.S.,'' says Harnisch. ChinaTire claims that Goodyear interfered with its contract to buy a radial-tirefactory in China owned by Dalian General Rubber Factory: Goodyear boughtthe factory instead. Some analysts believe Goodyear Tire & Rubber faces a$3 billion penalty if it loses the legal fight.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: A LAWSUIT MAY MEAN A `BONANZA'ERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TOUGH YEAR TO FOLLOWBy:Edited by Mark N. VamosExecutives at America's largest public companies see the economy cooling abit in the coming year. They're a tad less optimistic than they were thistime last year. Fewer expect growth in gross domestic product to pick up in1996, and the number anticipating rising unemployment has doubled. Butmanagers cheer the Fed: Their inflation fears have all but vanished, andfew worry about rising interest rates. A remarkable 91% give Fed ChairmanAlan Greenspan high marks, compared with the 26% who applaud Clinton'shandling of the economy.Survey of 401 senior executives drawn from the BUSINESS WEEK 1000.Interviews were conducted for BUSINESS WEEK Nov. 30-Dec. 15, 1995 by LouisHarris & Associates Inc. Previous surveys cited were of 400 seniorexecutives on Nov. 28-Dec. 5, 1994 and of 402 senior executives Dec. 10-20,1993.Optimistic VoicesOverall, how would you characterize your outlook for the U.S. economy inthe next 12 months--would you say you are very optimistic, somewhatoptimistic, somewhat pessimistic, or very pessimistic?                       1995    1994    1993Very optimistic          8%     13%      3%Somewhat optimistic     78%     76%     80%Somewhat pessimistic    13%     11%     16%Very pessimistic         0%      0%      1%Not sure                 1%      0%      0%Growth FactorCompared with the last 12 months, do you think the rate of growth of thegross domestic product will go up, go down, or stay the same over the next12 months?                1995    1994    1993Go up           30%     38%    25%Go down         25%     26%     9%Stay the same   45%     36%    65%Not sure         0%      0%     1%What About Inflation?Compared with the last 12 months, do you think the rate of inflation, basedon the CPI, will go up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           12%     53%    40%Go down         15%      6%     5%Stay the same   73%     40%    55%Not sure         0%      1%     0%Tracking TreasuriesCompared with where it is right now, do you think the 30-year Treasury ratewill go up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           24%     57%     67%Go down         47%     18%      5%Stay the same   25%     24%     27%Not sure         4%      1%      1%The Jobless RateCompared with the last 12 months, do you think the unemployment rate willgo up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           35%     17%     21%Go down         15%     33%     34%Stay the same   49%     50%    44%Not sure         1%      0%     1%The Company WayAnd now some questions about your expectations for your company over thenext 12 months. Please give your best estimate. Do you think each of thefollowing will increase or decrease between now and December, 1996?                          INCREASE  DECREASE    SAME  NOT SURESales                        89%       4%        5%     2%Wage and salary rates        85%       3%       10%     2%Investment in plant and equipment               72%      12%       13%     3%Health-care costs per employee                    59%      22%       17%     2%Investment in research & development               58%      14%       21%     7%Exports                      54%       3%       10%    33%Full-time employees          45%      30%       23%     2%Typical prices of standard products or services        40%      21%       37%     2%Prophesizing ProfitsDo you think your company's profitability will improve, stay the same, orget worse in 1996?Improve         79%     Get worse       6%Stay the same   13%     Not sure        2%Crazy For Alan...How would you rate the job Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve are doing-- excellent, pretty good, only fair, or poor?               1995    1994Excellent       40%     16%Pretty good     51%     50%Only fair        8%     29%Poor             0%      5%Not sure         1%      0% ...But Less So For BillHow do you rate President Clinton's handling of the economy -- excellent,pretty good, only fair, or poor?Excellent       1%      Poor           18%Pretty good    25%      Not sure        1%Only fair      55%Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CRUISE CONTROL?Car sales should remain strong, though high sticker prices are worrisomeBy:By Kathleen Kerwin and Keith Naughton in DetroitPeter Dirisamer may not drive home a new car in 1996. Dirisamer, 37, anElmhurst (Ill.) technical writer, wants to replace his family's 1988Plymouth Horizon subcompact. But with average new-car prices pushing$20,000, he's not finding much he can afford. ``Detroit expects me to pay$20,000 for the average four-door sedan?'' he sniffs. ``I don't think so.''Instead, he may settle for a used car.   Consumers such as Dirisamer are the reason Detroit is cautious about itsprospects for the new year. ``Price is the issue with customers,'' saysLehman Brothers Inc. analyst Joseph Phillippi. And with a flood of two- andthree-year-old cars and trucks coming back on the market as their leasesexpire--2.3 million in 1996 alone, according to Art Spinella of CNWMarketing/Research in Bandon, Ore.--consumers are finding plenty ofalternatives to pricey new wheels.   So Detroit is prepared to idle along at about the same rate as theoverall economy. Auto executives are looking for only a modest improvementof less than 2% over 1995's U.S. sales of 14.8 million cars and lighttrucks. Says General Motors Corp. Chairman John F. Smith Jr.: ``1996 lookslike a good year, not spectacular.''   Perhaps, too, Detroit is a bit cautious about predicting rosy sales. Ayear ago, its optimism had reached fever pitch. But by mid-January,consumers began to cool on auto buying as they felt the cumulative effectof interest-rate hikes by the Federal Reserve. Sales revived by fits andstarts through 1995, ending about 2.6% behind 1994's pace.GOOD AS IT GETS? Auto sales should be helped in 1996 by low interest rates,which make auto loans and lease terms more attractive. A continuingappetite for American-made trucks, including minivans and sport utilities,also is in Detroit's favor. And the Big Three are introducing a host of newmodels, notably Ford's Escort small car and F-series pickup, GM's newmidsize cars and minivans, and Chrysler's Dodge Dakota pickup.   Still, other worries loom. PaineWebber Inc. analyst Michael Ward fretsabout unsold cars and trucks on dealer lots, which reached a 75-day averagesupply late in 1995, 14% above year-ago levels. Ward predicts little changein sales for 1996: ``This is as good as it's going to get for Detroit.''   While most on Wall Street predict slightly stronger sales ahead, theydon't expect them to flow straight to the bottom line. Customers aredemanding cash rebates and sweet lease terms on all but the hottest-sellingtrucks. Flemington (N.J.) car dealer Steve Kalafer, who owns 23dealerships, says the only thing selling these days is bargains: ``In aworld full of wonderful products, the consumer is buying the deal.''   That squeezes auto makers' profit margins. ``The industry's margins area disaster for an expansion,'' says Paul Ballew, chief economist for J.D.Power & Associates Inc. Adding to the uncertainty, Detroit's contracts withthe United Auto Workers expire in September. A spirited debate is expectedabout the auto makers' shifting jobs to outside suppliers (box). AndJapanese competitors are hard on Detroit's bumper: introducing snazzy newvehicles while keeping price increases small.   Ford's costs of launching its many new vehicles will continue to dragdown profits during the first half of the year, company executives say.Stockholders remain anxious about the company's strategy of loading onfeatures to lure import-loving baby boomers at a time when consumers shunhigher sticker prices. Ford also will expand its ambitious globalreorganization--dubbed Ford 2000--by folding South America, New Zealand,Australia, and Taiwan into its combined North American and Europeanoperations in 1996. J.P. Morgan & Co. analyst David Bradley expects Ford toearn $3.6 billion, unchanged from 1995, on sales of $123 billion.   General Motors Corp., which sat out most of 1995 without new models,launches a series of important vehicles this year. After bungling severalcar launches in recent years, it has been working on debugging itsmanufacturing process to prepare for the launches. GM is counting on suchentries as the new Chevy Venture minivan, Buick Regal, and Pontiac GrandPrix to help it regain its footing in crucial market segments. The companyis hoping its falling market share finally has bottomed. Late in the year,its share edged above 34%, up from lows near 32%. GM will earn $7 billion,up 17%, on $160 billion of sales, Bradley calculates.``IDEAL SITUATION.'' Chrysler Corp. management, which just successfullyintroduced a new generation of its bread-and-butter minivans, is likely tospend plenty of time planning for a spring showdown with billionaireinvestor Kirk Kerkorian. If Chrysler balks at giving Kerkorian aide JeromeB. York a board seat, a nasty proxy battle will ensue. Back on the plantfloor, Chrysler is standardizing manufacturing processes and modernizingolder factories. Bradley estimates 1996 Chrysler earnings of $3.1 billion,up 58% from the depressed 1995 level, on sales of $54 billion.   Even as Detroit rolls out spiffy new models, its Japanese rivals willunveil their own new designs. And while a sky-high yen forced them to booststicker prices, putting them at a $2,000 to $3,000 per-car pricedisadvantage, they've been slashing costs. The 1997 Toyota Camry midsizesedan is expected to cost as much as $1,000 less than the current car.``The Japanese manufacturers have not gone away,'' says GM's Smith. ``Theyare tough competitors, and they will continue to be.''   Japan also is expanding its lower-cost U.S. production--and evenstepping up shipments of American-built cars to Japan. ``We are importing,not only to Japan but to 38 countries, from the U.S.,'' says NobuhikoKawamoto, Honda Motor Co. president and chief executive. ``We intend toreinforce this plan.'' Even softening in the yen last fall isn't likely tocause Japan to back off from cost-cutting. Says Ford Chairman Alexander J.Trotman: ``I doubt very much that they will take their foot off the pedaljust because the yen has slipped back.''   There is a silver lining to the slackening of 1994's breakneck pace.Back then, factories were running at maximum overtime, some key parts ranshort, and demand for raw materials renewed some inflationary pressures.Says Kenneth L. Way, chairman and CEO of Lear Seating Corp. in Southfield,Mich.: ``I think it's an advantage not to have deep troughs and bigpeaks.''   Instead, the industry may be bumping along on a plateau of 14.5 millionto 15.5 million unit sales annually. ``It's actually an ideal situation,''says Chrysler Chairman Robert J. Eaton. ``It allows you to get your plantsrunning at maximum efficiency, get your material flowing nice and evenly,and really focus on costs and quality.''   And when it comes to expansion opportunities, the Big Three are castingtheir eyes toward the Asia-Pacific region, where they can still turn outbasic cars on a shoestring. ``That is where most of our growth focus willbe in the next 20 years,'' says Ford's Trotman. Chrysler, which has laggedits Detroit peers abroad, is likely to make some major international movesthis year. The company is talking with a half-dozen potential partners inIndia, South America, and Southeast Asia. An alliance with a European automaker could also be in the cards.   Overseas horizons may indeed appear the brightest to Detroit. Especiallyif American consumers, such as Illinois car shopper Dirisamer, remainconvinced that new cars cost too much.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Lower interest rates make auto loan and lease payments moreaffordable.   -- A flood of products--Ford's Escort and new pickup and GM's familysedans--should whet consumer appetites.Negatives   -- Cost-cutting and a weaker yen are making the Japanese toughercompetitors than ever.   -- Price-conscious consumers are demanding deals.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Motor VehiclesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Cars/Light TrucksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A SHRINKING SUPPLY OF SUPPLIERSBy:By Kathleen Kerwin and Bill Vlasic in DetroitAmerican auto makers will rely on fewer parts suppliers in 1996. Ford MotorCo., for example, has reduced its stable from 10,000 to 2,300--and aims for1,150 by decade's end. At the same time, Detroit has suppliers building alarger percentage of the content of its cars than ever.   What gives? The consolidation is driven by auto makers who lean onsuppliers to provide entire systems for vehicles--an entire dashboard, forinstance, instead of just the ashtray that goes into it. Detroit is handingoff more development responsibility to suppliers, too. This favors thosecompanies with plentiful capacity, capital, and skills. Smaller playersmust merge or lose the business. Some become second- or third-tiersuppliers to the remaining giants.   The Big Three want global supply networks. A supplier who aspires toU.S. business in 1996 may have to be able to deliver the same parts tofactories in Germany or Brazil. Among those that analysts say may grow byacquisition in 1996: Borg-Warner Automotive, Dana, and Lear Seating. SaysTRW Inc. Chairman Joseph T. Gorman: ``There will continue to be massive[supplier] consolidation as markets that were once national or regionalbecome global.''   Big suppliers will end up with some extra burdens. ``The cost pressureson suppliers are still tremendous,'' says Kenneth L. Way, chairman of LearSeating Corp. in Southfield, Mich. ``You have to share engineering costsand design costs if you're a tier-one [supplier].'' And auto makers keepdemanding price reductions. The focus of supplier ire for 1996 is Fordpurchasing chief Carlos E. Mazzorin, who wants suppliers to cut theirprices by 5% a year.   Even so, Morgan Stanley & Co. analyst Stephen Volkmann projectssuppliers' earnings will rise 15% to 20% in 1996. Price increases for rawmaterials have eased lately, he notes. Suppliers of car parts may sufferspotty slowdowns, but business in truck components should remain robust.And Japanese car companies' expansion in the U.S. provides new marketopportunities for the best U.S. suppliers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THEY'RE HAVING A CAPITAL TIMESavoring solid demand here, machine makers also are expanding abroadBy:By Zachary Schiller in ClevelandBusiness investment has powered the U.S. economic expansion, and that hasmade machinery executives a bunch of happy campers. Shipments of industrialmachinery and equipment were up 12% through October, 1995, from a yearearlier, according to the U.S. Census, surging toward a likely record.Their plump backlogs almost guarantee another strong year. Says Jeffery T.Grade, chairman of Milwaukee's Harnischfeger Industries Inc., which makesequipment for papermaking and mining: ``1996, when all is said and done,will be a very good year for most industrial manufacturers.''   While growth and profits won't climb much in 1996, the gains come on topof a strong base. That's because U.S. manufacturing is itself in goodshape--and companies are convinced that they must invest to stay that way.``All in all, people are concerned about productivity and being competitiveglobally,'' says Daniel J. Meyer, chairman of Cincinnati Milacron Inc.   A healthy U.S. market should be supplemented by faster market growthabroad. ``Our biggest opportunity for [profit] leverage is the continuedaccelerated growth overseas,'' says Thomas F. McBride, chief financialofficer at Ingersoll-Rand Co. He's especially hopeful for Asia and thePacific. Ingersoll is looking to add three joint ventures in China to thethree it already has there, including one that makes industrial aircompressors and another producing rock drills for mining and road-clearing.ITT Industries Inc.'s Fluid Transfer Div. is putting a warehouse for itspumps in Santiago, Chile. Milacron, which just started making smallinjection-molding machines in a joint venture with an outfit based inIndia, hopes to be producing 600 there annually within a few years.MASS APPEAL. More machinery makers are realizing they have to intensifyglobal activities to keep their U.S. customers happy. ``When a DuPont or aDow says, `I'm building my next plant in China--I need you to step up yourcapabilities,' you've got to have mass to cover the world,'' says WilliamM. Jordan, president of Duriron Co., a Dayton (Ohio) pump and valve maker. Partly with that in mind, Duriron recently bought seal maker DurametallicCorp.   Also fueling mergers--including Ingersoll-Rand's 1995 takeover of ClarkEquipment Co.--is that stronger balance sheets have left more machinerymakers in a position to make purchases. Indeed, there even have been someinitial public offerings in the once beleaguered machine-tool business,such as a 1995 IPO by Hardinge Brothers Inc., a fast-growing Elmira (N.Y.)producer of lathes and machining centers.   Such has been the strength of machine-tool sales that the average age ofU.S. metalworking equipment began falling in 1994 for the first time in 14years. The rejuvenation should continue into 1996.   Even if demand dips next year for a number of machinery makers, existingorders will provide a cushion. For instance, Alton J. Brann, chairman andCEO of Western Atlas Inc., notes that an ``exceptional year'' of bookingsmeans a good outlook for 1996 sales of its Industrial Automation Group. Itsbacklog for machining and other systems is up about 50% from the $415million of a year ago.   There are some streaks of weakness in this rosy-hued picture. The sameglobalization that has U.S. executives rushing to expand abroad meansthey're facing more competition. And the same modernization that makesAmerican manufacturers world-beaters in productivity often has led toincreases in capacity that put a damper on prices.BUYING MOOD. What's more, there are spotty signs of a slowdown in demand.Manufacturers' use of their factory capacity fell from 85.1% a year ago to83.1% in November, 1995. Orders for forklift trucks, industrial aircompressors, and large plastic-molding machines have slowed in recentmonths. Demand from the auto industry may taper off, and 1995's sluggishhousing market will probably mean at best a flat market for constructionequipment this year.   Still, most machinery customers are in a buying mood. Such businesses aschemicals, paper, metals, and food should still spend smartly. Aerospacedemand is finally rebounding. And one of the biggest stars is likely to befarm machinery. ``The underlying fundamentals for farm equipment have neverbeen stronger,'' says Ted French, chief financial officer of Case Corp.,citing strong farm income and the lowest carryover of grain stocks in 30years. For machinery makers, the wheels are turning for a solid 1996.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Outsourcing by big companies means job shops will be buyingequipment.   -- With manufacturers concerned about global competition, they willcontinue placing orders for machinery.Negatives   -- There's still too much worldwide capacity in sectors such as pumpsand machine tools, keeping prices down.   -- Automotive capital spending will flatten out in 1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: MachineryIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Machine ToolsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457METALS NEED A FEW SUPPORT BEAMSFor steelmakers, falling prices and labor issues loom large in '96By:By Stephen Baker in PittsburghAt the dawn of 1995, Matthew Botsford, chairman of World Class Steel, wasconfidently raising money to build a $450 million minimill near Pittsburgh.If anyone epitomized America's resurgence in the steel industry, it wasBotsford, an entrepreneur who had built a successful $20 millionsteel-finishing business and was following in the footsteps of AndrewCarnegie.   These days, Botsford is an ex-executive. He's suing his oldcompany--after being ousted during a November board meeting and whiskedfrom the building by a security guard. His project had the backing ofbanks, suppliers, and the state government. But Botsford had troubleconvincing equity investors--and ultimately his board--that a new minimillcould make money in a climate of falling steel prices.   In the end, Botsford fell with a tumbling steel market. In 1995, asdemand dropped from 114 million to 110 million tons, prices plummeted, too:Flat-rolled steel plunged from $440 to $355 per ton. Other products, suchas structural beams, thrived. But because flat-rolled is widely used incars, appliances, and other products, it accounts for half of steel salesand defined the year. ``When we cut flat-rolled prices, it was on page A1[of the paper],'' laments Nucor Corp. President John D. Correnti. ``When weraised prices of structurals, it was on C4.''WILD CARD. The industry could wind up on page one again this year, witheven worse news. Executives see unchanging demand in 1996. A lower level ofinventories to start the year will help avoid a replay of 1995's heavyprice-cutting. But new steelmaking capacity coming onstream will putfurther downward pressure on prices, especially in the commodity grades ofsteel. ``The low end of the market is going to be tough for a while,'' saysRoy G. Dorrence, vice-president for operations at U.S. Steel Group.   The wild card this year is overseas. U.S. producers hope strong growthin China will translate into a buying binge reminiscent of 1993. But thekey factor for 1996 will be Europe. It was a vital prop under Americansteel during the first half of 1995--but then buckled at midyear. If a weakEuropean economy prompts producers there to step up exports, cheap Europeansteel could undercut U.S. producers' prices and lead to fresh tradesquabbles.   The biggest problem for U.S. producers is homegrown, however. Beforelast year's price drop, a minimill-building boom was well under way. Thenew mills could add 12 million tons of low-cost flat-rolled steel toproduction capacity in 1996 and 1997 combined. That's nearly five times thecapacity added in 1995. If flat-rolled could crash last year in arelatively strong economy, what will happen to the market in a downturn,especially when new mills come onstream? ``That's when we'll have our deathspiral,'' predicts PaineWebber Inc.'s Peter Marcus, who expects lowerprofits in 1996 and an even greater crash later this decade.STRIKE BAN. As if economic prospects weren't intimidating enough, laborquestions loom. Most integrated companies face mid-contractwage-and-benefit negotiations in 1996. Strikes or lockouts are prohibited.But concessions granted by arbitrators could eat into earnings.Job-security clauses in these contracts limit the big mills' power to cutlabor costs. Instead, the producers improve yields by tweaking thetechnology. In the past three years, they have added 4 million tons--theequivalent of Nucor's entire flat-rolled production--through this so-calledcapacity creep. Log one more factor in an eventual glut.   With a world oversupply, steel faces a dilemma just like the one U.S.aluminum makers wrestled with early in the decade. But aluminum companies,swamped with cheap Russian metal, shuttered 30% of production andnegotiated an OPEC-style allotment plan. Prices recovered smartly in 1995,as massive world inventories shrank by 75%. U.S. demand rose 5%, with salesrising to 15.5 billion pounds. Aluminum looks strong again in 1996, led bya recovery in aerospace demand. But can prices remain firm if aluminummakers reopen shuttered smelters? For now, executives don't even mentionthe possibility, for fear of spooking the market.   In the face of such difficult markets, metal industries are more andmore battling to take business away from one another. Auto hoods,tailpipes, and even beer cans are among the contentious areas. And ifunexpectedly slow growth in China, Europe, or the U.S. brings about a steelglut ahead of schedule, the metal wars could grow very nasty.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Demand for steel remains hearty.   -- World inventories of aluminum have fallen 80% in the past 1 1/2years.   -- China may return as a big customer of American steel.Negatives   -- New steel capacity coming onstream is undermining prices.   -- With higher aluminum prices, producers may restart idle smelters.   -- Labor concessions could hurt steel earnings.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Primary MetalsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Finished SteelCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457READY-ALL JOIN ARMSCash-Rich and eager to merge, defense companies are thrivingBy:By Eric Schine in Los AngelesFinancially speaking, small has been beautiful for the defense industry.For two years, defense companies have produced record profits and soaringstock prices while merging into a smaller, more efficient industry withfewer, bigger players. Year three of Operation Consolidation will bringeven more mergers. ``Everybody is talking to everybody,'' says C. MichaelArmstrong, chief executive of GM Hughes Electronics Corp.   Driving the consolidation is a persistent squeeze by the Pentagon. In1996, procurement outlays should shrink an additional 9%, to $49.7billion--a drop of nearly 50% from the 1987 peak spending year. And despiteyears of contraction, the industry must still reduce capacity by as much as40% over the next several years, according to Wolfgang Demisch, an analystwith BT Securities Corp. Arms exports will help, as the industry's share ofthe world market, now about 52%, should grow modestly. But the biggestgains may be logged by companies pushing forward in promising commercialventures, some based on defense technology.   Leading the consolidation charge will be a handful of large contractors.Analysts predict at least one more merger on the scale of last year'sLockheed Martin Corp. marriage, which created a $23 billion giant.Companies have built cash hoards as a result of cutting costs even fasterthan the Pentagon reduced spending, leaving GM Hughes, Litton, Loral, andothers poised to buy.MARRIAGE-MINDED. Makers of missiles, electronics, and airframes are indemand. Raytheon Co. purchased the fast-growing E-Systems last year for$2.3 billion and could easily spend an additional $1 billion in 1996. GMHughes, with some $5 billion in buying power, could swallow the defenseportfolio of a TRW or a Rockwell International, each accounting for about$3 billion in annual sales. But virtually every industry sector willattract shoppers. In 1995, General Dynamics Corp. paid just $300 millionfor Bath Iron Works Corp. and its $2 billion shipbuilding backlog.   One megadeal, sources say, could combine Boeing Co. and McDonnellDouglas Corp. That would be a potent combination: McDonnell's $10.1 billionin government sales with Boeing's 58% stake in the world commercial planemarket. It would solve each company's perennial weakness: Boeing covetsmilitary orders, such as McDonnell's recent $18 billion award for C-17transport planes. And McDonnell needs a commercial partner to counterEurope's Airbus Industrie and a likely threat from upstart Asiancompetitors. Neither company will comment publicly.   While the big companies attract most of the attention, themergers-and-acquisitions market among smaller suppliers is likely to be noless lively. ``The action is moving down the food chain,'' says Jon Kutler,principal of the Los Angeles-based Quarterdeck Investments.HIGH RESOLUTION. Unfortunately for thousands of aerospace and defenseworkers, mergers will mean more layoffs. Even after cutting some 1.3million jobs since the late 1980s, the industry will shrink its workforceby an additional 30% over the next several years, says Robert D. Paulson, aconsultant with McKinsey & Co. Most of the layoffs will come as second-tierplayers bail out or get bought. Two likely candidates: United TechnologiesCorp.'s Sikorsky Aircraft and Textron Inc.'s Bell Helicopter unit.   Conglomerates will take advantage of high defense prices to unloadbusinesses to move in new directions. Westinghouse Electric Corp., forinstance, announced in December that it will sell off its defensebusinesses to help finance its recent $5.4 billion acquisition of CBS Inc.   Entertainment and communications are fueling the defense industry'sgreatest commercial success: After surpassing 1 million subscribers in itsfirst year of operation, Hughes' DirecTV unit has announced plans to expandits satellite-TV service globally. And a consortium that includes LockheedMartin and Raytheon has invested more than $500 million to providehigh-resolution satellite images to real estate agents and farmers,potentially a $2 billion-plus market.   Such reassuring signs, together with the consolidation craze, have WallStreet predicting another year of bulging profits. BT Securities' Demischexpects defense and aerospace profits to rise at least 15% in 1996, toabout $5 billion. Downsizing is painful, but for those who hang on, therewards can be formidable.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Consolidation moves forward: Look for at least one more mega-mergerand continued capacity reduction.   -- Modest growth in the Pentagon's procurement budget is likely, whileoverseas sales could strengthen.Negatives   -- Profit margins will be squeezed as stingier contracts kick in. Thelucrative B-2 bomber and F-22 fighter programs may be stretched or killed.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: prognosis '96: DefenseIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Aircraft, Missiles & PartsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`UNEXCITING MIGHT BE GOOD'Few surprises in the oil patch. but with profits so healthy, who cares?By:By Gary McWilliams in HoustonThe oil patch has made its peace with low prices. Relentless restructuringand cost-cutting are delivering strong cash flow and higher profits despiteanemic pricing. Even in today's oil market, initial public offerings andsecondary stock sales are letting small independents fund new productionand property acquisitions without incurring debt.   Executives are prepared for more of the same in 1996. ``We don't seemany things out there that look any different to us than 1995,'' saysTimothy C. Headington, chief executive of Headington Oil Co. in Dallas, asmall crude-oil producer that has been steadily expanding with cast-offsfrom Exxon, Texaco, and others.   Most important, there's little evidence that prices will take a spill.Oil averaged $18.40 a barrel in 1995, and many forecasters expect it toremain there. ``I see no reason for the 1996 numbers to change by more than25 cents a barrel,'' insists Robert Gillon, senior analyst at marketwatcher John S. Herold Inc. What little encouragement exists is in U.S.natural-gas prices, which should recover to about $1.80 per thousand cubicfeet--up from $1.48 in 1995. That would put them back around 1994 levels.STEADY AS SHE GOES. The major oil companies should see their earnings risea modest 6% in 1996, thanks to a healthy economy's thirst for more oil,says Frederick P. Leuffer, senior energy analyst at Bear, Stearns & Co. Heforesees demand growing next year by about 2%. While hardly as robust ashigh tech, oils look like a safe haven. ``It's lackluster and sort ofunexciting right now,'' says Leuffer. ``But unexciting might be good'' werethe Dow to reverse course.   There are a couple of iffy assumptions in this steady-as-she-goesoutlook. The biggest is that OPEC, which has suffered a steady loss ofworld oil market share, continues to accept the losses. Some analysts areconcerned that OPEC countries may attempt to regain share by boosting theirproduction. Or that Iraq may return with significant new supplies. For now,neither seems likely.   Even if prices were to drop, restructuring and new technology have madeU.S. oil companies more able to cope. The best are finding fresh ways ofexploring and managing. A money-saving technique pioneered by Amoco Corp.and Royal Dutch/Shell Group: pooling their assets in low-profit productionregions. The two are forming a joint company to merge West Texas and NewMexico operations--and slash overlapping costs.3-D IMAGING. Technology continues to lower costs, too (chart). VastarResources Inc., a 1993 spin-off of Arco's U.S. oil and gas operations, saysits exploratory wells now hit pay dirt 60% of the time--as a result oftechnologies such as three-dimensional seismic imaging--compared with only47% of the time using older techniques. What's more, says CEO Michael E.Wiley, ``I think there will be some creative ways [cost-cutting] cancontinue.''   With expenses falling, prices don't have to rise much for productionincreases to flow straight to the bottom line. Next year's outlook is for asolid 7% rise in crude-oil production--with even higher increases forTexaco, Amoco, and Shell. Texaco, which hasn't boosted production fornearly a decade, predicts a 40% production rise within five years, thanksto rich prospects in the North Sea, Latin America, and China.   While petrochemicals were the big contributor to last year's headyprofits at Phillips Petroleum Co. and Amoco, prices have softened--assupply has caught up with demand. The question now: Will China, a hugebuyer that withdrew from the market in 1995, return in 1996? Bob Gower,chief executive at chemical maker Lyondell Petrochemical Co., predictsChina's return could mean a second leg to the chemical boom. ``All theinformation we have suggests we're not at the end of the cycle, but in atransition period,'' he says.   Retailing should continue to deliver profits, too. Continued reshufflingof gasoline outlets--as companies concentrate on specific markets--hasturned the cyclical business into a reliable profit center. ``We're seeingretail margins better than any time in history,'' says James E. Acridge,CEO of Giant Industries Inc., a Scottsdale (Ariz.) refiner andSouthwest-area retailer. For years, stock analysts urged Giant to quit thebusiness. No longer. ``We're smart guys all of a sudden,'' he says. Stableprices and lower costs are making a lot of people look smart these days.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Firmer gas pricing and savings from corporate restructurings shouldproduce stable profits.   -- Advances in technology are lowering costs for exploration anddrilling.   -- Gasoline retailing profit margins are at historic highs.Negatives   -- Petrochemical profits may soften further, cutting refining margins.   -- OPEC could seek to recoup markets from non-OPEC suppliers.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Energy: Coal, Crude Oil, Gas, PetroleumRefiningIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Oil And Gas ExplorationCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TIME TO REAP GLOBAL REWARDSWith demand and output growing, the U.S. could again dominate worldmarketsBy:By Greg Burns in ChicagoCorn and soybean farmer Robert Mullins doesn't get excited too easily. Butfrom where he sits on an 1,800-acre spread in rural Shabbona, Ill., theexport outlook is cause for celebration: ``Spectacular,'' he says. ``It'sreally coming alive.''   The next year could bring an export bonanza for Mullins and otherfarmers, as U.S. agriculture begins dominating world markets again. TheU.S. share of agricultural trade will rise to about 21% in 1996 afterfalling as low as 16.7% in 1986. The value of U.S. exports will push up tonearly $60 billion (chart), thanks to booming demand, reduced global tradebarriers, and a more competitive U.S. Farm Belt. U.S. farmers have longconsidered exports the missing link in their pursuit of higher prices: ``IfMother Nature cooperates, and we get a good crop, we could have the fullpackage for a change,'' says Mullins.   In 1995, Mother Nature had other ideas. Heavy rains delayed springplanting through much of the Midwest grain belt. Two months later, a summerheat wave baked the earth rock hard. Then a killing frost in late Septemberput a chill on the autumn harvest. With the crop stunted and plagued bydisease, production of corn plunged from 10 billion bushels in 1994 to 7.3billion in '95, sending U.S. corn stockpiles to 20-year lows. For the year,corn futures prices had soared 51% as of Dec. 14, soybeans 31%, and wheat25%. Big rewards went to farmers who produced decent crops in spite of theweather, then held out for the best prices late in the year. But predictingsuch explosive rallies can be tricky: ``With our reserves of feed grains athistoric lows, it makes the markets more volatile,'' says Patrick H. Arbor,chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade.SHRINKING SET-ASIDES. Still, the near-term trend is positive: Supplies havetightened at a time of heavy demand, especially from Asia. Spending by theJapanese, the largest importers of U.S. agricultural products, will reach$11.3 billion in 1996, up from $10.5 billion in 1995, according toprojections from the U.S. Agriculture Dept. South Korea and China,benefiting from robust economies, will increase imports as well. U.S. redmeat, fruit, and vegetables, along with grain, will be sought-aftercommodities. ``We have tremendous export-market potential,'' says analystDavid C. Nelson of NatWest Securities Corp. in New York.   U.S. farmers will be planting fence post to fence post this year. As ofmid-December, the government appeared to be all for it: Proposed reformswould eliminate annual set-aside programs that support prices by idlingcropland. Instead of paying farmers not to farm, the government wouldprovide fixed payments, shrinking each year, based on how much theyreceived in the past. With this change, the amount of corn, wheat, andsoybean acreage in production should jump by about 10% in the comingseason, analysts estimate. As the reforms stood at the end of '95, theywould have little effect on cotton, rice, sugar, peanut, and dairy farmers,who would retain key subsidies.   The additional land for grain crops will be a modest plus for fertilizercompanies such as IMC Global, Freeport-McMoRan, and Potash. But the biggestpotential for those companies lies overseas. In China, for example, averagegrain yields run about 50% behind those of the U.S. Yet rapid economicgrowth has the huge Chinese population clamoring for a better diet. Thesimplest way to boost yields: more fertilizer. The less developed worldwill be pouring on the potash, says Wendell F. Bueche, chief executiveofficer of IMC. ``There's nothing more dangerous than hungry people. You'vegot to keep your population well-fed,'' he says.   Other nations' efforts to improve farming techniques won't threaten U.S.market share right away. Greater use of fertilizer, pesticide, and hybridseed, as well as increased mechanization, could level the playing fieldsomeday. But the U.S. retains a big advantage in low-cost production. Andthe demand is huge. China's consumption is projected to grow even fasterthan its yields. And the former Soviet Union--a potentially hugecompetitor--has seen its output crash along with the rest of its economyover the past five years, with no comeback in sight.   Even if the U.S. produces a bumper crop in 1996, many bins will remainempty: ``We're not going to be flush with supply for at least severalgrowing seasons,'' predicts Daniel W. Basse of the AgResource consultancyin Chicago. For the rest of this decade, the world will be depending onU.S. farmers.Prognosis '96Positives   -- With world grain supplies at record lows and a farm bill thatencourages greater production, U.S. farmers will plant fence post to fencepost.   -- Export demand for agricultural products will soar.Negatives   -- With less government protection, farmers will be vulnerable to tradeproblems.   -- Uncertainty over the Farm Bill could complicate planting plans.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: AgricultureIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: U.S. Farm ExportsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IT'S A GOOD YEAR TO GET HITCHED'96 could be tough, so papermakers will continue to mergeBy:By Seanna Browder in SeattleFor a few crazy months early in 1995, making paper was akin to printingmoney. As demand outran supply, prices for white paper took their mostdramatic leap since World War II. The jump of 38% per ton in Dean WitterReynolds Inc.'s paper and paperboard composite index drove up profits anestimated 180% for 1995 at the 19 largest wood and paper companies. Aspaper executives tell it, the temptation to add new capacity was almostunbearable. But remembering a binge that turned to bust earlier in thedecade, they resisted. ``The memories are still fresh of what it feels likein a down cycle with too much capacity,'' says Lynn Michaelis, WeyerhaeuserCo.'s director of marketing and economic research.   Good thing. Fearing ever-higher prices, customers stockpiled paper. Bysummer, the bloated inventories undermined the sky-high prices, and theytumbled an average of 11%. Even without big new investments, the AmericanForest & Paper Assn. expects production capacity for pulp and paper to rise3% in 1996, largely because of efficiency improvements. And that may beenough to push prices down, says Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Sherman Chao.Chao predicts that prices of pulp and paper could decline as much as 19% in1996 on steady volume. This spells lower profits, though nothing resemblingthe industry's dive in the early '90s.   Without any hope for booming demand, expect paper and pulp companies tospend 1996 cleaning up balance sheets or plowing ahead with industryconsolidation. ``In our business, it is more favorable to buy assets thanbuild new plants,'' says John A. Georges, International Paper Co.'s chiefexecutive.ELECTION YEAR. Acquisitions already are rolling. Kimberly-Clark Corp.gobbled up Scott Paper Co. for $9.4 billion in December. Earlier in theyear, International Paper agreed to buy Federal Paper Board for $3.5billion, and paid $1.15 billion for a controlling stake in Carter HoltHarvey, New Zealand's largest timber-plantation owner. Boise Cascade soldits Rainy River Forest Products unit to Canada's Stone-Consolidated andacquired a 6.4% interest in Stone. In 1996, look for plenty more deals, asthe powerhouses buy slices of global markets and extend their reach overraw materials.   As the year begins, demand for white paper is lolling at 7% belowyear-ago levels. Demand should recover smartly in 1996, especially incoated papers used in glossy advertising, which should be bolstered by aPresidential election and the Atlanta Olympics. ``The coated grades areholding their own,'' says Paul C. Latta, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie inSeattle. Newsprint, though, which climbed 40% in price from 1994 to 1995,could be headed for a fall. Inventories are at record levels, and highprices are dampening demand.   Recycling should continue to attract much of the growth in the pulpindustries. Minimills, which convert old cardboard into pulp, areproliferating as such companies as Weyerhaeuser and Boise Cascade Corp.expand. Recycled materials should jump 26% in 1996, while production ofmarketwood pulp--the product of virgin wood chips--rises just 0.3%,according to the American Forest & Paper Assn. The extra pulp will go intoproducing more linerboard, kraft paper, and corrugated paper, creating aplentiful supply of those products and damping their prices, says LarryKatz of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore.HOUSEBOUND. The lumber industry, meanwhile, is struggling against competingmaterials and a surge of imports. Canadian lumber now accounts for around35% of the U.S. market, up from 28% in 1989. At the same time, growingnumbers of builders are substituting steel for wood, with steel-framehousing growing from 500 to 80,000 houses in the past four years. And totalhousing starts will rise only modestly in 1996, to around 1.4 million. Allthat should spell a continued slump in lumber prices.   Meanwhile, the wood industry will press ahead with such promisingengineered products as oriented strand board, a cheap new kind offiberboard. By 1998, there should be over 7 billion feet of oriented strandboard capacity, up from zero in 1988, estimates L. Pendleton Siegel, CEO ofPotlatch Corp., based in San Francisco. This should claim fully 50% of thefiberboard capacity, prompting a brawl. ``There's going to be a bloodymarket for the next two years,'' says Siegel. So don't be surprised to seea few of the losers get gobbled up by the industry giants.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Demand for coated paper used in advertising should be bolstered bythe Presidential election and Olympic Games.   -- Producers avoided bringing on fresh capacity when prices soared.Negatives   -- Mills making cheap, new engineered wood products will prompt a brawlin the fiberboard market.   -- The lumber industry faces intense competition from Canadianproducers.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Forest ProductsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Paper And PaperboardCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WEB KEEPS SPREADINGThe new market should grow 100% and create even greater opportunitiesBy:By Neil Gross, with Amy Cortese, in New YorkNetscape Navigator. Java. Yahoo. These pioneering products and services forusing the World Wide Web--and their creators--stole the headlines in 1995.But Web software is still just a blip on the software radar screen. In1996, Web-related programs--from browsers such as the Navigator to``firewalls'' that protect corporate data--will be worth less than 1% ofthe $100 billion-plus global software market, says Hambrecht & Quist Inc.analyst J. Neil Weintraut (chart).   What the numbers don't show, however, is the subterranean shock wave theWeb has sent across the software industry. Not only is the potentialhuge--with annual growth of 100%, sales of Internet programs could hit $4billion in 2000, Weintraut reckons--but the rush of millions of PC usersinto cyberspace could change every aspect of the software business. Therace to cater to cybernauts has unleashed the biggest epidemic of startupfever seen in years. And companies such as Microsoft, IBM, and Oracle arenow scrambling to make the Internet part of their core strategies.   Once again, the software industry is exuberantly reinventing itself.Indeed, the Internet revolution comes as growth in other softwarecategories is slowing. Sales of mainframe programs have been bumping alongat single-digit growth rates, and Anthony Picardi, a group vice-presidentat International Data Corp., figures the $19.3 billion mainframe softwaremarket will grow less than 2% over the next four years, to $19.6 billion in1999.READY TO JUMP. The huge market for personal computer office``suites''--collections of programs that include spreadsheets, wordprocessing, and presentation graphics programs--is also reachingsaturation. But sales are poised for a 20% cyclical jump in 1996, asmillions of PC users upgrade to Windows 95, predicts Goldman, Sachs & Co.analyst Rick G. Sherlund. The hottest market will remain software forso-called client-server computing--which should grow at 40%, he figures.   All told, says IDC's Picardi, the global market for packagedsoftware--about 75% of it made in America--will grow 10% in 1996, to $102billion. The number would be bigger if not for mainframe software, whichmakes up nearly 20% of worldwide sales. ``Other industries would die for asimilar growth rate,'' Picardi says.   And what about the new ``Webware''? In 1995, businesses set up Web siteslike periscopes, to see what was going on. This year, as they toy with theidea of electronic commerce across the Net, many companies will start usinginternal Web sites as windows into their own networks--creating``intranets.'' Says analyst Rich Edwards at Robertson, Stephens & Co. inSan Francisco: ``Every software company will have to participate.''   No question, intranets are coming. Corporate computer managersincreasingly see Web pages as a means to inexpensively publish and shareinformation internally. This is very much what Lotus Development Corp. hadin mind with Notes, a ``groupware'' program that helps teams of employeesshare documents or business applications simultaneously over a network. Onthe Net, much of this can be done on shared Web ``pages''--for a fractionof what it costs to buy, install, and customize Notes. Lotus, acquired byIBM for $3 billion last summer, is furiously rejiggering Notes for theNet.   Meanwhile, Web software startups--including Netscape CommunicationsCorp.--can cash in. Companies such as Cambridge (Mass.)-based VermeerTechnologies Inc. and OpenMarket Inc. should do a brisk business sellingsoftware that helps companies build and maintain Web sites.   The Web is also driving demand for new programming tools such asobject-oriented software languages. Versant Object Technology in MenloPark, Calif., ParcPlace-Digitalk in Sunnyvale, Calif., and Steven P. Jobs'sNeXT Computer are tailoring their programs--which let programmers buildsoftware from reusable chunks of code--to run across the Internet. Theupshot: Sales of object-oriented programs should double from this year's$300 million, according to IDC.   This explosion of Web activity has forced most software giants torethink their game plans. Microsoft Corp. is building Internet links intoall of its software products, from office suites to operating systems, andthe software giant is licensing Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Java programminglanguage. IBM has also made the Internet a priority: Big Blue has createdan Internet software unit. Oracle is offering a family of Web programs,including a ``browser'' and Web versions of its database software.   One reason industry executives and analysts gush over cyberspace: It isone of the few domains where Microsoft is not dominant. A quick look at thepackaged software market explains why that matters. Most of this year'sgrowth in office suites will go directly to Microsoft, which owns about 90%of the $3 billion market. In addition, a large portion of multimediaCD-ROMs sold this year will be Microsoft titles. Goldman's Sherlund figuresMicrosoft's net will hit $2.2 billion in calendar 1996--up 20% over lastyear--on sales of $8.7 billion, up 16%.SOUPED UP. Another place where Microsoft has not been able to dominate isclient-server computing. In 1996, big corporations will continue todownsize their computer operations from mainframes to networks ofservers--usually souped-up PCs or Unix workstations--and PC ``clients.'' Inthe process, they'll pump billions of dollars into client-server databasesfrom Sybase, Informix, and industry leader Oracle, whose sales will jump40% in 1996, to $4.9 billion, predicts Sherlund.   Microsoft is far from discouraged in client-server software. A serverversion of Windows NT is replacing Unix on many corporate networks and thesoftware giant expects strong sales in 1996 from its long-awaitedrelational database upgrade, called SQL Server 6.0. It is expected to sellfor a fraction of the price of Oracle, Sybase, and Informix programs. And,Microsoft plans to package SQL Server with other server programs, such assystems management packages, and offer the bundles at steep discounts.   Mainframe software vendors have also hopped on the client-serverbandwagon. Take Computer Associates International Inc. The Islandia (N.Y.)software maker's revenue from client-server software grew 79% in the firsthalf of 1995 from a year earlier, while mainframe software sales--still 70%of the company--grew just 18%.   Continued corporate downsizing is another boon to software makers.Having already stripped away layers of middle managers, many largecompanies are trying to squeeze out further efficiencies. One way is tojunk disparate computer systems that run various operating units.``Integrated enterprise software,'' supplied by the likes of SAP, Baan, andOracle, does the job (box). Another way to boost efficiency: automatingcustomer support. Newly public companies such as Vantive, Clarify, andRemedy have software that creates electronic files, or ``cases,'' from eachcustomer query or complaint. Later, anyone in sales, marketing, or customersupport can call up the entire history of the transaction. Hambrecht &Quist's Weintraut figures sales of such ``customer interaction systems,''roughly $400 million in 1995, could grow to $3 billion by 2000.   Merger mania swept through software in 1995 and is likely to continue in1996. Computer Associates bought Legent, IBM bought Lotus and, in December,SoftKey International Inc. pulled off a hostile deal to take over LearningCo. On Dec. 20, Informix Corp. bid for Illustra Information Technologies.But, with the Net spawning new startups every day, for every company thatgets merged out of existence, two new ones are bound to appear.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Windows 95 will spark demand for educational, entertainment, andbusiness software.   -- Businesses are rushing onto the Web, spawning markets such as digitalcommerce.Negatives   -- Diversity in desktop software will shrink as Microsoft's clout growsand Apple's shrinks.   -- Heavy discounting of software suites--and growing developmentcosts--will make life harder for small players.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Software & Data ProcessingIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: World Wide Web SoftwareCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457YOUR DATA SHOULD MEET MY DATABy:By Neil Gross in New York, with Gail Edmondson in ParisHark back to the old days in the computer industry--about two years ago. Asalesperson at Digital Equipment Corp. could drill down in a companydatabase to fish out technical specs for a customer. But the data producedmight not match what a Digital inventory manager kept separately on herdesktop computer, resulting in annoying delays while users cross-checkedtheir information.   That's why Digital and dozens of other companies are hot on so-called``integrated enterprise software.'' The idea is to junk all the old``legacy'' systems that separately handle a large company's customerorders, inventory, shipping, and logistical information, and replace themwith a single set of programs to run the company. That way, all the datalook the same, regardless of who's tapping in or where they work.   Large multinationals already have installed billions of dollars' worthof these systems. This has flooded the coffers of industry leaders SAP inGermany and Baan in Holland. Americans missed the first wave, but nowOracle Corp., Microsoft Corp., and others are plunging in. The sector ispoised to grow 14% worldwide, to $11.1 billion in 1996, according toInternational Data Corp.   The market for related services is a gold mine, too. Deloitte & Touche'sconsulting arm rakes in $200 million a year advising SAP customers. It's``a phenomenal success,'' says Darvis Cormier, a D&T internationaldirector.   Such services don't come cheap: A switchover can cost a largemanufacturer $100 million, making it ``the most expensive systems decisiona company has ever made,'' says Dick J. Fishburn, chief information officerof Digital, which is installing SAP software.    And if your company buys such a system, your integration problemsaren't instantly solved, warns Vinnie Mirchandani, an analyst with GartnerGroup, based in Stamford, Conn. He calls enterprise systems ``a 40%solution masquerading as a 100% solution.'' Still, a 40% solution is betterthan none. And that should put plenty of wind underneath the wings ofsoftware and services companies in this hot niche.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THIS YEAR, SERVERS WILL BE KINGPCs are everywhere. Now the spotlight is on machines that can link themBy:By John W. Verity in New YorkFor more than a decade now, the computer industry has been driven by avision of giving everyone his or her own computer. Large organizations haverushed to put a PC onto every desktop and stopped expanding their budgetsfor mainframes. Engineers switched in droves from sharing minicomputers torunning their own workstations. Families have scooped up millions of PCs,too, for use in home offices and to entertain the kids.   Now, with personal computers seemingly everywhere, the spotlight isshifting back to larger computers--the kind that can do work for manydifferent people at once. Collectively known as network servers--everythingfrom souped-up PCs selling for $10,000 to mainframes andsupercomputer-class systems costing millions--big iron will be in for themost technical change and competitive action during 1996 and the followingfew years. ``Servers are regaining their place as the fulcrum of businesscomputing,'' says Gregory Garry, analyst at Dataquest Inc. ``They're thecenterpiece of the network.''   Servers also remain the sweet spot of the computer market, offeringgross margins of 30% to 50%, vs. the 15% or less seen in PCs. ``Servers areclearly the healthiest segment of the computer industry,'' says LauraConigliaro, computer analyst at Prudential Securities Inc. In corporations,small servers store files and move E-mail for departments. Giant serverscan act as data warehouses--massive libraries of detailed product, sales,and financial information gathered from across an organization's many othercomputers. The World Wide Web, with close to 100,000 servers in place andhundreds more being attached every week, is also a major contributor toserver demand.PRICE-CUTTING. All told, International Data Corp. (IDC) estimates thatshipments of servers based on PCs--machines using Intel chips or souped-upversions of Apple's Macintosh--will grow 35%, to 1.05 million units, from777,000 in 1995. Shipments of servers based on proprietary hardwaredesigns, from companies such as Hewlett-Packard Co. and Sun MicrosystemsInc., will increase about 15% in 1996.   At the same time, PC sales will remain strong. Dataquest estimates thatU.S. consumption of PCs in 1996 will hit 25.6 million units, up 16% from1995 (chart). Worldwide consumption will grow by 19%, to 68.7 millionunits. Price-cutting will stunt growth in dollar terms: IDC reckons totalU.S. spending on PCs will be up only 12.6% over 1995.   The news in other categories is mixed. Workstation shipments areprojected to grow from 847,000 units in 1995 to 982,500 units in 1996.Sales of IBM-compatible mainframes will fall, from $7.5 billion in 1995 to$7.1 billion in 1996, as a line of cheaper machines based onmicroprocessors grows more popular.THE PREFAB FOUR. Although booming, the server market may be in for somejarring changes in 1996, thanks to Intel Corp. Along with its newtop-of-the-line P6, or Pentium Pro, microprocessor, Intel has launched acomplete circuit board containing four P6 chips. This Quad P6 board isdesigned specifically as a building block for low-cost servers. Like theprefabricated motherboards from Intel that helped relatively small PackardBell and Gateway 2000 beat IBM and Compaq to market with the firstPentium-based PCs, the Quad P6 board could put lots of new players into theserver business overnight and change the market's economics. Bottom line:Margins will begin to resemble those of the cookie-cutter desktop-PCmarket.   Intel's Quad P6 won't just affect the low end of the server business.Companies such as Sequent Computer, Chen Systems, and Data General plan togang as many as a dozen of the boards together to produce systems that canoutperform traditional mainframe computers for a fraction of the cost.PaineWebber Inc. computer analyst Stephen K. Smith figures that P6-basedservers will sell for less than half the price of proprietary servers atthe same performance level. It's ``one of the most significant hardwaredevelopments to impact the computer industry since Compaq cloned the IBMPC,'' he says.   Luckily for HP, Sun, and other companies making non-Intel-based servers,Quad P6-based machines won't start shipping in volume until late 1996, andthere will be a lag before software can be readied to take advantage ofthem. But the warning shots have been fired for another major battle in anindustry that seems to thrive on turmoil.Prognosis '96Positives   -- As computers get cheaper, they will become even more central to theeconomy.   -- Electronic commerce is fueling demand for high-capacity Web servers.Negatives   -- Standardized parts and designs will gnawat the profitability ofmidrange and large computers.   -- Personal-computer makers will feel more pressure from Intel's gradualentry into PC manufacturing.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Computer Equipment & PeripheralsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Personal ComputersCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SILICON GOES FROM PEAK TO PEAKIn a boom that could last a decade, turning out enough chips is the bigproblemBy:By Robert D. Hof in San Francisco and Otis Port in New YorkFor the companies that plant those teensy transistors on the silicon chipsfrom which personal computers and other electronic gadgets sprout, 1996shapes up as the fourth consecutive year of 20%-plus growth--26%, accordingto the Semiconductor Industry Assn. That's remarkable. Chipmaking has longgyrated through boom-and-bust cycles every three years or so. And whilegrowth in 1996 won't match 1995's spectacular 40% sales jump, analystsstill look for chipmakers to post per-share earnings gains averaging 29%.   The outlook is for steady growth until 2000, and perhaps beyond.``There's going to be a black hole for computing power for at least adecade,'' says Gordon A. Campbell, chairman of startup 3Dfx InteractiveInc., which makes chips that accelerate onscreen graphics for multimediaPCs. The optimism isn't limited to Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. VladiCatto, chief economist at Texas Instruments Inc., says the industry mightexpand by 20% a year for the next two decades. By comparison, since TI madethe world's first microchip 36 years ago, the industry has averaged 15%annual gains.OFF THE ROLLER COASTER? To be sure, not every sector is booming. The growthrate for multimedia PCs seems to be slowing, for example. No matter. Mostchipmakers won't be able to satisfy demand anyhow unless the whole PCbusiness falters. ``The rate at which semiconductors are going into [awidening profusion of products] has just skyrocketed,'' says G. DanHutcheson, president of chip watcher VLSI Research Inc. This ever-expandingbase of customers means producers are becoming less vulnerable to a hiccupin any one market, adds Jean-Philippe Dauvin, chief economist at Europeanchipmaker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics. That's a key reason why theindustry believes its roller-coaster cycles are a thing of the past. Whilechipmakers can't escape broad economic swings, these ups and downs will bea merry-go-round ride by comparison.   Because PCs remain the main engine boosting silicon's rocket for now,the immediate beneficiaries will be the makers of dynamic random-accessmemory (DRAM) chips and, of course, Intel Corp. New PCs gobble two to fourtimes as much memory as older models, so DRAM shipments could soar 40% thisyear. As for Intel, look for the microprocessor king to sell 25% more``brain'' chips this year than in 1995.   Despite fatter sales, Intel cautions that its incredible 55% grossmargins could shrink, because of its rapidly growing business in PCmotherboards and plug-in boards. On the other hand, some analysts sayIntel's profits could actually improve. Its chip sales are shiftingdramatically from 486 microprocessors to higher-priced Pentium models(chart), and Intel may pare prices less aggressively. That's becauseup-and-coming microprocessor rivals such as Cyrix and NexGen--soon tobecome a division of Advanced Micro Devices--aren't cranking out enoughchips to cramp Intel's style. Advanced Micro Devices Inc. recently said itsfourth-quarter profits would fall short because it isn't grabbing as much486 business from Intel as it hoped.   NexGen Inc. and Cyrix Corp. are hardly the only companies facing acapacity squeeze. In fact, lack of capacity will rob the chip industry ofseveral percentage points of potential growth this year. ``Everybody'sstraining just to get enough fabs out,'' says Ray Stata, chairman of AnalogDevices Inc. ``Fab'' is chip-speak for wafer-fabrication plant, thesqueaky-clean factories that make semiconductors.   Scarce capacity means continuing pain for the fabless companies thatoften design the industry's leapfrog chips. To guarantee production oftheir next wonder circuits, several fabless companies are buying into chipproducers. Cirrus Logic Inc., the biggest fabless company, plans to spend$2 billion over the next five years. Part of the money will go for a 15%stake in United Silicon, a new chip factory in Taiwan.   Wafer fabs now cost as much as $1.3 billion each, and the industry willneed to pour the foundation for a new one every week, figures TI's Catto,if chips are to reach the $331 billion level predicted for 2000 by marketresearcher Dataquest Inc. However, until investors share the industry'snewfound confidence that chips have outgrown their boom-and-bust days, thestock market could gum up Dataquest's long-range timetable. Absent that,the silicon horizon has a bright golden glow.Prognosis '96Positives   -- PCs continue to boom, driving sales of memory chips and Intel'sPentium microprocessors.   -- Use of chips in a growing variety of products will smooth thetraditional boom-and-bust cycles.Negatives   -- Capacity shortages could hurt producers of memory chips andchipmakers that contract out.   -- Investor jitters about possible market slowdowns could sink stocksand limit chipmakers' investing in new plants.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: SemiconductorsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: MicroprocessorsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE NOT-SO-CALM BEFORE THE STORMAll hell will break loose when deregulation hits. For now, business isstrongBy:By Catherine Arnst in New YorkThe telecommunications industry is setting off on a great adventure in1996: The forces of competition are being unleashed in all parts of thebusiness for the first time. However, most of the year will be aprofit-boosting calm before the storm--``the last good year beforecompetition starts in earnest,'' says Simon W. Flannery, an analyst at J.P.Morgan Securities Inc. ``The cable companies rolling out telephones, theBells getting into cable, PCS [wireless] systems being switched on--all thethings we're just guessing at at the moment will start coming into focus in'96.''   Congress had tried for two decades to pass legislation that wouldoverhaul the 1934 rules regulating telecommunications. Finally, at the tailend of 1995, Congress was able to write a sweeping telecom-deregulationbill that allows long-distance carriers, local phone companies, andcable-TV operators to enter one another's markets. And even withoutCongress, about half the states are freeing up local phone markets. By nextJanuary, competition should be busting out all over.   The telecom legislation allows long-distance and cable-TV operators intothe local phone market immediately. Local monopolies can offer longdistance and cable TV outside their regions at once, and in-region as soonas competition is established. If there are no hitches, Bell Atlantic Corp.Vice-Chairman James G. Cullen predicts that consumers in some parts of thecountry will be able to choose a local phone company by the end of 1996.GRAB A PARTNER. As all the industry's players scramble to ready themselvesfor this brave new world, expect to see a flurry of alliances,partnerships, and outright acquisitions. Bell Atlantic Corp. and NynexCorp., which have teamed up in three wireless and entertainmentpartnerships already, are likely to offer long- distance together as well.Analysts say other such pairings are probable. And look for buyouts ofsmall long-distance and alternative-access companies such as WorldCom andMFS Communications.   In the meantime, business is booming. Demand for Internet access, thegrowth of telecommuting, the huge popularity of cellular phones, and asurge in data transmission all make telephony a growth business.Long-distance calling traffic accelerated by 8% in 1995 and is expected togrow another 8% this year. Local phone companies should add access lines ata rate of 3% this year, compared with 1% to 2% earlier in the decade.   The result: Phone companies are bringing in money like never before.Steven R. Yanis of Oppenheimer & Co. expects revenues for the three biggestlong-distance carriers--AT&T, MCI Communications, and Sprint--to grow by8.2% in 1996, to $118 billion, while the seven Baby Bells should see 3.2%growth in revenues, to $96 billion.   Once competition starts, price wars will break out and margins will beunder pressure. Plus, the phone companies have to start getting ready forcompetition now, an expensive task. Market researcher Forrester ResearchInc. in Cambridge, Mass., predicts that the top local and long-distancecarriers will need to spend $30 billion over the next three years tobankroll their competitive strategies. J.P. Morgan estimates that capitalspending is expected to increase to $130 per phone line, from $120 per linein 1995.   The local phone monopolies in particular must develop a competitivemindset. ``They really need to get much more focused on customer service,''says Larry R. Levitan, managing partner for Andersen Consulting'scommunications group. For proof, just look at a new study from Deloitte &Touche: Nearly 40% of corporate telecom managers say they would be likelyto switch from their traditional local-service provider if given a choiceof comparable quality. That's why industry analysts think phone companieswith large rural territories and few corporate customers, such as SBCCommunications Inc. and U S West Inc., are best positioned for thederegulated world, since they are the least likely to face competition.   With the Bells freed to enter new markets such as long distance andcable, deregulation should be a ``win-win'' for everyone in the long run,says Yanis. ``I truly believe that competition will increase the size ofthe whole market. This will not be a zero-sum game. It's a positive-sumgame.'' And the starting gun is about to go off.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Deregulation will unleash a wave of investment and creativity.   -- Demand is booming. Long-distance usage keeps rising, and householdsare adding second lines in record numbers.Negatives   -- While deregulation is in sight, state and federal agencies must workout hundreds of details first.   -- Carriers will have to spend billions of dollars to get into oneanother's markets.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: TelecommunicationsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Long DistanceCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBUST AND READY TO BRAWLDrugmakers are flush, so more mergers--even hostile ones--may be on thehorizonBy:By Joseph Weber in PhiladelphiaWith stock prices setting records and earnings climbing at double-digitrates again, pharmaceutical executives are heading for maybe their bestyear since the roaring '80s. More unit sales, more freedom to raise prices,and savings from restructurings are hypercharging growth. ``We're not inthe doldrums of the early '90s anymore,'' says Robert L. Andrews, aDeloitte & Touche managing director.   Heavy margin pressure, sharp staff cuts, and deep discounting are fadingas fast as memories of President Clinton's election-year attacks ondrugmaker price-gouging. For 10 leading U.S. and European drugmakers, netincome this year may rise as much as 12%, to $18.6 billion, while salesclimb 8%, to $106.2 billion, estimates Cowen & Co. analyst Stephen Scala.The healthiest companies could repeat 1995's 20% earnings gains.   Yet execs can't afford to be complacent. Mergers have reshaped theindustry, and more may be on the way. The biggest companies gain an edge infunding research and development, bargaining with managed-care buyers, andcompeting globally. By mid-December, the industry had tallied $41.2 billionin deals, up from 1994's record $36.1 billion, according to Windhover'sdirectory, 1995 Health Care Strategist.TWISTED ARMS. Foreign buyers set the pace in 1995, led by Glaxo Holdings'record-breaking $14 billion purchase of Burroughs Wellcome, Hoechst's $7.1billion acquisition of Marion Merrell Dow, and the stock-for-stock mergerof Upjohn and Pharmacia, valued at $7 billion. Hostile deals, such asJohnson & Johnson's $1.8 billion takeover of Cordis, a maker of cardiologydevices, could bring an unwilling partner or two to the altar this year.Says Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. analyst Neil B. Sweig: ``The whitegloves are off.''   Who's next? Industry titans Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and Eli Lilly & Co.figure prominently in Wall Street speculation as potential acquirers of themidsize likes of Monsanto Co.'s Searle & Co. unit or perennial mergertarget Warner-Lambert Co. Well-heeled Swiss drugmakers Ciba-Geigy Ltd. andSandoz Ltd. also make likely buyer lists. Japanese drugmakers, whosestockholders are wrestling with tough times generally, could be alluring toglobal buyers.   Acquisitions aren't always the right tonic. Merck, SmithKline Beecham,and Lilly are still chasing a payoff from pharmacy-benefit managers, thedistribution operations for which they together have paid $13 billion since1993. At the same time, Rite Aid Corp. and other drugstore chains arebuilding competing units. After shelling out $6.6 billion in 1993 for MedcoContainment Services Inc., a big benefit manager, Merck & Co. has turnedcool toward all kinds of mergers. Says CEO Raymond V. Gilmartin: ``Majoracquisitions would be a diversion for us.''STICKER SHOCK. Acquisition fever may be tempered, too, by slightly morepricing freedom. ``Companies are less inclined to give discounts and reduceprices,'' says Wayne P. Yetter, chief executive of Astra Merck Inc. Indeed,some prices--chiefly to retail drugstore buyers not covered by insuranceplans--have been climbing faster than inflation.   The industry's financial health conceals a shortfall of novelblockbusters. While drugmakers squeeze ever more sales out of big producerssuch as cholesterol-fighters and antidepressants, few have offered trulynew potential $1 billion sellers recently. One likely exception: theosteoporosis treatment Fosamax, a drug from Italy's Istituto Gentili beingmarketed by Merck in the U.S. Another potential big winner is J&J'sRisperdal, a schizophrenia treatment.   Drugmakers aren't helping their cause by limiting R&D. ThePharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America says the 8% growth inindustry R&D spending in 1995 was the lowest in more than two decades. ``Iworry that by reducing the rate of increase in research, we are going toreduce the opportunities'' for new drugs, says Schering-Plough CEO RichardJ. Kogan. He says his company will outpace its peers in 1996, boosting its$650 million in R&D spending by more than 10%.   R&D cannot be neglected. Pfizer Inc. credits new drugs for boosting itsnet income an estimated 20% last year, to about $1.6 billion, on a 23% risein sales, to $10.2 billion. This year, analysts expect Pfizer to nearlymatch that growth. Luckily for Pfizer's competitors, this won't be the yearthey'll have to pay for underinvestment. There's enough right with the drugbusiness that there will be plenty of gains to go around.Prognosis '96Positives   -- More providers are using medicine instead of surgery orpsychotherapy.   -- Pressure against price hikes is easing, helping broaden profitmargins.   -- Wider uses are being found for big sellers such ascholesterol-reducers.Negatives   -- With few new blockbusters, drugmakers will battle to sell more ofwhat's already in the medicine cabinet.   -- Merging companies are jeopardizing their futures by cutting R&D.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: PharmaceuticalsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Drug ProfitsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE MEDIA CIRCUS IS STILL IN TOWNThrills and chills as global demand keeps the buying frenzy goingBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesIt has been more than a decade since television host Monty Hall lookedbehind that curtain for the last time. But in the frenzied media world,every day seems to be a rerun of Let's Make a Deal. Walt Disney Co. plunkeddown $19 billion in stock and cash to buy Capital Cities/ABC Inc.Westinghouse Electric Corp. bought CBS Inc. News Corp. Chairman RupertMurdoch jumped on the Internet, launched a sports channel to rival ESPN,and then made plans to beam TV signals to Latin America. And in cable? Lastyear, a staggering $25 billion in deals were struck, as nearly one in fivesubscribers saw their cable companies change hands.   In 1996, the media dealmaking won't be confined to the TV and moviebusinesses. USA Today publisher Gannett Co. is still on the prowl aftercompleting its $1.7 billion purchase of Multimedia Inc. Other publishingdeals may be in the offing. Spurring on the activity is an unquenchableworldwide thirst for American-made movies and TV programs--and a surprisingrebound in Americans' appetite for the printed word.   Programming and distribution entities will keep getting married in1996--programmers to ensure an outlet for their works, distributors to filltheir pipelines. General Electric Co. is likely to go shopping for partnersagain this year, after failing in 1995 to persuade Disney to buy ahalf-interest in its NBC Inc. unit. Possible candidates: Seagram's MCAsubsidiary, which includes Universal Pictures, or Sony's Hollywood-basedstudios. Microsoft Corp., a partner with NBC in an on-line news channel,could also be a bidder. After buying CBS, Westinghouse is still looking tobolster its programming and could strike an alliance with a Hollywoodstudio as well. ``The idea is to protect yourself from being shut out asthe big get bigger,'' says Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Jessica Reif.NET GAINS. Propelling the movement toward bigness in 1996 is the expectedpassage of the long-awaited federal telecommunications bill. Among otherthings, the legislation would immediately allow cable and telephonecompanies to compete in one another's markets and gradually raise ceilingson the number of radio and TV stations a company can own. That shouldprompt a new wave of acquisitions, says Gene F. Jankowski, managingdirector at Veronis, Suhler & Associates Inc., a New York investment bank.Among those rumored ready to sell is billionaire Ronald O. Perelman, whoseNew World Entertainment Inc. broadcast and production company is loadedwith debt.   Media companies will benefit in 1996 from a robust advertising marketthat for the third year running should outperform the overall economy.Boosted by the Olympic Games in Atlanta and U.S. political campaigns,domestic advertising in all media should grow by 7.8%, to $174 billion,predicts Robert J. Coen, a senior vice-president at ad agencyMcCann-Erickson Worldwide. The four major broadcast networks will be amongthe biggest winners, with a projected 12.5% increase, to $13 billion.NEW SYSTEMS. The ad increase isn't the only good news for networktelevision. After losing audiences to cable and syndicated programming foryears, the number of sets tuned into the networks will stabilize in 1996 atroughly 64% of those viewing TV, predicts Veronis Suhler. But not everynetwork will survive. Time Warner Inc.'s struggling Warner Bros. networkwill likely seek a merger with startup UPN, a joint venture of UnitedBroadcasting and Viacom Inc.'s Paramount Pictures Corp.   Cable television, meanwhile, will seek growth by adding services ratherthan subscribers. After adding 9 million subscribers over the previous fiveyears, the industry's customer base will grow by roughly 1 million in 1996,according to Veronis Suhler. To maintain the cash-flow growth, cablecompanies will need to build systems to battle the telcos, and many cablecompanies will introduce modem services for high-speed data transfer laterin 1996. Other companies, such as Tele-Communications Inc., will moveaggressively overseas into markets with greater potential to addsubscribers.   Foreign companies--which have sat on the sidelines since the disastrousforay of Japanese companies in Hollywood--will also reemerge on theAmerican media scene. The sale of Tur-ner Broadcasting System Inc. to TimeWarner alerted many of them to the dwindling number of companies availableto fill the Information Superhighway with films and TV shows. Dutchelectronics giant Philips' PolyGram entertainment unit will aggressivelyseek an acquisition. So might German media powerhouse Bertelsmann, whichrecently opened a flashy Los Angeles headquarters. One likely target isMGM/UA, which is rising from the ashes with such films as GoldenEye and GetShorty. The studio's owner, French bank Credit Lyonnais, recently hiredinvestment bankers Lazard Freres & Co. to sell off the studio.PAPER PROFITS. Other bidding wars will feature Sony Corp.'s Los Angelesfilm unit and Thorn EMI's record division. Murdoch is a possible bidder forEMI. So is Disney, which has a small record company with few stars. Thebiggest bidding war, however, could center on Sony. After parting ways withU.S. CEO Michael P. Schulhof, Sony is likely to try unloading a piece ofits film company. Sony insiders say Murdoch has expressed interest.Investment bankers say GE is eager to line up more content forbroadcasting. And, despite his frequent denials, Microsoft Chairman WilliamH. Gates III may also be interested.   Hollywood production will increase in 1996 to satisfy the boomingforeign market and domestic cable operators. The year will feature morethan the usual numbers of retreaded oldies. Universal Pictures, with freshcapital from new owner Seagram, will churn out films based on old TV showsMcHale's Navy, Flipper, and Sergeant Bilko. Tom Cruise will headline a filmversion of Mission: Impossible from Viacom's Paramount Pictures unit.   The newspaper business lacks Hollywood's glitz but had a marquee year in1995, with earnings gains of 14.8% at 11 big newspaper publishingcompanies, according to Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette (DLJ) Securities Corp.McCann-Erickson's Coen says that in 1996, advertising revenue will increaseby a modest 5.5%, to $4.25 billion, down from an 11% rise through the firstnine months of 1995. That will dampen industry earnings growth to anaverage of 6.5% in 1996, DLJ says.   Those kinds of returns don't satisfy many newspaper publishers, who saythey need to make drastic cost reductions to ensure their long-term health.``We're starting to see a little breathing room, but not an awful lot,''says Mark H. Willes, Times Mirror Co.'s new CEO. In 1995, Willes cuthundreds of jobs at the flagship Los Angeles Times and closed the New YorkCity edition of Long Island-based Newsday.   Still, newspaper companies are hardly turning their backs on theirprinting presses--high paper prices and the Info Highway notwithstanding.Evidence of that is Gannett's purchase of Multimedia. Also, in 1996, TheNew York Times will launch a Northeastern edition, while the Los AngelesTimes will revive plans to distribute its paper in Washington, D.C.   Why the newfound optimism? For one thing, readership of newspapers is upas the number of Americans 35 and over expands. Those demographics willalso help book and magazine publishers. In 1996, a slew of new specialtymagazines will likely hit the newsstands. Century 21 Real Estate Corp., forinstance, will launch a new home magazine with Hachette FilipacchiMagazines Inc. Book publishers intend to expand their lines to fill theshelves of book superstores and discount chains. Hearst Corp. will soonlaunch its first hardcover line for adults. Even MTV will have its own bookline, geared to the under-35 crowd.   Which media companies will strike the audience's fancy in 1996? That'shard to say. But these days, if you can't produce a hit you can always buythe hitmaker.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The Olympics, the election, and a revived economy should increase TVad revenue by about 8%.   -- Telecom deregulation will spur a burst of investment by phonecompanies in cable TV.   -- Foreign demand for U.S. entertainment remains strong.Negatives   -- Technology disappointments will slow adoption of interactive TV.   -- Smaller players may be shunted aside.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Media/EntertainmentIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Media SpendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BABY BELLS TAKE THEIR FIRST STEPS IN TINSELTOWNBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesAs he stood before his shareholders at Ameritech Corp.'s annual meeting,chatting via a video hookup with Mickey Mouse, Chief Executive Richard C.Notebaert left little doubt that the telephone companies' pin-striped worldhad definitely gone Hollywood. In 1996, in a wide swath of head-to-headconfrontations from San Diego to Chicago, the Baby Bells intend finally tolaunch their attack on the cable-television industry.   The sweeping telecommunications bill in Congress would allow phonecompanies to challenge cable operators outside their home marketsimmediately, and within their regions once they prove their phone businessfaces competition. At first, phone-company offerings won't look all thatdifferent from what TV viewers get now by handing over $40 to $50 eachmonth to their local cable companies. Down the road, however, the phonecompanies hope to beat the cable companies to the interactive market withsuch features as home shopping and games. ``The idea is to outdo the cablecompanies, not just match them,'' says Howard Stringer, chairman of theTele-TV venture that includes three of the seven Baby Bells.   First off, the telcos plan to offer more channels. In Glendale Heights,Ill., Ameritech's network of optical fiber and copper cable will offer 90channels, compared with the local cable operator's current 60. InRiverside, Calif., where the 90 channels will be delivered over the airthrough a system called wireless cable, the reception is expected to besharper. With only 15% of Riverside County receiving cable, Pacific TelesisGroup expects to make inroads by stuffing marketing literature into theweekly phone bills it sends in the area.   The telcos won't lack programming firepower, either. Walt Disney Co., apartner with three of the Baby Bells and GTE Corp. in another jointventure, has assigned top animators to work on tailor-made programming,including a souped-up on-screen guide. As for Tele-TV, Stringer says it hasa production facility ready for action. For phone companies, Hollywood willbe quite a change from selling call-waiting service.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE PATIENT IS STABLE-FOR NOWHealth-care costs are in check, but the industry's upheaval isn't overBy:By Keith H. Hammonds in New YorkA deceptive peace has descended on the nation's $750 billion health-careindustry. There has been no word of a major health-maintenance organizationmerger for months. Hospital giant Columbia/HCA appears too occupieddigesting the acquisitions of years past to indulge its unrelentingappetite. And once again, reform sits deadlocked on Capitol Hill.   But just wait: Beneath the surface, a revolution rages on. ``The pace ofchange is stunning,'' says Dr. W. Allen Schaffer, head of managed care atCIGNA Healthcare Inc. ``We have to reevaluate our strategic assumptionsevery six months.'' Managed-care plans snatched some 5 million Americansfrom their traditional health insurers in 1995, bringing total enrollmentin HMOs to 56 million. Those are powerful numbers, and managed care nowcalls the shots. This year, it likely will force more consolidation thanever.   The industry, still fragmented and unwieldy, remains eminently ripe forrestructuring. Even though health-care inflation has slowed, spendingcontinues to edge upward as a share of the nation's economy (chart).Massive overhead associated with excess capacity remains, and ``the onlyway to slow growth in health-care spending is to debloat the system,'' saysJohn F. Hindelong, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette SecuritiesCorp.   That process is under way. Indeed, employers saw their health-care costsdrop in 1994 and remain flat in 1995 as millions of workers moved intocheaper managed-care plans. Employers' costs will probably rise slightly onaverage in 1996 as fewer additional employees switch to managed care,according to Foster & Higgins consultant John Erb.TEAMING UP. The cost squeeze means more upheaval for doctors and hospitals.``The market works, but it is very painful,'' says Robert L. Montgomery,chief executive at Alta Bates Health System in Berkeley, Calif. Alta Bates,forced to hold managed-care charges flat for a third straight year, hasjoined a hospital consortium to amass a total of 600,000 managed-carepatients--the better to negotiate with ever-larger HMOs. Even big,for-profit chains are looking at admissions increases of only 1% to 3% in1996, says DLJ's Hindelong, though consolidation will help the sector liftearnings by 15% to 20% next year.   The motivation is irresistible: As of Dec. 15, 1995, the industry hadseen a record 433 mergers and acquisitions, according to Securities DataCo. Increasingly, those mergers are crossing industry boundaries--producingnew ``integrated delivery systems'' that put hospitals, doctors, nursinghomes, and others under the same corporate roof. The object: one-stopshopping for managed-care companies, who require access to a broad array ofservices, says Coopers & Lybrand consultant Glenn A. Shively.CRAWLING REFORM. At the same time, HMOs are themselves driving for size,market penetration, and efficiency. Growth certainly won't come from ratehikes: Even the better HMOs will win premium increases of just 1% to 2%this year, says analyst Kenneth Abramowitz of Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.Rather, the HMOs need new bodies. Many will see big revenue gains this yearas more Medicare recipients move into managed-care plans--a shift thatwould accelerate if health-care reform succeeds.   And what of reform? Republicans and Democrats alike want to cut back onpayments to Medicare service providers. And doctors and hospitals face anenormous hit from a proposed provision requiring payment reductions iftotal Medicare spending exceeds budget. The outlook for Medicaid isparticularly cloudy--one reason many insurers are staying away from thebusiness.   In any case, governmental change will prove, as always, far lesspowerful than the market-driven charge for critical mass and market muscle.The resulting shakeout will be dramatic. Industry executives suspect thatAetna Life & Casualty and CIGNA, both on the verge of shedding hunks oftheir property-and-casualty businesses, could spend huge sums to turn theirmiddling health businesses into national HMOs.   Such new players, if well-conceived and adequately funded, couldtransform a compartmentalized industry that until now has fought itsbattles largely within cities or regions. ``By the end of the decade, wewill begin to see the endgame appear,'' says Gennaro J. Vasile, a longtimehospital executive who recently became head of Gemini Consulting Inc.'sNorth American health-care practice. And some fair hints should come evensooner.Prognosis '96Positives   -- For-profit hospitals should continue to gain market share and seeadmissions rise modestly.   -- Well-managed nursing homes will pick up business as hospital stayscontinue to shrink.Negatives   -- Rising cost pressure from managed care, plus lower Medicare andMedicaid rates, will keep a squeeze on margins.   -- Health-care reform hasn't addressed the uninsured, who will put aneven greater strain on the system.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Health-Care ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Health-Care SpendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PICKING UP SPEEDAirlines are finally in the clear--and railroads may link upBy:By Wendy Zellner in DallasTransportation services expect modest growth in 1996, with airlines andrailroads faring best and truckers bringing up the rear. All three sectorsare focusing on improving productivity--and keeping a close eye on themerger scene.   Airline executives are happiest: After five years of losses andretrenchment, the industry has finally recovered. Net profits in 1995totaled about $2 billion, vs. a $279 million loss in 1994. In a sentimentwidely echoed by his peers, Continental Airlines Chief Executive Gordon M.Bethune says: ``It's a pretty rosy-looking '96.''   With traffic expected to grow only about 3% in 1996, airline profitswill hinge on keeping costs in check and capacity usage up. That won't beeasy. Unit costs will rise 1.5% to 2% for the major carriers, after holdingsteady in 1995, says analyst Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber Inc. ``We'vepicked the low-hanging fruit,'' agrees Delta Air Lines Inc. CEO Ronald W.Allen. ``It's going to get tougher from here on out.''   The good news for airlines is that capacity should grow more slowly thantraffic, meaning fuller planes and higher fares. Systemwide capacity forU.S. airlines grew about 2.5% last year, and it's likely to show a similarincrease in '96, estimates David A. Swierenga, chief economist for the AirTransport Assn. That bodes well for fares. True, the rapid expansion ofsuch low-cost carriers as Southwest Airlines Co. and ValuJet Airlines Inc.will help to hold fares down. But Edward P. Gilligan, executivevice-president for American Express Co.'s Travel Management Services,predicts that airfares will rise an average of 3% to 4% this year, withonly limited and carefully targeted discounting.BOLD COMBINATIONS. The airlines' discipline is expected to translate intohigher profits. A bullish Steve Lewins of Gruntal & Co. figures majorairlines' earnings will soar 56% from 1995's modest level. The risingprofits complicate carriers' efforts to wrest major concessions from theirpilots so they can better compete with lower-cost carriers. Still, pilotsat American and Delta have recently announced a willingness to considerwage and work-rule changes on short-haul routes that airlines have beenfarming out to other carriers.   There's still one unsettling question as the industry reaches cruisingaltitude: Will airline mergers mar the flight plan? A new round ofdealmaking could distract execs from rebuilding balance sheets andimproving service. United Airlines Inc. decided last year not to pursue amarriage with USAir Inc. And American says it won't strike first. Still, noone rules out a new wave of merger mania in 1996.   Railroads, in contrast, are already pursuing bold combinations. UnionPacific Corp. is seeking government approval for its $3.9 billionacquisition of Southern Pacific Rail Corp. Its deal comes in response toBurlington Northern Inc.'s $4 billion purchase last year of Santa FePacific Corp., creating, at least for now, the nation's largest railroad.And takeover rumors continue to swirl around companies such as Conrail Inc.Meanwhile, U.S. railroads are expected to be bidders this year in theprivatization of Mexico's railroads.   Even without such deals, investors have much to cheer about. MerrillLynch & Co. analyst Michael H. Lloyd expects modest revenue gains of 4% to5% this year for the major railroads, but operating profits should grow atdouble that pace, thanks to productivity increases and cost-cutting. Thenew Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp., for example, has already slashedjobs and has also identified almost $1 billion in operating cost savingsover the next few years.   Labor remains a wild card as the railroad industry bargains with about adozen unions to reach new contracts. But bargaining is off to a strongstart with a tentative accord with the United Transportation Union,representing 25% of workers.   Truckers are hoping simply to bounce back from a bleak 1995. Theindustry has been hammered by a slowing of U.S. economic growth, a downturnin exports to Mexico, and excess capacity. After a banner 1994, bullishtrucking companies rapidly expanded their fleets with bigger trucks. Now,with softer demand and lackluster earnings, analysts expect a shakeout.Swift Transportation Co., for one, is hoping to benefit: The company hasmade four acquisitions since 1991 and is prowling for more. Truckers willhave to satisfy themselves with such hardscrabbling while railroads andairlines enjoy a relatively smooth ride.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Airline capacity should grow more slowly than traffic, meaning fullerplanes and higher fares.   -- Railroads are boosting productivity with computerization and fasterlocomotives.Negatives   -- Airlines will be hard-pressed to win cost reductions from labor whenprofits are soaring.   -- The trucking industry is suffering from excess capacity.   -- Railroads have yet to sign contracts with about a dozen unions.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Transportation ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: U.S. AirlinesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHERE THERE'S A WILL, THERE ARE MISTAKESBy:EDITED BY AMY DUNKINGrace WeinsteinJacqueline Kennedy Onassis made the right moves when it came to estateplanning. Many people do not, deterred either by the thought of dying or bythe seeming complexity of well-made plans.   Don't be put off. After all, you can't take it with you. If you're notcareful, however, you can sure make a mess of leaving it behind, makingUncle Sam richer and your family poorer in the process. ``It'' is yourhard-earned property. The mess is what happens if you make one of theseall-too-common estate planning mistakes:-- Ignoring the whole thing. Seven out of 10 Americans reportedly diewithout making a will. ``The single most important thing you can do,'' saysStephan Leimberg, professor of taxation and estate planning at The AmericanCollege in Bryn Mawr, Pa., ``is get your papers in order and figure outwhat you want to do.''   Then, follow through. Remember, if you die without a will, you'releaving it up to your state to decide who gets what. If you're married,your assets may be split among your spouse and children. If your childrenare minors, your spouse would then have to get permission from the court tospend ``their'' money on their behalf. If you're not married, your closestblood relatives would inherit your worldly possessions--even if you have aclose friend you would prefer.   Living trusts, pushed in some quarters as a probate-free substitute fora will, have advantages and disadvantages. A living trust, which isrevocable and takes assets out of your name, can be helpful if you live inone of the few states, such as California, with high probate fees or if youwant backup should you become incapacitated. A living trust is a good``standby vehicle,'' says Bill Knox, a trust attorney with Neuberger &Berman in New York, because the trustees you have named can manage youraffairs if you cannot. But you won't save on income taxes with a livingtrust. And, unless all of your assets are owned by the trust, you won'tavoid probate. You'll still need a will to take care of any assets notsheltered by the trust at the time of your death.   You can prepare a legal will yourself, using software programs such asNolo's WillMaker (about $40, 800 992-6656). But if your affairs arecomplicated--if you have remarried or own investment real estate--you wouldbe better off consulting an attorney experienced in estate planning.   Once you draft it, don't file your will and forget it. Make a list ofall your assets and liabilities, so that your family won't flounder inignorance when you're gone. Then keep this list current and review yourwill every few years, more often if there are changes in tax law or yourown family circumstances. Marriage, divorce, newborn children orgrandchildren, or a move to another state should all be triggers forupdating your will.-- Using the $600,000 exemption from federal estate taxes only once. Jointownership can undermine good estate planning by wasting the second $600,000estate exemption otherwise available to the surviving spouse. So can usingwhat Ralph Engel, an attorney with Rosen & Reade in New York, calls a``sweetheart will,'' in which you leave everything to your spouse.Solution: Divide assets so that each spouse separately owns at least$600,000, then leave the first $600,000 in each estate in a bypass orcredit shelter trust. The survivor can receive income from the trust, andtap principal, but after the second spouse dies the remainder goes to thechildren or other designated beneficiaries free from estate tax.-- Failing to plan specifically for substantial retirement assets.Accumulated retirement funds--individual retirement account, 401(k), orprofit-sharing--make up a large portion of the estate for manymiddle-income Americans. In fact, it can be difficult for some couples todivvy up asset ownership if one spouse has a sizable retirement plan. Ifyou don't recognize the potential tax bite on large plan accumulations, youcould wind up losing as much as 85% of your retirement money to acombination of estate, income, and excise taxes.   Estate taxes start at 37% and go up to as much as 60%. An excise tax of15% applies to so-called excess accumulations at death of $1.5 million orso as well as to excess distributions during life of more than about$150,000 a year (the specific amount is a moving target because it dependson your age at the time of death and current Internal Revenue Serviceinterest rate assumptions). Income tax kicks in if your beneficiaries mustpull money out of your ira to pay any estate taxes that may be due.   You won't solve the problem by putting retirement money in trust. Engelcites an instance in which a trust was named beneficiary of a six-figureretirement plan. Because of that setup, the surviving wife, who couldotherwise have left the money untouched until she reached retirement age,couldn't do an ira rollover, so the money was immediately subject to incomeand estate tax.   One approach is to begin withdrawing your own retirement money early.Don't wait until the mandated withdrawal age of 70 1/2 if you will beaccumulating so much money that you'll be subject to excise tax. StevenLockwood, president of Lockwood Pension Services in New York, suggests thatif you have other assets you can pass to your heirs, you should ``plan todeplete your ira by age 90'' rather than leaving it in your taxableestate.-- Holding on to more money than you need. Successful people sometimesdon't realize until late in life that the government may get half of whatthey leave behind. By then, says Knox, ``it's too late to make much of adent in the looming tax losses.''   There are multiple solutions here. Start by making what Knox calls``invisible lifetime gifts.'' These are grants of up to $10,000 per personper year, as well as direct payments of tuition or medical bills, that arenot subject to gift tax. Giving these gifts to your family members whileyou're alive removes the money--and its subsequent appreciation--from yourtaxable estate. By helping your children buy a house or your grandchildrenattend summer camp, such gifts also let you enjoy the fruits of yourgenerosity along with the recipients.   If your estate is sizable, you may want to consider making larger giftsas well. Giving appreciating assets is the idea here, so that future growthis removed from your taxable estate. The cost basis for determining capitalgains on inherited assets is fixed at the time of death, or ``stepped up''from the original purchase price, while the cost basis of assets you giveduring your life is what you paid. Hold on to assets that have alreadyappreciated significantly, otherwise your heirs will lose the benefit ofthis stepped-up basis at death and owe capital gains when they sell on theentire appreciation from your date of purchase.   Gifts of up to $10,000 per year ($20,000 for a married couple) are neversubject to tax. On larger gifts, a gift tax return will have to be filed,but the tax itself will not be due until your death. That's when theunified gift and estate tax kicks in on amounts (whether given during lifeor after death) in excess of approximately $600,000.   Charitable gifts can also reap large rewards. The American College'sLeimberg makes reference to Jacqueline Onassis, who may have sheltered asmuch as $90 million out of a $100 million estate by setting up a charitablelead trust. No one knows exactly how much was in the Onassis estate, butattorneys recognize the astute estate planning.   With a charitable lead trust, a specific sum is set aside. The charitiesof your choice receive a fixed amount each year, typically based on apercentage of the original amount, for the period of time you specify. Atthe end of that period, your children or other beneficiaries receive theprincipal. Because the gift to the children has been deferred, Knoxexplains, it is discounted for tax purposes. Furthermore, if the trust'sreturn on investments is higher than anticipated, the excess goes to thechildren without tax.   Charitable lead trusts are most often used by the very wealthy. Theirmirror image, charitable remainder trusts, are more common. With a crt, youreceive both an immediate tax deduction and income during your lifetime(and, if you wish, that of your spouse), with the principal then going tocharity. No estate taxes are due on amounts left to charity through thetrust.-- Insisting on simplicity, at the expense of what could be significant taxsavings. Knox points out that people who have built successful businessesor professional practices are often ``impatient with, or even distrustfulof, estate planning techniques they can't easily understand.'' Used tomaking and controlling their destiny, ``they can't bring themselves to dosomething complicated that doesn't make complete sense to them, no matterhow great the tax savings for their families,'' he says.   One approach is to search out good advisers and then rely on theirrecommendations. You don't have to understand the technicalities, so longas you understand the consequences in terms of tax savings and your controlover your assets.-- Failing to read documents. No matter how good the recommendations fromyour advisers, you really do need to peruse all the documents and have yourattorney answer any questions that you may have. Mistakes can creep in ifyou're not paying close attention. Michael Allmon, chairman of theCalifornia Society of cpa's estate planning committee in Los Angeles, citesa client who made several specific bequests of property, but never noticedthat their addresses were incorrectly listed. ``We think we can take careof his intent,'' Allmon says, ``but we will have to get the court involvedto do so.''-- Thinking that estate planning is only for the rich. If anything, saysLeimberg, preparing your will is much more critical for the middleclass--or those people with estates under $1 million. ``If a wealthy personloses $100,000 because of poor or no estate planning, the world won't cometo an end,'' he says. ``But it's tough when you have a smaller estate.'' Inother words, most of us can't afford to make any mistakes.Five Rules of Estate PlanningMAKE A WILLThis might seem obvious, yet 7 of 10 Americans die without one. If youneglect this important piece of business, you're essentially granting yourstate the right to decide who gets what.USE A BYPASS TRUST IF MARRIEDFor sizable estates, the couple divides the assets and each spouse puts upto $600,000 in a trust. This ensures that both get to use a $600,000federal estate tax exemption.WATCH RETIREMENT ACCUMULATIONSIf your IRA or qualified plan amounts to more than $1.5 million, you maywant to start withdrawals early so you don't bump up against the excise taxon excess accumulations.FIND EXPERT HELPRefer to self-help software and books. But if your affairs are at allcomplicated, use an attorney experienced in estate planning. Readeverything and ask questions--even experts make mistakes.START ``GIFTING'' EARLYIf you have enough to live comfortably, giving up to $10,000 a year($20,000 for a married couple) to each child and grandchild can greatlyreduce your taxable estate.DATA: BUSINESS WEEKCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STEERING CLEAR OF TITLE TROUBLEBy:Richard KormanWhen stage great Helen Hayes died in 1993, her son, James MacArthur,inherited her Victorian mansion overlooking the Hudson River in Nyack, N.Y.MacArthur arranged to sell the house for $730,000 to Christopher andGeorgine Chalsen, who planned to live there with their five children. A fewweeks before the scheduled closing last June, a title researcher foundburied in the public records a 29-year-old right of first refusal thatHayes had granted to a neighbor. After much frustration and weighing oflegal options, MacArthur honored the agreement, and the neighbors boughtthe house. They removed a strip of land connecting the Hayes property andtheir own to the river bank and put the house back on the market at$849,000. With the river access gone, the Chalsens declined to pursue adeal.   The fiasco over the Hayes mansion, known as Pretty Penny, is an exampleof how a defective title can kill a real estate deal that both partiesbadly want to complete. No matter how much you feel that you've finallyfound your dream home, don't get in too deep unless you're sure the houseclearly belongs to the seller or that you won't get involved in abottomless legal pit. Refusal rights, liens, easements, or boundarydisputes are the type of problems to watch out for.   But even the seller doesn't always know. MacArthur was unaware that therefusal right existed, much less that it had passed to the couple next doorwhen they bought their house from his mother's original neighbors a fewyears ago. Hayes had granted an unlimited right to all ``heirs, executors,administrators, successors, and assigns'' of the neighbors. Says AlanWayte, a Los Angeles attorney: ``That's a mistake, and a very common one.''What Hayes should have done is restrict the refusal right to her originalneighbors or limit its duration.   The broader issue is that title searches are often left until it's toolate to prevent both parties from spending a lot of money and effortgetting ready to close. A title is evidence that an owner has the right topossession. Mortgage lenders require a search to assure that the property'stitle is free and clear of claims or any other problems. The search mayshow that the seller has a former spouse who is a co-owner but knowsnothing of the sale; a trucking company has an easement that allows it todrive through the property during the night; or that the toolshed was builttwo feet over the boundary of a neighbor's lot and the problem needs to beresolved. It should also show any liens for unpaid taxes or mortgages.EARLY REQUEST. The key is not to let the title check wait until after youhave completed other aspects of the deal, such as mortgage approval andarranging to move. If possible, obtain a pre-approved mortgage before goingout to shop for a house, suggests Gary W. Eldred, author of The 106 CommonMistakes Homebuyers Make (And How to Avoid Them) (John Wiley & Sons,$14.95). Getting mortgage approval out of the way allows everyone involvedto concentrate on the title and other matters, he says.   The minute your bid on a house is accepted, start researching the title.Ask the seller's lawyer or broker to send a copy of the title report fromthe property's most recent sale and the proposed contract, says EricGonchar, MacArthur's attorney. Also ask for the most recent property surveyand certificate of occupancy.   Before the contracts are signed, make sure you or your bank orders thesearch from the company that will issue your title insurance. Also get acopy of the summary report. It shouldn't take longer than two weeks. Don'twait until the property is appraised or until your loan is approved. Ifpossible, have the abstract of the title and property survey before yourclosing or moving dates are made. That way, if there are problems that willtake weeks or months to resolve, you won't have to undo preparations tomove from your current residence and inconvenience your buyer or tenant.   Title searches and reports cost $150 to $500 and, if the deal closes,that cost is rolled into the title-insurance bill. If the title reportturns up information that makes closing impossible, most home-salecontracts require the seller to pay the buyer's title-search fee andrelated title-examination costs.   Although MacArthur picked up the tab for $1,000 of title-research costs,Christopher Chalsen says he still spent $700 on the inspection. Chalsenrecalls that he told his lawyer to hurry to get the title information, buthe and his wife signed the contract before the data were in hand. Luckily,the Chalsens eventually found another house. It hadn't belonged to a famousactress, but its title was free of anything that could have turned thepurchase of the home into a tragedy.Before You Seal the Deal...-- Get the title search done as early as possible, well in advance ofclosing and arranging to move. Press lenders, real estate agents, andattorneys not to neglect this part of the deal. Try to get a mortgageapproved early so you can concentrate on the title.-- Seek the title data from previous sales and refinancings prior tosigning a contract. Ask for copies of the survey and certificate ofoccupancy as a tip-off to trouble involving boundaries or illegalstructures.-- Always buy title insurance. Be sure the policy covers the owner, notjust the mortgage lender. Try for a policy that insures the full equity inaddition to the mortgage amount.DATA: THE 106 COMMON MISTAKES HOMEBUYERS MAKE (AND HOW TO AVOID THEM),CHICAGO TITLE INSURANCE CO., ERIC GONCHARCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A PANGLOSS FOR THE MILLENNIUMBy:BY MICHAEL J. MANDELTHE STATE OF HUMANITYEdited by Julian L. SimonBlackwell 694pp $54.95No one can accuse Julian L. Simon of thinking small. In his new book, hetackles nothing less than the fate of all mankind. The State of Humanity, amassive new volume of essays assembled and edited by Simon, is an attack onthe fashionable notion that human progress has stalled. ``Just about everyimportant long-run measure of human welfare shows improvement over thedecades and centuries, in the United States as well as in the rest of theworld,'' claims Simon in his introductory essay. ``There is no persuasivereason to believe that these trends will not continue indefinitely.''   This happy assessment is no surprise. In previous books, Simon, aneconomist at the University of Maryland, has argued the benefits ofpopulation growth and immigration, giving him a well-deserved reputation asperhaps the most optimistic economist alive. His argument that humanity isstill on an upward trend is backed up by almost 700 pages of hard data andnumerous charts and graphs. Simon and his co-authors, including Nobelprize-winning economist Robert W. Fogel, have put together what is probablythe single most concentrated mass of upbeat statistics ever assembled,covering virtually every aspect of the human condition, from childmortality to air pollution, from housing and food to natural resources andozone depletion.   For the most part, the arguments are convincing. We have been warnedthat the world is about to run out of oil. Not so, Simon points out: Globalcrude-oil reserves have soared over the past 15 years, as higher priceshave stimulated exploration and new technology for exploiting existingfields. In 1980, the world had about a 30-year supply of crude oil atcurrent rates of consumption. By the early 1990s, though, the world hadabout 45 years' worth. Notes Simon: ``Metals, foods, and other naturalresources have become more available rather than more scarce.''   The perspective of Simon and his co-authors is decidedly global. Whiledeveloped economies such as the U.S. have struggled in recent years,developing countries such as China, Taiwan, and Malaysia have seenexplosive income growth, making this the greatest period of wealth creationin history. These economic gains have been accompanied by other advances,as well. Over the past 30 years, life expectancy in poor countries hassoared, from 46 to 63 years. The spread of education in developingcountries has been equally spectacular: The proportion of children aged 6to 11 enrolled in school has risen from less than 50% in 1960 to about 70%today.   Interestingly, Simon's upbeat view does not depend on new technology.The State of Humanity barely takes notice of computers. There is no mentionof the Internet, virtual reality, gene splicing, cellular telephones, orany of the other marvels that are supposed to be boosting productivity andimproving the modern standard of living.   Instead, Simon bases his forecasts on a simple principle: Assume thatlong-term trends will continue, in the absence of convincing evidence tothe contrary. So if the steady accumulation of knowledge has produced arising standard of living for the past 200 years, there's no reason tobelieve that things will suddenly change.   Of course, many would consider Simon's view of the world to be naive.The conventional wisdom is that global overpopulation is inexorably leadingto ecological and economic disaster--a modern version of Malthusian misery.``For those who think the future may be a simple extrapolation of the past,there may be some surprises ahead,'' observes Lester R. Brown, president ofWorldwatch Institute, in the forthcoming book State of the World 1996(Norton). Brown, as committed a pessimist as Simon is an optimist, arguesthat the ``spiraling human demands for resources are beginning to outgrowthe capacity of the earth's natural systems.''   Food, especially, will be in short supply, in part because the people ofChina and other growing nations will demand better diets as they becomericher. Notes Brown: ``Oil can be replaced with other energy sources, butthere is no replacement for food.''   The State of Humanity tries to answer each of these negative arguments.Despite the fears, Simon cites statistics from the Environmental ProtectionAgency to assert that ``the air in the U.S. and in other rich countries isirrefutably safer to breathe now than in decades past.'' Moreover, there isno sign of any widespread food shortages yet. Crop yields have risen asfast as world population. The price of food, like that of other naturalresources, is still falling compared with other goods and services.   Simon points out that in every era, there have been doomsayers who seethe imminent end of civilization. For example, in the mid-1800s, theBritish began to worry about running out of coal. Writes Simon: ``The greatEnglish economist, Stanley Jevons, calculated that a shortage of coal wouldbring England's industry to a standstill by 1900; he carefully assessedthat oil could never make a decisive difference.''   Despite the power of its arguments, The State of Humanity does have someflaws. The essays are of uneven quality--Simon's own contributions,especially the introduction, are pointed and well-written, but some of theother chapters are confusing and less than helpful. The book also suffersfrom overkill. One grows weary of being told over and over how everythingis getting better all the time.   Moreover, while whining about how the pessimists get more attention thanhe does, Simon does not acknowledge that scaremongers are often responsiblefor much of the improvement he cites. The death rate from all accidents,for example, dropped by more than 20% over the past 10 years--thanks in nosmall part to the consumer-safety advocates Simon professes to deplore.Indeed, it may very well be that alarmism is the only way to stimulate aneffective response to large-scale problems, such as global warming andozone depletion, that require concerted multinational action.   Still, The State of Humanity will become essential reading for anyonewho wants to put today's policy debates into a larger context. At a timewhen politicians are locked in a bloody stalemate in Washington and manyAmericans are disappointed with their lot, it's worth remembering theprogress that the human species has already made--and pondering thepotential for gains to come.About the Author(s):Mandel is a BUSINESS WEEK economics editor.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INTERNET 101 FOR BUSINESSBy:BY IRA SAGERTHE DIGITAL ECONOMYPromise and Peril in the Age of Networked IntelligenceBy Don TapscottMcGraw-Hill 342pp $24.95Surf the Net these days and you'll soon find, alongside the obscure 'zinesand hip cyber hangouts, some of the biggest names in business. Kodak,Aetna, AT&T, Eli Lilly, IBM--each has a home page on the World Wide Web.They and scores of other companies hope online networks can provide adirect link to the customer and a whole new realm of electronic commerce.   Today, however, most are sputtering along the Information Highway,offering little more than electronic brochures. To get beyond that, arguesDon Tapscott in The Digital Economy, businesses must build fundamentallynew strategies for competing in the electronic marketplace. ``Wheninformation becomes digital and networked, walls fall and no business issafe,'' Tapscott writes. On the other hand, companies that understand theNet will blossom.   Tapscott's mission is not to tell executives how to craft I-waystrategies but to help them grasp the changes the Net will bring so theycan start planning. This isn't uncharted territory: Tapscott, a consultantwho has written often on information technology, follows countless magazineand book writers in predicting how the computing, telecommunications, andmedia industries will converge. While he points out the possibilities, heoffers few fresh insights. He cites other consultants and quotes liberallyfrom business publications. Also, many of the companies Tapscott hails aspioneers--Federal Express, Wal-Mart, Levi Strauss--are already well knownfor their online strategies.   Tapscott does well weaving into one tome the business, social, andeducational implications of networks. He lays out privacy and censorshipissues, and explores the Net's potential to change the way people interactwith the government. He also raises important questions about inequalityand the need to extend the Net to a broad base of citizens. The DigitalEconomy doesn't offer solutions, but it can help executives contemplatingcyberspace to ask the right questions.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`I WANT BLOOD FOR BLOOD'By:JAMES DRAKEIn the north Albanian village of Bluji, deep in the Dukagjin highlands,women and children do most of the work. Grandmothers scrub laundry on thedoorsteps of stone cottages. Young wives--some heavily pregnant--lug pailsof water along the rutted cart track from the communal well. Five-year-oldsspend long days in the fields tending scrawny livestock.   Bluji's menfolk hold antiquated notions of gender roles, but it's fearthat keeps most of them from showing their faces: This is the land of theblood feud, a centuries-old tradition. Kept in check during the communists'rule, it reemerged three years ago, forcing some 10,000 able-bodiedbreadwinners, out of a population of 3 million, into hiding.SHAMEFUL. ``I want blood for blood,'' spits Nasi Gjini, polishing thepre-1914 Lee Enfield rifle that has been his constant companion since histwo sons were shot to death by a neighbor in February. The deaths followedan exchange of drunken insults. Now, the teenage assassin, his threebrothers, and his father stay indoors, thwarting Gjini's quest for revenge.A murderer's male kin are fair game, but gunning them down in their ownhouse is more shameful than the original offense. ``Here I am safe,'' saysthe Gjinis' killer, peering through the bars on his window. ``But this isno kind of life. Only Allah knows how long I'll have to stay here.'' Hespends his days smoking, sleeping, and playing cards.   The blood feud goes back to the 12th century and was a means of metingout summary justice. After World War II, under dictator Enver Hoxha, thepractice was suppressed, with murderers executed and their familiesostracized. But with the fall of the regime, old ways quickly returned.   The circle of violence is taking an economic toll among the hot-temperedsubsistence farmers. When Albania opened its doors for business, somemultinationals came courting the highlanders, bringing hard currency.Leisure giants such as Club Med talked of opening ski resorts and hikinglodges on the country's game-packed slopes and sending whitewater raftsdown its salmon rivers.   ``But even if they had found local partners they could trust, therewould be no guarantee those partners would be alive the next morning,''says Adnan Rama of the Albanian Tourist Ministry. Potential investorsbacked off, taking their dollars and Deutschemarks with them. Most folksrun livestock on land too poor for farming. Some make a better livingsmuggling oil, weapons, liquor and cigarettes to Serbia and Bosnia. But theaverage income is just $30 per month.   The Dukagjin district has seen some 350 revenge killings since 1993, andthe problem is spreading: Hill people who migrate to the cities in searchof work take their quarrels with them. ``I'd say around 20% of our murdersthis year were connected to the feuds,'' estimates Shkelqim Merdani, policechief in Tirana, the capital.   In a bid to stop the madness, Islamic cleric Ndrek Pjetri formed theMissionaries of Reconciliation, a group of holy men dedicated to endingfeuds. Its members act as go-betweens, often persuading the aggrieved partyto accept cash in place of blood. The mullah has even traveled to Turkeyand Germany to settle quarrels between expatriate Albanians, and in 1994,he successfully petitioned the U.S. Embassy in Tirana to cancel a visagranted to a man bound for New York to carry out a killing.   For many here, honor means more than anything. Last year, on his 16thbirthday, a boy traveled to nearby Kopliku to avenge the killing of hisgrandfather 40 years ago by a brutal police captain. Reaching Kopliku, hefound the killer had died. So he called out the captain's cousin, bade himgreet the grandfather, and dispatched him with a single bullet, therebyremoving a stain on his family's honor. The boy himself was killed beforehe turned 17.   The 68-year-old Pjetri claims to have resolved more than 170 disputes,but new ones crop up too fast for the pack mules he uses to travel toisolated villages. By the time he arrives, another murder may have takenplace. So he has applied for a government grant to buy a four-wheel-drivevehicle. ``They say there isn't money,'' he says. ``I've told them theyshould see it as an investment.''Illustration(s):Illustration: Map: AlbaniaMAP BY ALAN BASEDENPhotograph(s):Photograph: OLD WAYSFeuds have helped keep rural Albanians mired in deep poverty, with manymigrating to the cities--and taking the feuds with themPHOTOGRAPH BY NICOLE BENGIVENO/MATRIXAbout the Author(s):Drake is based in Prague.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IT'S FOR YOU--ON THE PCVoice calling via the Internet is here and it's cheap-but don't toss yourphone yetBy:BY JOHN W. VERITYThere's little, it seems, that the Internet doesn't provide: low-costelectronic publishing, global E-mail delivery, instant access to every kindof digital information and service. Now, it's promising ``free'' phonecalls between any two Net computers, more or less, and for no more moneythan the usual connection fee.   As it turns out, this is another one of those Internet concepts thatseem to offer exciting potential if not high-quality results just yet. It'ssort of like the idea of finding whatever information you need on the Net.Sure, its computers are crammed with information, but as all Web surferssoon discover, much of it is trivial.MEETING PLACE. Likewise, the Internet can transmit speech cheaply, but notin a satisfying or easy way. Right now, an Internet voice call has littleof the tone or intimacy of a regular phone call. It's more like talkingover CB radio. Still, it costs little to try, and when they work well,Internet voice calls can be entertaining and useful. Besides saving moneyon long-distance communications--even across oceans--Internet phoning canenhance computer games. Eventually, phoning via the Internet may serve asan inexpensive method for training and conference calls.   How to get started? First, you'll need basic Internet knowhow and somepatience. For hardware, you'll need a Windows-compatible computer with a50-megahertz 486 processor, a sound card, a speaker, and a microphone.(Most Internet phone-software packages work only with Microsoft Corp.'sWindows, but there are programs available for Apple Computer Inc.'sMacintoshes and for Unix computers.) A 28.8-kilobits-per-second modem isbest, though some packages can work with 14.4-kbs models. Also required isa SLIP/PPP connection to the Internet.   There's already a choice of software. Trial versions are available at nocharge directly from the Web sites of several suppliers (table). Even incompressed form, these lengthy programs can take 15 minutes or more todownload into your machine. Also, each is programmed to work only for alimited time. VocalTec Inc.'s Internet Phone allows just 60 seconds ofcalling time, for instance. You're free to take more than one copy--or pay$49.95 for a limitless version. Internet Telephone Co.'s WebPhone program,which was available free prior to Jan. 1, 1996, now costs $49.95.   Each program does essentially the same thing--make your PC's sound cardconvert the microphone's analog signals into a string of digital packets ofdata that move separately across the Net like envelopes in a postal system.Depending on the Net's traffic conditions at any given moment, consecutivepackets may take different routes through the Net and arrive out of order.At the receiving end, telephony software will try to compensate, but it'soften impossible for the program to reconstruct the original signalcompletely.   None of this software is simple to install or use. There are numerousnetwork and computer parameters to set, and you'll need to plug inspecifics about your Internet addressing, for instance. It took me and afriend more than an hour to get VocalTec's package to work. For WebPhone, Isought the supplier's assistance.TOUGH TALK. Once we had the software installed, we found out just howdifferent from conventional telephone calling Internet phone setups are.The sound is choppy, syllables drop out of words, and it can take severalseconds for voices to traverse the Net. Each party must take turnsspeaking--and they must be using the same brand of software. You musteither arrange a time to converse or scan your supplier's online directoryto find others around the world who are online and looking forconversation. Directories often list people's preferred topics ofconversation, which range from the personal to lofty technical matters.   Which software to choose? As the first to market, VocalTec's package hasbecome the most popular. Internet Telephone's WebPhone looks the best--likea futuristic telephone with lots of point-and-click buttons. QuarterdeckCorp. plans to enhance its WebTalk with a variety of multimedia tools tohelp people collaborate over the Internet. You can keep up with thetechnology's rapid evolution by seeing what enthusiasts post to theindependently run Voice on the Net E-mail list: Send the message,``subscribe von-digest,'' to majordomo@pulver.com.   For now, Internet telephony reminds me of the dancing elephant in acircus: One is more impressed that it can dance at all than with the danceitself. But at this stage, teaching the Internet new dances is really whatit's all about.NETPHONE SOFTWAREINTERNET PHONEVocalTec. Street price: $49.95Trial copies available at http://www.vocaltec.com.WEBTALKQuarterdeck. Street price: under $50, including two copies, microphone, andWeb browser.Trial copies available at http://www.qdeck.com.INTERCOMTelescape Communications.Available free at http://www.telescape.com.WEBPHONEInternet Telephone. Price: $49.95.Trial copies available at http:///www.itelco.com.DATA: BUSINESS WEEKCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHY IS THE U.S. SETTLING FOR STUNTED GROWTH?By:BY PAUL CRAIG ROBERTSEconomic growth has fallen on hard times. The budget struggle betweenCongress and the Clinton Administration has been partly over whether theeconomy will grow 2.3% annually or 2.5%. Federal Reserve Board ChairmanAlan Greenspan has hinted that even this slow growth might not be possiblewithout a balanced budget.   It was not always so. In the postwar era, growth was a liberal mantra.Not even inflation-shy Republican Administrations could withstand itsimperative. The Ford Administration, for example, forecast a growth rate of5.98% in average annual real gross national product for the 1976-80 period.The Carter Administration brought us into the 1980s with a 4.7% averageannual real GNP growth projection for 1979-83.   The attitude toward growth changed remarkably in 1981, when the ReaganAdministration forecast a 3.8% annual rate of real GNP growth from 1981 to1985. The forecast was paltry compared with those for earlier periods andwas no higher than what the economy achieved from 1976 to 1980. But thehyperbole flew fast. Reagan's forecast was denounced as a ``rosy scenario''that ``lies far beyond the limits of any past experience in this country orany other industrial democracy'' (The Washington Post, Mar. 9, 1981).COOLED PASSION. What happened in such a short time span to make modesteconomic-growth projections unwelcome? Environmental hysteria connectinggrowth with pollution took a toll, as did the rising inflation that hadaccompanied growth in the 1970s. But among macroeconomists themselves, thecooled passion for growth may have reflected the change in the way it wasbeing pursued.   In the postwar era, prosperity-peddling Keynesians connected economicgrowth with the growth of government. True, in the Keynesian model, a taxcut that increased the deficit would raise aggregate demand and economicgrowth, but the tax cut multiplier was less than the government-spendingmultiplier. That is, if economic growth was the goal, more governmentspending was the efficient way to achieve it. Keynesian economics was apolitical success because it merged economic growth with liberal compassionand the propensity of politicians to build spending constituencies.Moreover, the Keynesian model relied on a proactive government to manageaggregate demand and produce full employment. Policymakers found this to bea more gratifying approach than laissez-faire.   Reagan's growth program was unpopular with macroeconomists because itwas not premised on the growth of government. Indeed, Reagan wanted tocurtail the growth of government, while increasing economic incentives toindividuals. This cut to the emotional core, and liberals who couldn't getenough ``Keynesian'' growth were horrified at the prospect of``supply-side'' growth.   For many, supply-side economics has an even worse strike against it. Itmaintains that fiscal policy works not by increasing aggregate demand, butby raising aftertax rewards for work and investment. Supply-side economicsnot only tolerates market-based income differences--it also links taxpolicy with productivity growth and shows the high cost of using taxes tolevel incomes.   Liberal economists have responded not by resurrecting Keynesian demandmanagement--an impossible task--but by deemphasizing growth. One way ofdoing this is to argue that regardless of policy, the economy cannot growany faster than its long-term average of 2.5% annually. Liberals thennarrowly limit economics to ``fairness'' issues. For example, Paul R.Krugman, an economist at Stanford University, says that with a long-termgrowth potential of 2.5%, it is pointless to increase incentives when theonly effect is more economic inequality.   A downsizing of growth ambitions requires harsher cutbacks in welfareand entitlements in order to contain the deficit or balance the budget. Italso means that policymakers cannot rely on income growth to compensate forthe slower growth in government programs or on job growth to absorb theinflow of legal and illegal immigrants. The social and politicalimplications of slow growth may well prove more unpalatable than``greed.''   From 1982 to 1989, the U.S. economy grew at an average annual rate of3.7%. The new ``2.5% inevitable growth school'' may argue either that theseseven years of above-inevitable growth occurred at the expense of futuregrowth or compensated for below-inevitable growth in the past. But the factremains that people experienced 3.7%, not the long-run average. Theelectorate liked it, and the Washington policymakers who took it away arehistory.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANATHEMA: Liberals would rather put the brakes on growth thanhave a fast expansion based on supply-side principlesKATHERINE LAMBERTAbout the Author(s):Paul Craig Roberts is John M. Olin Fellow of the Institute for PoliticalEconomy and Distinguished Fellow of the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FED FEAR OF THE JOBLESS RATEIt may be a faulty inflation signalBy:BY GENE KORETZThough they welcome the Federal Reserve's latest cut in short-term interestrates, economists Mickey D. Levy of NationsBanc Capital Markets Inc. andJoseph Carson of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. both believe that Fed policyremains far too restrictive in the face of growing economic weakness. Asthey see it, the largest roadblock to a substantial easing of monetarypolicy may well be the Fed's unjustified concern regarding the lowunemployment rate.   Fed officials, says Levy, tend to believe in a so-called natural rate ofunemployment--that is, a rate at which labor markets are so tight thatfurther declines would spark rising inflation. Though estimates of thatrate have varied from 4% in the 1960s to 6.5% in the 1970s, the currentlevel is presumed to be just below 6%--placing November's 5.6% jobless ratein the danger zone.   Levy argues, however, that productivity progress by U.S. businesscombined with the Fed's enhanced inflation-fighting credibility haveeffectively lowered the natural rate of unemployment well below the5.5%-to-6% range. By reaping productivity gains from restructuring and moreflexible use of labor (including contingent workers), as well as fromincreased investment in technology, says Levy, business has improved itsresiliency in labor markets and boosted its leverage in wage bargaining.   Meanwhile, growing job insecurity has made employees more docile. Andthe Fed's tough anti-inflation stance has curbed employers' ability to payfor wage hikes by raising prices. All of which, says Levy, suggests thattoday's 5.6% jobless rate is far from a danger signal of impendinginflation.   For his part, Carson notes that the meager 607,000 rise in employmentover the past 12 months (as measured by the Labor Dept.'s survey ofhouseholds) was matched by unusually sluggish labor force growth of just724,000 people. This is only half of the 1.1% growth in the labor force in1994 (chart), which was right in line with Labor Dept. projections.   Carson attributes this sharp drop in labor force growth to declines inlabor force participation by 20-to-24-year-old and 55-to-64-year-old males.He speculates that poor job prospects in 1995 inspired more young workersto stay in school, while continued downsizing eroded the ranks of olderworkers. In any case, he says, ``the thing to remember is that theunemployment rate would be a half a percentage point higher if the laborforce had expanded at its trend rate.''   Either Levy's or Carson's analysis may explain why inflation has stayedso low with 5.6% unemployment. If, as seems likely, they are both right,the Fed has more than ample room to ease aggressively in the months ahead.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: A Puzzling Slowdown In Labor Force GrowthERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHAT'S STALLING MONETARY UNIONEurope's economies are out of syncBy:BY GENE KORETZAt first blush, the wave of European interest-rate cuts touched off by theBundesbank's latest move would seem to suggest that economic convergence isgrowing. Christopher Widness of Chemical Securities Inc. points out,however, that despite the synchronous rate cuts, the differences betweeninflation rates (and interest rates) have actually widened. A year ago, forexample, French inflation was nearly a percentage point lower than Germaninflation. Today it is higher. And the gaps between German inflation andinflation in Spain and Italy have grown (chart).   The irony, says Widness, is that in many countries, such as Italy andSpain, fiscal restraint could boost inflation as sales tax hikes feed intothe price indexes and inspire wage pressures. And that spells increasedpolitical strains that could short-circuit progress toward economicconvergence and monetary union.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Europe's Diverging Inflation RatesERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A MILESTONE FOR BLACK FAMILIESFewer out-of-wedlock birthsBy:BY GENE KORETZAs reported by The Numbers News newsletter, black families in America havemade significant progress in at least one key area in recent years:Birthrates among unmarried black women--including teenagers--declined in1993 for the fourth year in a row. The birthrate fell from 90.7 per 1,000unmarried black women age 15 to 44 in 1989 to 84.0 in 1993. By contrast,the birthrate among unmarried white women, though far below that of blacks,continues to rise sharply--from 30.2 in 1989 to 35.9 in 1993.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHEN LAWYERS ARE LOOKERSAttractiveness boosts earningsBy:BY GENE KORETZOther things being equal, better-looking lawyers make more money than theirunattractive colleagues. That's the implication of a new study that looksat how law school graduates of the 1970s fared in labor markets insubsequent years. In the study, economists Jeff E. Biddle of Michigan StateUniversity and Daniel S. Hamermesh of the University of Texas developedattractiveness ratings based on class photos of students of a top lawschool and then used survey data to gauge their career progress five and 15years after graduation.   The results indicated that attractive male attorneys (there were fewwomen in the group studied) made more money than plain or homely attorneysafter five years of practice, and the gap widened over time. Further, moreof the attractive group tended to become litigators, a specialty where goodlooks are a likely asset, and to work in the higher-paying private sector,where client relationships have a larger effect on earnings.   Interestingly enough, the researchers found little payoff toattractiveness among law school graduates of the 1980s. And while goodlooks boosted the chances of males grads of both the 1970s and 1980s beingoffered a law firm partnership after only five years of practice, theyactually lowered the chances of early partnership for young femalelawyers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457YOU MADE THE CALLBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGTHE THIRD ANNUAL UP FRONT Reader Survey is gleaned from 288 responses toour questionnaire, almost half via E-mail. It shows a sober group that'scautiously optimistic and doesn't expect miracles.   We asked about job security for the second year in a row. And theanswers were pretty close to last year's. In a time of corporatedownsizing, the share of those feeling less secure at work rose slightly,from 32% to 36%, while people who are more secure was virtually unchanged.Yet, despite all the gloom and doom we hear about how too few are savingenough for old age, two-thirds project their old-age standard of living toremain as is or get better.   About the stock market, the consensus is for continued good times, withan average prediction of 5754 for the Dow's 1996 high. Mostprognostications clustered in the 5251-6000 range. There's no consensus ona favorite stock, though, with names scattered all over. The No.1 pick is atie between Microsoft and Intel, with 14 responses each.   On matters not affecting them directly, namely the federal budget,readers go for the conventional wisdom. Most name 2002 as the best targetdate to balance the budget. Newt Gingrich wants to do the deed by then.Now, so does Bill Clinton. There's a tempered optimism on the muchballyhooed Information Highway. While a majority sees the Infobahn as thedriving force of tomorrow's economy, skeptics abound: To more than 40%,it's just hype.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: How do you feel about personal job security, comparedwith your situation last year?Illustration: Chart: When you retire, your standard of living will...Illustration: Chart: The best target date to balance the federal budgetis...Illustration: Chart: The Information Superhighway is...Illustration: Chart: The high point for the Dow Jones industrial averagefor 1996 will be...Photograph(s):Photograph: SURF CITY: So much hype?PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW LICHTENSTEIN/JB PICTURESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LET'S PLAY 30 QUESTIONSBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGNow, let's just see if you've been paying attention. Our pop quiz (no fairpeeking at the answers) will reveal the real business-news buffs.1. What natural event helped ruin rogue trader Nick Leeson's investingstrategy?2. What is Lou Gerstner's vision for IBM called?3. What two jobs did Michael Fuchs have at Time Warner?4. How many parts is ITT splitting into?5. Name the new CEO of DuPont.6. Which American company had a major power project canceled by Indianauthorities?7. Who is the recently departed chief of Sony's U.S. arm?8. What does Steve Forbes want to do to the dollar?9. Who is the highest-level exec to quit Apple so far?10. What is former IBMer James Cannavino's new job?11. Name IPO darling Netscape's chairman.12. What is the Prowler?13. Former Simon & Schuster honcho Richard Snyder tried to buy what?14. What is dethroning Citicorp as the nation's largest bank?15. Ron Perelman wants to do what with Revlon?16. Which bank has spurned Wells Fargo's buyout overtures?17. Name Bob Packwood's replacement as Senate Finance Committee chairman.18. Who wants to sell MGM/UA?19. Why did CBS's 60 Minutes yank a segment critical of the tobaccoindustry?20. Which newspaper did Times Mirror CEO Mark Willes close?21. Name Salomon's embattled chief.22. What is the first U.S. TV series to run on Japanese prime time in eightyears?23. Who is threatening a proxy fight against RJR Nabisco?24. What company did William Agee last head?25. Name the theme song for the Windows 95 ad campaign.26. Who is Michael Eisner's new No.2 at Disney?27. Whom did the Grace family oust as CEO of W.R. Grace?28. Name Leon Hess's chosen successor to head Amerada Hess.29. Converse bought a sports-apparel maker, then shut it down after 85 daysof deteriorating results. Name it.30. What's the price tag for Bill Gates's new high-tech house on LakeWashington?ANSWERS:1) The Kobe earthquake.2) Network-centric computing.3) Head of Home Box Office and Warner Music Group.4) Three.5) John Krol.6) Enron.7) Michael Schulhof.8) Link it to gold.9) CFO Joseph Graziano.10) President of Perot Systems.11) James Clark.12) Chrysler's new hot-rod-style car.13) Western Publishing.14) The merger of Chemical and Chase Manhattan.15) Take it public.16) First Interstate.17) Republican William Roth of Delaware.18) Owner Credit Lyonnais.19) Fear of litigation.20) New York Newsday.21) Deryck Maughan.22) The X-Files.23) Bennett LeBow and Carl Icahn.24) Morrison Knudsen.25) Start Me Up by the Rolling Stones.26) Michael Ovitz.27) J.P. Bolduc.28) His son, John.29) Apex One.30)$30 million.Photograph(s):Photograph: BIG IDEA: GerstnerPHOTOGRAPH BY NAJLAH FEANNY/SABAPhotograph: BIG SHOES: FuchsPHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LEYNSE/SABAPhotograph: BIG BUST: LeesonPHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A FEW NEW BLOTS ON THE LEDGERDelinquent consumer loans and skinny margins may temper an otherwise bullyyearBy:By Kelley Holland in New York, with Amy Barrett in WashingtonIt was beginning to look as if the good times would never end for U.S.banks. Since 1991, profits have set record after record, asset quality hassharply improved, and bank stocks have seemed headed for the moon. But now,a few clouds are dotting the horizon. Consumers are beginning to havetrouble with heavy debt burdens. And the narrow gap between short- andlong-term rates bodes ill for banks' profit margins on loans andinvestments. Although Merrill Lynch & Co. predicts that profits for 56 topbanks should grow 9.8% in 1996 (chart), pan in for a closeup and thepicture is murkier.   The biggest potential problem is related to the ongoing growth inlending. Consumer installment credit grew roughly 14% in 1995, according toDRI/McGraw-Hill. While banks profit initially by providing that credit,heavy consumer debt burdens mean more loan delinquencies down the road.Indeed, the American Bankers Assn. says that late payments on bank-cardaccounts have risen for four quarters in a row and are currently at theirsecond-highest level in 10 years. ``Consumer credit quality is, I think, avery big short-term issue, potentially a big minefield,'' says JudahKraushaar, a banking analyst at Merrill Lynch.HARD TO FUDGE. Corporate lending is also expanding rapidly, raisingadditional concerns about loan quality in 1996. James B. Lee, vice-chairmanat Chemical Banking Corp., the top bank in loan syndications, sayscorporate lending will increase through 1996, but ``certain [industry]sectors will continue to deteriorate.'' That will prompt some borrowers tofall behind on payments or default. Lee says lending standards are farhigher than they were in the late 1980s. However, the intense competitionto make many loans suggests that some banks are willing to offer loan termsthat leave little room for error.   Then there is the problem of profit margins. Today, there's less thanone percentage point between the short-term rates at which banks borrow andthe longer-term rates at which they typically lend. That means room forprofits is scarce. A 1995 study by Merrill Lynch shows that bank stockshave been poor performers nearly every year following periods when short-and long-term interest rates are close together. ``This is a hard yieldcurve to work with,'' says Jeffrey C. Keil, president of Republic New YorkCorp.   Luckily, banks still have plenty of wind at their backs. While loandelinquencies are rising, they are still relatively scarce, and banks needto use only small portions of their earnings as reserves for bad credits.Moreover, new businesses are expanding for some of the biggest banks. AtJ.P. Morgan & Co., Thomas B. Ketchum, head of investment banking for theAmericas, expects corporate-finance fees for services such as advising onmergers to increase 40% in 1996.   Expect many banks to be intensely cost-conscious in the coming year.Bank mergers will likely continue at gale force: Gerard Smith, managingdirector in the financial institutions group of UBS Securities Inc.,predicts that by 2000, the top 50 banks will control 80% of the assets inthe U.S. banking industry, up from 56% today. And many deals will bepredicated on massive cost savings.REFORM DELAY. Spending on technology will grow in 1996. Most bankers, eagerto see their customers reduce their use of high-cost branches and step upuse of electronic banking outlets, are placing large bets on systems forbanking by phone or personal computer. Edward E. Crutchfield Jr., chairmanand CEO of First Union Corp. and one of the country's most acquisitivebankers, plans to stop buying banks for five years while he invests inelectronic retail banking. ``As soon as we really do have a choice for thecustomer to make that's realistic, then he will move away from branches,''he says.   Changes will be harder to come by on the regulatory front. Banks havebeen stymied on the big revisions they sought in 1995, such as an end tothe barriers between commercial and investment banking, and they could wellbe frustrated again. Banks and insurance agents need to agree on provisionsto limit the forays of banks into the insurance business before suchbanking law reform can move forward.   Having waited this long for deregulation, bank executives aren't holdingtheir breath. However, for those who keep a sharp eye on operations, payclose attention to the creditworthiness of borrowers, and plan forelectronic banking, 1996 could be a very good year indeed.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The financial condition of banks is excellent and leaves them wellprepared to weather any economic slowdown.   -- Managed properly, the ongoing consolidation in the industry will makeit more efficient.Negatives   -- Consumers have been loading up on debt, and consumer loandelinquencies are rising.   -- Profit margins on consumer and corporate loans could decline, hurtingbank earnings.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: BankingIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Big BanksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOHN DEWEY, MEET PETER DRUCKERBy:By Paul Magnusson in WashingtonYour revenues are rising, but not as fast as the cost of serving customers.Labor costs are climbing, but antiquated work rules and poor morale limityour flexibility. Your overseas competitors pay more, spend lavishly ontraining, and get far better results. Your physical plant is crumbling.Computers are scarce. And your customers are dissatisfied.   Welcome to America's public school system. Its problems are so profoundand its disorganization so pervasive that it would be a challenge to thesavviest of America's business managers. Just for starters: There is nocentral management--only 16,000 local school districts run by amateurboards pursuing their own agendas: football, creationism, condomdistribution.   The school-board situation isn't going to change anytime soon, sincelocal control is considered an inalienable right in America. But some helpfor what ails the schools is on the way, thanks to contemporary managementtheory. Two related movements--toward school choice and schoolstandards--have far more to do with Peter F. Drucker than with John Dewey.SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST. School-choice advocates hope to foster competitionamong schools. That way, the weakest schools will lose students and eitherimprove or fold. The strongest schools will prosper and expand. One planwould offer vouchers for purchasing education from existing private andpublic schools. Vouchers are strongly opposed by teachers' unions and theClinton Administration. They argue that some kids will be left in badschools and some schools will use the wrong lures--such as lavish spendingon sports. Still, Republicans will give school choice a boost if theirnumbers increase in state legislatures this year.   Other reformers favor charter schools that contract to provide educationto willing public-school students. Often operating out of storefronts orunderused public buildings and free of bureaucracy, charter schools aregenerally cost-effective. These schools must demonstrate results or losetheir charters. There are some 245 of them in 19 states. ``This is justapplying America's entrepreneurial spirit to the school,'' says JosephNathan, director of the Center for School Change, a research group inMinnesota that is tracking the trend.   Curriculum reform based on setting universal standards of knowledge isprogressing much faster. It is based on sound business principles: Firstyou decide what students should learn, and then you hold teachers andadministrators accountable. ``In states where they take standardsseriously, they have seemed to make a difference,'' says Marc Tucker,president of the National Center on Education and the Economy, which helpsschools in the standards effort. Critics complain that teachers willconcentrate on drilling students to pass tests instead of pursuing broadereducational objectives. Still, parents seem to like the results. In theirsecond year of a standards-based curriculum, Maryland students boostedtheir scores by 25%.   Pressure for schools to become more efficient is intense. Immigration isswelling enrollments. The number of students with limited proficiency inEnglish jumped by 26% during the 1980s. And children who require specialeducation increased by 15% over the past decade. ``We've got a whole influxof kids who have been exposed to alcohol and drugs, hurt by environmentalcontaminants, or diagnosed with learning difficulties,'' says KathyChristie, a Denver-area school board member and an analyst at the EducationCommission of the States.FALLING BEHIND. All this is happening as an unpaid bill for neglect ofschool buildings is coming due. One-third of America's schools, servingsome 14 million students, require extensive repair or replacement,according to a 1995 report by the General Accounting Office. A quarter ofall public schools lack sufficient computers, and 42% have inadequatescience laboratories, says the GAO.   That is a lot for local school boards to deal with. Without a clearfocus on educational goals, they tend to ``pay too much attention toasbestos and not enough to training teachers and developing curriculum,''says Bruce Alberts, president of the National Academy of Sciences. Americanscience scholarship in grade school is falling behind because much of theindustrialized world pays ``enormously more attention to teacher refreshercourses and to professional development,'' says Alberts.   America's management gurus may not have the whole solution. But thenotion that schools must measure and improve their output--graduates whocan read and do math--can only help.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: K-12 Spending Per Pupil Keeps RisingRAY VELLA/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INDUSTRY OUTLOOKBy:By Mike McNamee in Washington, with Richard A. Melcher in Chicago,Elisabeth Malkin in Mexico City, Wendy Zellner in Dallas, and bureaureportsOn medieval maps, the terra incognita around the borders was festooned withwhirlpools, dragons, and dire warnings: ``Here there be monsters!'' In1996, as the U.S. economy sails into uncharted waters, its map might wellbe decorated with cherubs and zephyrs. Refreshed after 1995's slowdown andwafted along by falling interest rates, American business should glide into1996, leaving in its wake steady if not sparkling growth through the sixthyear of expansion.   Favorable portents abound. Congress and the White House seem certain todeliver a plan to whack hundreds of billions out of federal deficits overthe last half of the '90s. Even with the budget unresolved, the FederalReserve cut short-term interest rates on Dec. 19 from 5.75% to 5.5%--thefirst of three 25-basis-point cuts that Fed-watchers expect by the end of1996. That's welcome news: ``We'll see growth in '96, but I think we'll seemore of it if the Fed keeps lowering rates,'' says Ross J. Centanni,president of air-compressor maker Gardner Denver Machinery Inc.   Coupled with continued low inflation, the Fed's easing will ratify theremarkable rally in bond prices, keeping crucial long-term rates down. Thatwill provide a lift to housing and commercial real estate. And America'stop trading partners should struggle out of their 1995 doldrums and buymore from U.S. manufacturers.SCROOGES GALORE. That's not to say that business will sail effortlesslythrough the year. The 23 industries profiled by BUSINESS WEEK in thisyear's Industry Outlook will need skillful navigation to steer throughshifting currents. The sectors that will lead the way through 1996 willeither enjoy continuing strong demand--such as semiconductor makers or WallStreet's securities houses--or, like defense manufacturers, will continueto squeeze more profits out of shrinking sales.   Laggards will find themselves on the wrong side of 1996's negativetrends: slower growth in capital spending, pressure on pricing, andtight-fisted consumers. After a three-year modernization binge with12%-plus growth rates in capital spending, investment in producers' durableequipment will rise only 6% in 1996, after adjustment for inflation. Evencomputer makers will lose some altitude, with inflation-adjusted salesrising 18% in 1996, vs. 27.1% growth in 1995, according to forecasts byDRI/McGraw-Hill.   The '90s efficiency boom will spell trouble for any producer trying toraise prices in 1996. In a BUSINESS WEEK/Harris Executive Poll in December(page 76), only 40% of the executives surveyed predict they will raiseprices in 1996, down from the 63% who were confident of price hikes before1995 began. ``We're in a buyer's market,'' says Bradford W. Hildebrandt, amanagement consultant to law firms. And carmakers, restaurateurs,retailers, and other businesses catering to consumers will find they'redealing with wary customers, thanks to debt burdens that have hit a record19% of disposable income. ``Debt is putting a lot of pressure onhouseholds, particularly the under-$50,000 families'' who are the core ofthe mass market, says economist Mark M. Zandi of forecasters RegionalFinancial Associates.   But even careful consumers will spend enough to keep the economygrowing. Jobs and income will keep rising, and inflation will stay low,with consumer prices up about 2.9%. That will help keep long-term interestrates near their low 1995 levels, with yields on the 30-year Treasury bondaveraging 6.3% for 1996. All told, BUSINESS WEEK expects the economy toturn in a better performance in 1996 than 1995: The gross domestic productwill grow about 2.3%, after inflation, from the fourth quarter of 1995 tothe end of 1996. That's up from the 2% expected when the books are closedon 1995 (charts, pages 74, 74A).   That 2.3% growth may not sound like much, but, remember, the scale formeasuring the economy is changing. The Commerce Dept. is adjusting the wayit calculates growth in GDP--in particular, how much of growth represents areal increase in output vs. how much results from inflation. The old systemtended to overemphasize growth in surging industries with falling prices,primarily computers, thus ballooning the economy's overall growth rate.   The new ``chain-weighted'' measures will reflect price changes morequickly, resulting in less exaggeration of fast-growing sectors. So whilethe old scale measured GDP growing at a respectable 2.8% in 1995, theCommerce Dept. will probably report a 2% gain by the new measures--forcingbusiness and economists to recalibrate notions of what constitutes a``weak'' or ``strong'' economy. BUSINESS WEEK uses the chain-weightedsystem in this report.GROWING SEASON. However you measure it, the 1996 economy will feature somefamiliar trends, such as downsizing. Outplacement specialists ChallengerGray & Christmas Inc. predict that corporate layoffs will total 420,000 in1996, matching 1995's level. Payroll-shedding will be most common inindustries where the government's role, either as a purchaser or aregulator, is shrinking: defense, aerospace, telecommunications, banking,and utilities.   Slash-and-burn alone, however, will no longer dominate strategysessions. ``Very few companies have created sustainable advantages throughshrinking,'' says Thomas J. Tierney, managing director of consultants Bain& Co. More companies say they're focusing on growth strategies designed toincrease sales, boost market share, and expand overseas. In a Septembersurvey of senior planning executives at 100 large U.S. corporations, 73%said that boosting revenues would be more important than cutting costs overthe next three years, according to the Futures Group Inc., strategicplanning consultants. Only 18% of the executives surveyed emphasizedbelt-tightening.   One of the fastest routes to growth is acquisition. The 1995 merger boomwill keep rolling--whether it's telephone and media giants scrambling forstronger positions in explosive communications markets or doctors bandingtogether for clout to deal with insurers. Defense contractors, electricutilities, drugmakers, and banks are all feeling the heat. ``People realizethey need scale to compete--and it's easier to buy than to build,'' saysmergers and acquisitions expert Kim Fennebresque, managing director ofUnion Bank of Switzerland. ``If you have scale, you can reduce costs.''   Take Union Pacific Corp., awaiting government approval for its $3.9billion purchase of Southern Pacific Rail Corp. Ronald J. Burns, CEO ofUnion Pacific Railroad Co., figures the combined lines will reap nearly$700 million a year in cost savings and increased revenues when the deal isdigested. With economies like that within reach, Securities Data Co.expects 1996's M&A activity to top the record $442 billion in 1995 dealsreported as of Dec. 18.   Internal investment will remain heavy, too. For some industries, even athree-year boom in capital spending hasn't satisfied the need for moreproduction capacity: Semiconductor makers are scrambling to build enoughclean rooms to keep up with 20%-plus growth in chip demand. Even sectorswith plenty of new facilities must upgrade for global competition. ``Whenyou're in a harsh, competitive environment, you can't stop modernizing,''says Roger E. Brinner, DRI chief economist. Pharmaceutical firms, whichboosted research spending by a relatively low 8% in 1995, plan to beef upbudgets in search of blockbuster drugs.   Steel is an example of the modernization drive. Despite 1995's collapsein prices, steelmakers are rushing to build minimills. While each newminimill wreaks havoc on existing producers, cheaper production gives steelan edge over other materials: Builders, for example, are using more steeland less concrete. ``People say steel demand is inelastic,'' says NucorCorp. Chairman F. Kenneth Iverson. ``But when you drop the price, youexpand the market.''   Many industries will be looking abroad to expand their markets in 1996.``We're not planning on the U.S. economy to carry us in 1996,'' says DanielJ. Meyer, CEO of Cincinnati Milacron Inc. Outfits such as Milacron lookingto expand sales abroad can count two strong pluses in 1996: Americanindustry is now ranked the world's most competitive, according to theSwiss-based World Economic Forum. And America's top trading partners, aftera poor-to-disastrous 1995, see better economies ahead.   The biggest surprise may be Japan. After a 33% surge in the Nikkei stockindex, coupled with the Bank of Japan's success at stabilizing the yen ataround 100 to the dollar, Tokyo pundits are hopeful that economicstagnation will finally end after four flat years. Forecasters expectJapan's GDP to grow by 1.2% or more in 1996, after inflation.   That growth should open up possibilities for U.S. exporters. Americanbrands are increasingly popular in Tokyo's Ginza, where Gap Inc. recentlyopened a store to push its low-key apparel. U.S. computer makers hold about30% of Japan's $9 billion PC market, with Compaq Computer Corp. and IBMexpecting to reap even more sales from the recent rollout of a Japaneseversion of Windows 95. Even American carmakers are pushing at the gates inhopes of capitalizing on last summer's U.S.-Japan trade deal: Ford MotorCo. and Chrysler Corp. unveiled right-hand-drive models of the Taurus andNeon at this fall's Tokyo auto show.RECOVERING PESO. The other sick economy of 1995--Mexico--will also showsigns of health. Following last winter's peso crisis, the Mexican economyhas shrunk by at least 7%. U.S. exports to Mexico fell by 9% in 1995, whilethe cheap peso powered a sharp 30% rise in Mexican sales to El Norte. Now,Mexico seems set for a slow recovery, with 1.5% to 2% growth in 1996followed by 4% or more in 1997. That won't ignite a boom in U.S. exportsales, but pressure on the trade imbalance could ease if the peso gainsstrength against the dollar.   U.S. companies account for the bulk of the $6.3 billion in directinvestments in Mexico pledged for 1996. AT&T, MCI Communications, and BellAtlantic are spending heavily to prepare for the 1997 opening oftelecommunications. Privatization will spread to petrochemical plants andrailroads in 1996, and Mexico is encouraging foreigners to invest innatural-gas distribution and power plants. U.S. corporations increasinglysee Mexico as an attractive production base for sales to the rest of LatinAmerica. ``We can tie together manufacturing in the U.S. and Mexico and goafter markets in South America,'' says Kenneth C. Brown, president of GE deMexico.   Forecasters don't expect much help with the trade balance from Canada'srebounding economy, which the Bank of Montreal predicts will grow 3.5% in1996. With the weak Canadian dollar (trading at around U.S. 73 cents) andwith shaky Canadian consumers holding on to their wallets, Canada'ssouthbound exports may grow faster than the flow of goods northward. Thatcould push Canada's merchandise trade surplus with the U.S. to a record $27billion in 1996, says Sherry Cooper, chief economist at Toronto brokerageNesbitt Burns.   Europe may not do much for the U.S. trade balance in 1996, either. Whilemembers of the European Union recently unveiled their proposed unifiedcurrency, the Euro, the recent French strikes to protest budget-cutting inParis highlight the difficulty that EU members will have in meeting thestringent fiscal requirements for monetary union. French forecasters expectgrowth of only 1% in 1996. Germany is healthier, but business there isstruggling to remain competitive in the face of high wages and taxes.``Europe still has the pain and agony of downsizing and restructuring aheadof it,'' says Nariman Behravesh, DRI's chief international economist, whopredicts 2.3% growth for the EU in 1996.   For fast growth, U.S. exporters will once again have to turn to Asia.The economies of China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan,and Thailand will grow at rates between 5% and 9% in 1996, down justslightly from 1995. Texas Instruments Inc., for instance, has an Asianexport winner in its high-end digital-signal processing chips, made inAmerica and sold for use in interactive toys, telecom gear, and videodevices. TI's Asian sales rose 50% in 1996, says Victor Koh, managingdirector for Hong Kong and China, in part because Asians are buying moreelectronics for their own use. ``We're benefiting from the higher affluencein Asia,'' he says.   Global crosscurrents will make 1996 the third strong year for Americanexports, which should grow a further 9% after adjustment for inflation. Atthe same time, subdued U.S. consumers may cut down on their purchases ofgoods made abroad. So while the U.S. will still run a trade deficit, theimproved trade balance should add some $18 billion to GDP in 1996, saysAllen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Inc., marking ``the firsttime this decade that net exports have been a plus for U.S. growth ratherthan a drag.''BETTER THINGS TO DO. Export gains, continued capital spending, lowinflation, and falling interest rates--what could go wrong with thispicture? The biggest threat to the serene economy of 1996 may lie inWashington. In their struggle over balancing the budget, President Clintonand congressional Republicans have already shut down major portions of thefederal government twice and spooked the markets.   Still, neither the White House nor Capitol Hill has much to gain from abudget stalemate. For both sides, the best course is to strike a deal andmove on to matters closer to politicians' hearts--such as campaigning forNovember's elections. If Washington's dragons and sea serpents will justget out of the way, the U.S. economy could enjoy fair winds in 1996.LeadersHigh-tech and service industries will set the pace in 1996SEMICONDUCTORS: Good-bye to boom-and-bust cycles as chips becomeall-pervasiveSECURITIES: Continued low interest rates will fuel Wall StreetBUSINESS SERVICES: The world wants American services, from advertising toconsultingSOFTWARE: With the Internet, the software industry once again reinventsitselfDEFENSE: Revenue keeps shrinking, but the sector is profiting fromconsolidationLaggardsBasic industries and others serving strapped consumers will trudge alongAUTOS: Sales may rise a bit, but affordability remains a nagging problemINSURANCE: Look for more mergers--and more competition for householdsavingsRETAILING: Heavy discounting will squeeze profits as the weak disappearMETALS: New steelmaking capacity will drag prices downFOOD: Supermarkets will lose ``share of stomach'' to take-out jointsIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: The 1996 EconomyCHARTS BY ALAN BASEDENIllustration: Chart: World GrowthCHARTS BY ALAN BASEDENPhotograph(s):Photograph: PUSH COMES TO...COOPERATION: With depressingly stable prices,how do you turn a buck these days in the oil patch? Talk rivals intoteaming up on production (page 87)PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUG MILNERPhotograph: WHOPPERS AND WOOFERS TO GO: If you can sell burgers in ahome-electronics store, why not? Here, too, the name of the game is reducedoverhead (page 105)NINA BERMAN/SIPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TALK SHOWBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG``The world is full of people whose notion of a satisfactory future is, infact, a return to an idealized past.''-- Robertson Davies, the Canadian author of The Cunning Man, who died at 82on Dec. 2Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TEA LEAVES, ANYONE?By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGOnce again, Up Front bravely predicts the future. We undertake thisfoolhardy venture on the basis of what we know about the past. That oftencan lead one astray, but it's the best we've got.THE '96 ELECTION. It's Bill Clinton, the Comeback Kid, for four more years.Vilified for much of his first term, he still will outshine his dour GOPchallenger, Bob Dole. Right-wing Republicans, uneasy about deal-cutterDole, will stay home. Ross Perot will mount a third-party foray and skimoff more GOP voters. Public dismay over Gingrichian harshness will give theDems back the House but not the Senate.STOCK MARKET. Funny thing how the economy and the market usually go up inan election year. Aided by lowering interest rates and ebbing inflation,the Dow should rise moderately, to 5600, by Election Day. Nothing like1995's performance, however, since that's hard to top.INTEREST RATES. An eventual federal budget accord--neither party wants tobe accused of gridlock--should give the Federal Reserve all the ammo itneeds to lower rates some more. Look for the Fed, satisfied that inflationis under control, to reduce the federal-funds rate by a half-point, to 5%,by spring. Then it will lay off, so as not to get tangled up in electoralpolitics.MONETARY UNION. The much heralded European Monetary Union will be shelvedduring a summit this summer. Other than Germany, no European country isclose to hitting fiscal targets set up by the Maastricht Treaty for asingle currency. These require cutting budget deficits and debt by 1997. Asthe strikes in France show, the necessary austerity is not popular. Plus,Europe's economies are weakening, which will make achieving the treaty'sgoals even harder.APPLE. Woebegone Apple Computer will sell off chunks of its business, sinceno buyer wants the whole thing. Look for Oracle's Larry Ellison, SunMicrosystems, or IBM to acquire software. Japan's Canon could be a buyerfor the hardware.DISNEY. Mickey's run of smash animated films will end with this summer'srelease of The Hunchback of Notre Dame. While not a bust, this flick willdo nowhere near the box office of The Lion King blockbuster or even themoderate hit Pocahontas. In a bid to lure boys and teens, Disney choseQuasimodo's unlovely tale. This downbeat story, though, will turn offtraditional Disney fans. Plus, the movie has few of the soaring musicalnumbers that punctuated earlier efforts.CHRYSLER. A nasty proxy fight erupts as Kirk Kerkorian challenges Chrysler.His goal is to name his lieutenant Jerome York to the board, launch a hugestock buyback, and double the dividend. Result: CEO Robert Eaton fends offthe billionaire. Eaton shunts some of the company's $6.4 billion in sparecash--which Kerkorian wanted to use for dividends and buybacks--into themore productive pursuit of a joint venture with a foreign auto maker.THE INTERNET. Net fever will cool off a notch or two. With scads ofcompanies already on the Net but profits scarce, new offerings will taperoff. Look for consolidation among the companies providing Net services.Most likely winners: America Online, Netscape, Microsoft.Illustration(s):Illustration: SLICE AND DICE: ApplePhotograph(s):Photograph: FEARLESS FORECASTSPHOTOGRAPH BY GAMMA-LIAISON (CLINTON)Photograph: FRANCE: On strike against austerityPHOTOGRAPH BY BUU SIMON/GAMMA-LIAISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SMARTEST MOVES OF 1995By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG1. AT&T focused its energies on the booming telecom market by forging plansto spin off its manufacturing arm and its problem-plagued computer unit(the former NCR). The stock has soared since, wiping out all the NCRlosses.2. Early investors in the Netscape public offering profited outrageously.Since going public at 28 last summer, it topped 150 by early December.3. Colin Powell adroitly managed his public persona with his book tour. Bythen ruling out a Presidential bid, he avoids the mud of the 1996primaries. So he's free to be crowned the GOP Vice-Presidential nominee.4. Kirk Kerkorian advanced his battle to win more influence at Chrysler byhiring its former CFO, Jerome York. York's baleful analyses of thecarmaker's finances grabbed investor attention.5. Caterpillar hung tough and got the United Auto Workers to come back fromtheir 18-month strike, accepting terms they rejected at the outset.Photograph(s):Photograph: NICE HIRE: KirkPHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE KODEY/LAS VEGAS REVIEW (KIRK)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DUMBEST MOVES OF 1995By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG1. Daiwa Bank let a U.S.-based trader run up $1.1 billion in losses. A keyregulator at Japan's Ministry of Finance knew about the mess but let itslide.2. Barings collapsed because it didn't know until too late thatSingapore-based trader Nick Leeson ran up $1.4 billion in losses.3. Newt Gingrich's abrasiveness and vainglory blunted his message. Bigexample: He said he favored shutting down the government in November partlyout of pique that Bill Clinton made him sit in the back of Air Force One.4. Calvin Klein was forced to withdraw his jeans ads, which used teenmodels in suggestive poses. Critics accused him of purveying kiddie porn.5. ABC knuckled under to Philip Morris' $10 billion libel suit over aprogram about cigarettes' nicotine content that contained one defensibleerror.Photograph(s):Photograph: BAD BOY: A Calvin adPhotograph: TOUCHY: NewtPHOTOGRAPH BY GAMMA-LIAISON (NEWT)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FROM CHRISTMAS BLAHS TO NEW YEAR'S EASEBy:BY JAMES C. COOPER & KATHLEEN MADIGANWhile Congress and the White House play their political games over thebudget, they seem oblivious to the dangers of testing the patience of thefinancial markets. With so much anticipation for deficit reduction alreadypriced into the markets, Wall Street had better get some good news fromWashington fast, or another 102-point tumble in stock prices and a sharpsell-off in bonds like those of Dec. 18 could be in the making.   For now, at least, the markets have taken solace from elsewhere inWashington: the Federal Reserve. The Fed's Dec. 19 quarter-point cut inshort-term interest rates has soothed the markets' edginess, not so muchbecause of that one snip but because it now looks as though more policyeasing is on the way.   The strongest hint of that is the reason given by the Fed for its latestcut. Chairman Alan Greenspan cited not a soft economy but inflation thatwas ``somewhat more favorable than anticipated.'' More important, he noted``an associated moderation in inflation expectations.'' The two-point dropduring the past year in long-term bond yields, which incorporateanticipated inflation, bears that out.   If such expectations are indeed down, the Fed cannot justify holding itsovernight federal funds rate nearly three full points above the rate ofinflation, in light of an historical average of only about 1 3/4%. WhatGreenspan is saying is this: Against a more sanguine attitude toward futureinflation, real short-term rates are simply too high.   Moreover, these expectations of lower inflation are not fleeting. Theyare set to stay down amid continued modest economic growth, an eventualbudget deal, a stronger dollar, and a new order of technology-drivencompetitiveness in Corporate America.THE IMPACT of these structural forces is clear in the November consumerprice index, which was flat for the first time since the end of the lastrecession in March, 1991. The core index, which excludes the volatileenergy and food sectors, rose a scant 0.1%.   Through November, annual CPI inflation was running at 2.6%, the same asin 1994, and it seems likely to have ended 1995 very near that pace. Backin July, the Fed's own forecast projected that inflation for the year wouldbe much higher, between 3.1% and 3.4%.   Even service inflation, widely anticipated to be the first area toregister a speedup, has remained modest, at about 3.4% for most of theyear. Meanwhile, goods inflation, at 1.5% in November, is hardly on theradar (chart). However, that low rate is the result of deep discounting bymany retailers, which threatens their profits--and for some, their veryexistence.   Retailers' dreary little Christmas provides additional support for awinter rate cut. Despite the expected last-minute surge, stores stillreported pretty dismal sales in December. Rampant price promotions to lureshoppers subtracted from dollar revenues. The early winter weather in someparts of the nation only added to the problem. The Johnson Redbook Reportsaid December sales at department and discount stores through Dec. 23 were2.4% below November sales.   Lifeless sales mean that yearend profits will be a disaster for manyretailers, and the consolidation process already wracking the industry willaccelerate. More chains, especially regional discounters and apparelstores, are likely to seek bankruptcy protection.   The resulting liquidations could well lead to further downward pressureon goods prices. If so, an actual decline in the monthly CPI in any of thecoming months cannot be ruled out.   This lack of price pressure should bolster the strong low-inflationsentiment in the bond market. And given the Fed's statement on inflationaryexpectations, low long-term rates will give the central bank even more roomfor another rate cut.DO THE RETAIL WOES mean that the economy is tanking? Not necessarily. Muchof the profits decline stemmed from price cutting, so sales on aninflation-adjusted basis should look somewhat better. Also, consumerconfidence, while down slightly in December, remains at the level it hasheld for most of 1995 (chart).   Moreover, according to one top Fed official, the central bank is awarethat the reports from individual retailers do not match the data used tocalculate the Commerce Dept.'s retail sales figures. And those retailnumbers do not include service purchases, which have remained healthy inrecent months.   But while consumer buying is not as dramatically weak as the dourreports from retailers would suggest, demand will still be no better thanmodest. One reason is that in early 1996 consumers will have to contendwith their holiday credit-card bills.THE RESULT WILL BE continued pressure on industrial output and employment,as businesses adjust their inventories to more desirable levels. Thatscenario should translate into unexciting economic growth in the newyear--another reason the Fed will have room to ease policy further.   In October, inventories held by manufacturers, wholesalers, andretailers rose 0.6%, but sales tumbled 0.4%. During the past year, theannual growth rates of both inventories and sales have been slowing, butthe pace of sales has slowed faster (chart).   That disparity is the chief reason for the continued sluggishness in theindustrial sector. Industrial production in November rose a tepid 0.2%,following a decline in October. Output for the fourth quarter is on trackto rise even more slowly than the lackluster 3.2% annual rate posted in thethird quarter.   The international economic climate is also conducive to rate cutting.Even before the Fed's Dec. 19 move, the British Treasury and the GermanBundesbank had trimmed rates in the face of slower economic growth. Andfollowing the Fed, the Bank of Canada eased monetary policy as well.   Other European central banks followed the German lead, as growththroughout Europe appears to be slowing, leading most private forecastersto cut their projections for 1996 European growth. Almost allindustrialized nations reported weak holiday sales.   Consequently, the dollar should be able to maintain its recent trend ofappreciation against the German mark and the Japanese yen, even in the faceof further rate reductions by the Fed. The greenback will get some addedsupport when a budget deal rolls in from Washington--whenever that may takeplace.   That delay, however, will not hamstring monetary policy. In the recentlyreleased minutes of the Fed's Nov. 15 meeting, the central bankers agreedthat the Fed ``could not freeze its policy options while it awaited theoutcome of a prolonged federal budget debate.''   Now that Shutdown II has stretched to record length, the Fed's refusalto be tied to the political wrangling means that economic and inflationaryforces will set the course of monetary policy in early 1996. And right now,those forces point to further easing ahead.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Goods Prices Hold Down InflationERIC HOFFMANN/BWIllustration: Chart: Households Remain UpbeatERIC HOFFMANN/BWIllustration: Chart: Stock Levels Are Outpacing SalesERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A HARD-WON VICTORY IN A SOFT ECONOMYBy:BY JAMES C. COOPER & KATHLEEN MADIGANAfter a dismal 1995, Argentina is poised for an expansionary 1996. And thatgrowth will pave the way for fiscal improvement and a stable currency.   The latest sign that Argentina is coming out of recession came from theLatin America Research Fund. The private agency reported that demand forindustrial goods rose again in November. Purchases have been increasingsince hitting a three-year low in August, with capital goods leading thegain. In addition, in its semiannual survey the government said that theunemployment rate slipped to 16.4% in October, from a record high of 18.4%in May. However, only part of the drop is the result of job growth of40,000 new slots. The rest came from workers dropping out of the laborforce.   Argentina's economy likely fell by 2.5% in 1995, but the government isforecasting growth of 5% in 1996. Private economists expect a morerealistic 3% advance this year. Economic growth should be fueled by lowerinterest rates, a stronger peso--thanks to its link to the rising U.S.dollar and low inflation--and inflows of foreign funds. Already, prospectsof better corporate profits have lifted the stock market in recent weeks.   Economic growth will keep the markets rising. And it will help thegovernment balance the budget in 1996, after Argentina's $2.4 billiondeficit in 1995. To raise revenues, Congress hiked the cigarette tax by 7%on Dec. 21.   Argentina's slump was the result of an austerity program to fighthyperinflation--a battle that has succeeded so far. Consumer prices were up1.7% from a year ago in November (chart). Inflation is on track to risebetween 1.5% and 1.7% for 1995, the lowest rate on record. In 1989,Argentine inflation ran at a stunning 5,000%.   The International Monetary Fund has blessed Argentina's economic andfiscal progress, saying it would lend Argentina $380 million this year.That influx of funds--along with private money attracted by the risingstock market--is added insurance that Argentina's economy will grow in1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Argentina's Headway Against InflationERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HERE COMES GRIDLOCK '96Dug-in liberals and GOP zealots spell election-year paralysisBy:By Richard S. Dunham, with Lee Walczak, in WashingtonCiting irreconcilable differences with his Republican foes, PresidentClinton vetoes appropriations bill after appropriations bill, leaving largechunks of the government to run on fumes. A bitter budget impasse shuttersthe federal bureaucracy for the longest stretch in history, forcing theTreasury to resort to creative accounting to fund essential arms ofgovernment. Voters increasingly dismiss the capital caterwauling as thelatest example of Washington's childishness. Actually, there's another wayto describe the capital's escalating political brawl: dress rehearsal.   As the 1995 legislative season draws to a rancorous close with the fateof a budget-balancing accord, welfare reform, and other key legislationunresolved, the tone is being set for next year's policy struggles. In thebest of times, an election-year Congress can be expected to elevatepolitical theatrics over substance. But the ideological differences betweendug-in Democratic liberals, GOP hardliners, and a President obsessed byreelection will ensure that next year's Congress--and any chance businesshad for advancing the solid legislative gains of '95--will be stymied byparalyzing political gamesmanship.   Even as GOP and Administration budget negotiators warily convened for around of post-Christmas talks, the realization was growing that aftermonths of Republican dominance, Washington has once again become GridlockCity. ``We're ready to kill each other already,'' laments a Democraticleadership aide. ``It can't get any worse--can it?''   Actually, it can, and it will. Bolstered by his success at using theMedicare debate to paint Republicans as extremists, President Clinton plansto continue his political jiu-jitsu in 1996. The new target: a GOP flat-taxproposal that the Administration will cast as a boondoggle for wealthyinvestors. Says a Clinton adviser: ``Medicare was just a dress rehearsalfor what Republicans are in for when Democrats start in on the `taxgiveaway for the rich.'''HANGING TOUGH. If Clinton is spoiling for another fight along class lines,he's sure to find one with a combative group of Hill conservatives who arenot letting House Speaker Newt Gingrich's plunging popularity cool theirfervor. The freshmen have hardened GOP resistance to a budget-balancingaccord and promise to make more trouble next year by redoubling attacks onthe welfare state.   The hang-tough tactics ``haven't been marching orders from NewtGingrich,'' says rookie Representative Steve Largent (R-Okla.). ``We camein here with our name on the dotted line.'' Adds freshman RepresentativeZach Wamp (R-Tenn.): ``We've been called radical and extreme, but I thinkwe're right out of the heart of America.'' Still, business leaders worrythat the freshmen's all-or-nothing approach is overly antagonistic. ``Thewar is worth fighting,'' says Amway President Dick DeVos. ``But itshouldn't be done stupidly.''   To appreciate just how complicated 1996's legislative equation will be,take a short stroll across the Capitol from the foxholes of House GOPguerrillas to the placid quarters of Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole. TheRepublican front-runner will pursue his own agenda--and none of it includesriling potential voters, Gingrich-style. Dole plans a light Senate schedulefor the first three months of '96, which will give him lots of time to wrapup the nomination. Concedes one senior House staffer: ``All we're going toget done around here is the minimum must-pass agenda.''   Even a minimal Hill agenda could fall victim to gridlock. Aside frommonitoring preliminary hearings on radical simplification of the tax code,business is keenest on winning regulatory relief from nuisance lawsuits,environmental mandates, and overeager regulators who don't weigh thepotential economic impact of new rules. The outlook for sweeping change iseven gloomier. For starters, Dems will continue to score political pointsby portraying GOP reformers as too cozy with polluters and overly beholdento corporate benefactors. And House and Senate Republican moderates willcontinue to line up with Dems against GOP radicals. The bottom line forbusiness: little progress in '96.   On another front of interest to business lobbyists--politicalreform--bipartisan attempts to limit the role of organized giving inpolitical campaigns seem likely to be thwarted by the leaders of bothparties. Newly triumphant Republican leaders are shaking the corporatemoney tree hard and don't want to give up their advantage. Democrats,meanwhile, remain hooked on reforms that include taxpayer subsidiesvehemently opposed by Republicans. The prospect: Look for superficialreforms, at best, and torrents of pious rhetoric.DEEP BELIEFS. GOP plans to dismantle New Deal social programs by returningresponsibility to the states will face tough sledding, too. Already, GOPmoderates have quashed reformers' efforts to turn food stamps and theschool lunch program into state-run block grants. And Clinton's attack onGOP schemes to shift Medicaid to state capitals is just a preview of a '96Democratic assault that charges Republicans aim to shred the social safetynet. The outlook: Although Clinton may yet cut a deal on a proposal to endthe federal guarantee of open-ended welfare benefits, other GOP``devolution'' initiatives will languish.   At bottom, deeply held partisan beliefs frame this running debate aboutthe role of government. But the tactics of the combatants are disturbingthe American electorate. In December, the Harris Poll's annual ``alienationindex'' hit a 30-year high. And an Associated Press poll released on Dec.26 found that 29% of those surveyed said neither political party addressestheir top concerns. That's why the return of Washington gridlock will spurdemands for new political options--whether it's Ross Perot's infant ReformParty or another movement.   ``People are concerned by all the posturing and shifting of blame,''says New Hampshire pollster Richard Bennett. ``All politicians are going topay the price.'' Perhaps. But until a resurgent Bill Clinton, unrepentantGingrichites, and comeback-minded Democratic liberals pause to assess thelong-term costs of their scorched-earth tactics, don't look for any breakfrom gridlock politics. All sides are having too much fun gumming up thegears of the American political machinery to stop now.If you liked the partisan battles of '95, you'll love what's in store for'96TAX REFORMExpect early skirmishing over GOP plans to overhaul taxes. Republicans willpush competing plans for a flatter income tax. The Democrats want reformthat retains progressive tax rates and closes corporate loopholes.REG-SLASHINGRepublicans will renew calls for legislation that gives companies relieffrom lawsuits and environmental mandates. The Democrats, allied withRepublican moderates, will again attack reform proposals as extreme.WELFARE REFORMClinton's likely veto of the GOP welfare bill will send everyone back tothe table. In '96, Republicans hope to cast Clinton as a defender ofwelfare deadbeats. Democrats will hold out for better work incentives and asafety net for mothers.POWER TO THE STATESRepublicans who failed in '95 to end entitlements for food stamps and otherprograms will try to shift the programs to states. Democrats will arguethat states lack the resources to fund income-support plans during economicdownturns.THE RIGHT'S AGENDAUnder heavy pressure from conservative freshmen, House Speaker NewtGingrich will allow votes on new abortion restrictions and a repeal of theassault-weapons ban. Democrats will try to thwart both measures.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE ECONOMY THAT FELL TO EARTHGermany's slowdown is scaring its neighborsBy:By John Templeman in Bonn, with Heidi Dawley in London, Silvia Sansoni inRome, and bureau reportsGermany is supposed to be Europe's locomotive. But thanks in part to recentFrench strikes holding up shipments of German goods, gross domestic productprobably will show no growth in the fourth quarter, the second stagnantquarter in a row. Unemployment, rising since last spring, is now at 9.3%.Exports are weakening. Capital spending is slumping. And corporate profitsare falling. Says Ian Harwood, head of strategy and economics at London'sKleinwort Benson Group PLC: ``Fears of a hard landing are growing.''   Indeed, while a tax cut, a recent Bundesbank interest-rate reduction,and a widely expected decline in the German mark may produce a briefrebound in the first half, the year ahead looks grim. Unless consumersunzip their pocketbooks in a hurry--and that looks doubtful--Germany willhave a hard time even reaching the anemic 2% growth rate it achieved in1995 (chart).   Such downbeat forecasts scare Germany's neighbors. ``If Germany slowsdown, everyone else winds down with it,'' says Sergio De Nardis, senioreconomist at Confindustria, the Italian industrialists' federation. Thatcould spell the end of Europe's grand plans for a single currency andmonetary union by the start of 1999. European Union nations, led by France(box), already are struggling to cut budget deficits and cap governmentdebt levels to bring them in line with the Maastricht Treaty. But a seriousgrowth setback starting from Germany would lower tax revenues, raisegovernment borrowing, and bloat deficits across the EU, putting monetaryunion out of reach and blowing further European unification out of thewater.   To a great degree, Germans have themselves to blame for theirpredicament. Economics Minister Gunter Rexrodt blames the current slowdownon a high mark, big wage hikes, and rising taxes. Add overregulation ofbusiness and rigid work rules, and it's no surprise that German companiesmade some $26 billion in direct investments outside the country in thefirst nine months of 1995, double the 1994 rate. The money is flowing toEastern Europe, Asia, and even Britain, whose manufacturing costs are 40%lower than Germany's.   The huge gap prompted Siemens, for example, to choose Britain as thesite for a $1.7 billion semiconductor plant. Consumer-products makerProcter & Gamble Co., meanwhile, has stopped making new investments inGermany. Its high business costs, warns Harald Einsmann, P&G regionalpresident, risk turning the country into the ``hole in the doughnut'' inEurope's industrial landscape.   As manufacturers rethink their commitment to Germany, hollowing out isbecoming a growth business. Two-thirds of management consultant McKinsey &Co.'s German trade now consists of helping manufacturers expand productionin other parts of the world. Says Senior Partner Herbert Henzler:``Germany's present export model--design it, make it, and export it fromhere--is no longer viable.''WARY CONSUMERS. With more companies adopting that mantra, workforce cutswill continue. Germany has already lost 1 million jobs since 1992, mostlyin manufacturing. But employers' organizations warn that another 500,000 to1 million jobs are at risk unless wage costs, particularly welfare taxes,fall. Little wonder that in one recent poll, two-thirds of easternGermans--and half of those in the west--told the Allensbach-basedDemoskopie Institut that the risk of losing their jobs is now their biggestworry.   That's bad news for policymakers who are counting on a revival ofconsumer demand. Many expect further Bundesbank rate cuts, and an $11billion income tax reduction kicks in on Jan. 1. Will that money find itsway into stores? Some analysts are skeptical, noting that after months ofbelt-tightening to pay higher taxes, many consumers aren't about to loosenup with the economy slowing. ``We went without so much this year, that wemight consider spending [the tax rebate],'' says Gabi Lewin, a mother oftwo whose husband works in an accountant's office. ``But if things getworse over the short term, we might just sock it away and wait.''   Reflecting that caution, retail sales fell 2.5% in 1995, the thirdstraight decline, and a hoped-for late spurt in Christmas buying failed tomaterialize. And forget about 1996. Walter Deuss, chief executive officerof the Karstadt department-store chain, notes that recent surveys ``don'tpoint to any durable improvement in consumer confidence.''   While Germany waits for consumer spending to revive, the economycontinues to flag. If the U.S. is any guide, German restructuring effortscould start bearing fruit around the time the EU plans to get its monetaryunion into motion. That could leave Germany stronger and more competitivethan ever. Until then, expect anxiety levels to keep rising--in Germany andacross Europe.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Signs Of German StagnationCHARTS BY ERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NOW JUPPE HAS TO PICK UP THE PIECESBy:By Bill Javetski in ParisAs Paris buses and subways began running again in late December afterFrance's worst strikes in three decades, drivers and token-booth clerkscheerfully welcomed commuters back by letting them ride free of charge. Itwas a smart public-relations move--but it was also unauthorized, showingjust how feisty France's public-sector unions are feeling after paralyzingthe country for 24 days. In forcing Prime Minister Alain Juppe to back awayfrom several key reforms, labor leaders have set the stage for a perilousNew Year as France tries to curb spending, revive growth, and prepare formonetary union. Without a strong government in charge, achieving any ofthose goals may be impossible.   It is true that Juppe did not lose everything in his struggle with theunions. In late December, a ``social summit'' with labor and industry leftintact a core plan to eliminate France's $12 billion health-care deficit.But the realization is sinking in that ``Juppe is storing up problems forthe future,'' figures Christopher Potts, economist at Paris brokerageChevreux De Virieu.BATTERED ECONOMY. For starters, Juppe's health-care plan probably marks thelimits of the reforms that his government will achieve. Tackling the costsof France's civil service now seems impossible, since to end the strikes,Juppe caved on the key points of reforming the loss-ridden nationalrailroad and aligning public-sector pensions with more restrictiveprivate-sector ones. And with his autocratic style, Juppe has failed tobuild any kind of consensus for further cuts, even though governmentspending is fast pushing up debt levels to dangerous heights (chart).   Yet Germany, France's key European partner, is insisting on even deeperFrench budgetary austerity for a possible monetary union. For a singlecurrency to work, France must meet the German demands. Even a vigorouseconomic upturn won't be enough to keep Juppe from needing additionalspending cuts to shrink the deficit from its current 5% of gross domesticproduct to 3% by the end of 1997. That's when France and other aspiringcandidates must prove they qualify for the currency union.   France's economy enters 1996 badly battered from the strikes, which mayresume at the end of January. Estimates of the strikes' costs in losteconomic activity range as high as $4 billion. The crippling job action,which dried up holiday shopping, put some 50,000 small businesses at riskof failing, according to Conseil National du Patronat Francais, the Frenchemployers' association. ``We're in recession now, and we'll enter 1996slowing down further,'' says CNPF Vice-President Denis Kessler.Unemployment, which recently began rising again, will top 12% by June, thenational statistics office estimates. Morgan Stanley Group Inc. economistEric Chaney sees France's economy growing just 1.3% next year. For 1997,the critical year for picking nations that will be eligible for monetaryunion, he sees France's budget deficit hovering above 4%, a full percentagepoint off the target.THIN GRUEL.. Boxed in by the unions, Juppe hopes to stimulate moribundconsumer activity by granting tax breaks to investors selling stakes inmoney-market funds. To tackle 20% youth unemployment, he is looking topersuade companies to fill half their job vacancies with people under theage of 25. And he is calling on business and labor to speed up negotiationsover part-time work and other ways to make French industry more flexible.   But that's thin gruel considering France's budgetary plight. The strikesmay be over for now. But their repercussions on France and all of Europewill be felt through 1996 and beyond.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: France's Growing Debt ProblemCHARTS BY ERIC HOFFMANN/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: STYMIED: The strikes hurt retailersCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FROM BLUEPRINTS TO GRAND DESIGNEx-engineer John Correnti now must recast NucorBy:By Stephen Baker in PittsburghAs a young engineer, John D. Correnti built factories for a living. The jobkept him moving about as often as a traveling salesman. He built blastfurnaces in Ohio, a tire-cord factory in Georgia, a uranium plant in Texas.He was usually hundreds of miles away, he now jokes, by the time anyglitches appeared. In 1983, Correnti was finishing up a steel mill in Utahfor Nucor Corp. when he got a surprise phone call from Chairman F. KennethIverson ordering him to run the plant. Correnti was stunned. ``You didn'ttell me I'd have to live with my mistakes,'' he protested.   Iverson just called Correnti again--and this time he's turning the wholeshebang over to him. On Jan. 1, the 48-year-old executive will take over asCEO of the Charlotte (N.C.) minimill giant, which is poised to passBethlehem Steel Corp. as the second-biggest steel company in America,trailing only the U.S. Steel Group of USX Corp. The transition shouldn't bebumpy for the compact, silver-templed Correnti: Since 1991, he has beenNucor's chief operating officer. What's more, Iverson is sticking around aschairman. Still, taking over for a CEO who led Nucor to 30 years of strongsales growth and solid profits is daunting. ``He's an icon,'' Correntisays.ADJUSTMENTS NEEDED. Correnti's promotion comes at a trying time for Nucor.For a decade, it has been the high-flying Wal-Mart of the steel industry,keeping costs down on basic products and passing the savings on tocustomers. But as imitators spring up, also offering cheap, basic steel,Nucor finds itself under pressure to revamp its product mix and get intohigher-margin steels. Meanwhile, it's still struggling with new technologyat its iron carbide plant in Trinidad. Worried investors have traded thestock down to about $54, vs. last year's high of $72.   Correnti admits Nucor has some adjusting to do. To compete in premiummarkets, it must improve product quality. Customers in those markets, suchas auto and appliance makers, also demand lots of customized attention, aspecialty of the integrated steel companies.   Yet Correnti takes over a strong, nearly debt-free company. As newchallengers grapple with startups in Kentucky and Indiana, Nucor already isexperimenting with making upscale stainless steel and ultrathin gauges inits Indiana and Arkansas plants. Plus, it's busy building a thirdflat-rolled steel mill, a $500 million behemoth in South Carolina. Correntiexpects Nucor's sales this year to jump 13%, to $3.35 billion, and earningsto top 1994's record $227 million. He's looking for 15% to 20% sales growthfor the next five years. Even if Nucor stumbles, it likely will eclipseU.S. Steel as the No.1 steelmaker by the year 2000. ``After South Carolina,it would just take one more mill,'' he says.FRIEND OF BILL. The question is whether Nucor under Correnti can staynimble. He says he will keep the 22-person headquarters small and continuedelegating great powers to the plant managers. His job? To oversee newprojects, stay in touch with Wall Street, and visit the 19 divisions two orthree times a year. Except for all the flying time--spent reading mysterynovels--Nucor's rapid growth rate won't be much of a drain on its CEO, hesays; ``What's the difference between 15 divisions and 30 divisions? It'sjust a few more lines on the page.''   Correnti is regarded as harder-driving than the genial Iverson, and hepreens a bit more in the limelight. He made friends with then-Governor BillClinton when the company was negotiating plant sites in Arkansas. And hecontinues to meet with Clinton, talking steel and politics at the WhiteHouse--or, more recently, chatting at a Little Rock banquet for retiringDemocratic Senator David H. Pryor. ``I'm one of the Republican Friends ofBill,'' he says.   He's also quicker than Iverson to make enemies. Speaking at RobertMorris College in Pittsburgh, Correnti bulled into a subject mostexecutives sidestep, saying matter-of-factly that he would ``never dream ofbuilding a mill'' in a union town like Pittsburgh. But as competition heatsup for Nucor, Correnti's combative ways might be just what the companyneeds.JOHN D. CORRENTIBORN Apr. 1, 1947, Rochester, N.Y.EDUCATION Clarkson University, BS in civil engineeringCAREER PATH Construction engineer at U.S. Steel; plant manager, COO atNucorGOAL To expand Nucor by 15% to 20% a year, which would make it the No.1U.S. steelmakerHOBBIES Skiing, reading Dick Francis mysteriesQUOTE ``I just want to keep the train on track, steaming ahead''Photograph(s):Photograph: BACKUPCorrenti, left, will still have the counsel of the savvy Iverson, who isstaying on as chairmanWILL MCINTYRECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SHE IS THE NRAIts first female chief is out to oust Clinton and lure womenBy:By Paul Magnusson in WashingtonMarion P. Hammer was working late one night in Tallahassee when a carloadof thugs followed her into a parking garage and threatened her. ``I reachedinto my purse, pulled out my gun, brought it up through the headlights, andaimed right at the driver,'' she recalls. ``He put it in reverse, the tiresstarted smoking, and they were gone.''   That was a decade ago, when Hammer was lobbying the Florida legislatureto relax restrictions on handguns. Her success there helped kick off a28-state movement to ease restrictions on carrying concealed weapons. InDecember, her record as a winning lobbyist and hard-line opponent of guncontrol helped her become the first female president of the 3.3million-member National Rifle Assn. after her predecessor, Thomas L.Washington, died of a heart attack. Hammer, who had been vice-president, isexpected to run unopposed in April for a one-year term of her own.   Now, the 56-year-old Hammer has her adversaries firmly in her sights.She wants Congress to overturn the federal assault weapons ban.``Restrictions on gun ownership are just a form of harassment,'' she says.Next up is the defeat of pro-gun-control politicians--starting with thePresident. ``The one thing we definitely plan to do is to work to beat BillClinton,'' says Hammer.   Hammer's confrontational style may be just right for today's embattledNRA, which has image and money problems, has recently lost 200,000 members,and is being audited by the Internal Revenue Service for allegedlycommingling funds. To boost membership again, Hammer plans to step up theNRA's appeal to women and families using two time-honored NRA programs: the``Refuse to be a Victim'' educational campaign for women, emphasizing crimeprevention and self-defense while promoting gun ownership; and the ``EddieEagle'' gun-safety campaign for children, which is Hammer's personalcreation.``WILDLY SUCCESSFUL.'' Under Hammer, the NRA won't neglect politics at thestatehouse either. She spent 20 years lobbying in Florida on behalf of gunowners and proudly points to Florida's first concealed-weapons permit,which allows her to pack her .38 caliber Colt Detective Special or her 9-mmBeretta semiautomatic. ``During the past three years, the NRA has beenwildly successful in the states, and Hammer is the poster child for theconceal-and-carry issue,'' laments Josh Sugarmann, director of the ViolencePolicy Center, a gun-control group.   Hammer, a grandmother of three, likes to unwind at the target rangeafter a day of hard lobbying. On the range or at the office, her opponentssay, she seldom misses her mark.Photograph(s):Photograph: TRUE BELIEVERLobbyist Hammer fended off thugs with a hidden weapon, then sparked a28-state push to ease curbs on handgunsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TELECOM: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE WALLS FALLOnce reform passes, a frenzy of pair-ups is sure to followBy:By Joseph Weber in Philadelphia, with John Carey in WashingtonThey might as well be ringing a starting bell on the Capitol steps.Washington's long revamp of telecommunications law is just about finished.The message most telecom companies hear ringing loud and clear: Let thedeals begin.   On Dec. 20, House and Senate conferees finally hammered out a compromisethat would allow Baby Bells, cable-TV operators, and long-distancecompanies to invade one another's turf. It would also permit companies toown more radio and TV stations than is now permitted. Thorny details, suchas how much to relax curbs on foreign ownership of U.S. companies, remainto be determined. But says Representative Rick Boucher (D-Va.): ``All thecore issues have been settled. This will be landmark legislation.''   Once the bill is passed, probably by early 1996, a swarm of mergers,alliances, and joint ventures seems inevitable. That's because most of therigid regulatory barriers between segments of the industry will be gone.Now, says Robert Barada, chief strategist for San Francisco-based Baby BellPacific Telesis Group: ``Technology and customer demand are going to breakdown the walls.''``LOOKING.'' Which companies are likely to pair up? Bell Atlantic Corp. andNynex Corp. may be among the first, either through a complete mergeror--more probable--a joint venture on long-distance service. Bell AtlanticCEO Raymond W. Smith and Nynex chief Ivan Seidenberg already have jointventures going to provide cellular phone service and, with PacTel, developprogramming for cable TV. Indeed, a Bell Atlantic spokesman calls along-distance joint venture with Nynex ``a real option.'' Adds NynexTelecom Group President Richard A. Jalkut: ``We are looking at all possiblecombinations.''   Teaming up to challenge AT&T, MCI Communications, and Sprint in thelong-distance market would make good business sense for the two NortheastBaby Bells. The Bell Atlantic and Nynex regions account for $20.5 billionof the nation's annual $73 billion long-distance bill (charts). A mergerwould give the two Bells the marketing and technical firepower needed tocompete for customers. Just pooling their ad budgets--Bell Atlantic alonespends about $105 million yearly on all advertising--would challenge the $1billion the Big Three long-distance carriers spend promoting their phoneservices.   Who's next? Analysts expect each Baby Bell to eventually link up with atleast one other. Among the predicted pairings: Pactel and US West, SanAntonio-based SBC Communications and BellSouth, and, perhaps, Chicago-basedAmeritech with Bell Atlantic and Nynex. GTE Corp., with phone linesscattered around the country, is expected to find allies, too. Among otherthings, partnerships would help the Bells better tap international markets.Team-ups of Southern Baby Bells, for instance, could move into LatinAmerica, while Western outfits could target the Pacific Rim.CULTURE CLASH. Long-distance providers, too, should find dealmakingirresistible. Pacts with the Baby Bells would eliminate the need toduplicate local networks while providing potent marketing partners.Analysts say MCI Communications Corp. is a natural ally for a BellAtlantic-Nynex team, for instance. But long-distance carriers are lookingfurther afield as well. Since late 1994, Sprint Corp. and cable operatorsTele-Communications, Cox Cable, and Comcast have been exploring ways toleverage phone and cable-TV operations into advanced communicationssystems. One caveat: A couple of years ago, Bell Atlantic sought to mergewith TCI in a failed deal that confirmed Smith's empire-buildingaspirations. That failure showed how tough it can be to join the go-gocable world with the more conservative Bells.   Another caveat: Analysts figure AT&T will probably avoid cutting dealswith Baby Bells because it won't want to be accused of recreating Ma Bell.It may team up instead with, say, Time Warner Inc.--already a rumorednegotiating partner--to use cable lines for local phone service. That woulddramatically blur the old lines between segments of the telecomindustry--and set the stage for even more radical change. The deals to comewill be ``complex, multifaceted, multidimensional things,'' says TonyFerrugia, a telecom analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. in St. Louis.   In the end, the rewired telecom biz probably will include far fewerplayers who will deliver better service and offer bold innovations. Ma Bellwon't exactly be coming back together after 12 years, but some of heroffspring almost certainly will.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Two Phone Giants' Long ReachCHART BY LISA KNOUSE BRAIMAN/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: SEIDENBERG AND SMITH: A long-distance joint venture?(L TO R) PHOTOGRAPHS BY TIM REDEL; KATHERINE LAMBERTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ALL TOGETHER NOW: `MAKE THAT TO GO'Insatiable demand for convenient, ready-to-eat meals has the food bizscramblingBy:By Greg Burns in ChicagoBoston Chicken Inc. didn't expect much when it tested ready-made holidaymeals this past Thanksgiving. But customers flocked in, gobbling downhundreds of roast turkeys with all the fixin's. Why? ``People don't evenhave time to cook Thanksgiving turkey dinner,'' says Saad J. Nadhir,co-chairman of the take-out chain.   In 1996, the nation's $900 billion food industry will be at the mercy ofcustomers who don't have time. Shoppers who can barely steal a few momentsto shop--let alone whip up home-cooked feasts--will set the pace of growthfor food processors, retailers, and food-service chains. The edge will goto big, dominant companies that can use marketing clout to expand ``shareof stomach'' at the expense of weaker competitors. Other winners will beinnovators of all sizes that find new ways to ease the hunger pangs of aharried populace.   Inevitably, the time squeeze on shoppers will create losers, too,especially among traditional full-line supermarkets. Their strong cashflows give them enviable staying power, so an immediate shakeout isunlikely. But erosion will continue as supermarkets face off againstup-and-comers such as Nadhir, who estimates that half the customers at hisfast-growing Boston Chicken chain would otherwise have cooked at home.``You have too many retailers competing for too few food dollars andappealing to consumers who have less time to deal with it,'' saysconsultant Neil Z. Stern of Chicago's McMillan & Doolittle.IDLE OVENS. Food processors and restaurant chains will see 5% to 6% revenuegrowth in 1996, Stern estimates. Supermarkets will eke out 2% to 3% growth,barely even with inflation. As U.S. households prepare fewer meals at home,the percentage of food dollars spent at food retail stores--as opposed torestaurants, cafeterias, convenience stores, and the like--will dip to 48%in '96 from 55% a decade ago (chart). ``It's a great threat tosupermarkets,'' warns John H. Bryan, chief executive officer for Sara LeeCorp.   Consumers clamoring for ready-to-eat meals have made deli sales the onesupermarket bright spot. Supermarket chains such as Byerly's in Edina,Minn., and Dominick's Finer Foods in Northlake, Ill., have pioneered newin-store formats. In '96, expanded deli departments will attract at least 8cents of each food dollar, up from 4 cents in 1986. And watch for moresupermarkets to introduce mall-style food courts featuring proven operatorssuch as McDonald's Corp., which is testing outlets at a Farmer Jackssupermarket in Michigan and a Kroger in Tennessee. Food processors willjoin in, too: Sara Lee has 17 sandwich shops serving its premium deli meatsinside Kroger supermarkets in Texas and Ohio.   Among restaurant chains, cost control will be crucial. McDonald's hascut the cost of opening a new restaurant by 30% over the past five yearsthrough standardization and more reliance on drive-thru layouts. That hashelped McDonald's step up its U.S. growth fivefold, including jointventures that have put Golden Arches in Wal-Mart Stores, Home Depots,Incredible Universe home-electronics stores, and Amoco gas stations.FAR AND AWAY. With so many more outlets at hand, busy shoppers visit moreoften, leaving less on the plate for the competition. Says McDonald'sVice-Chairman Jack M. Greenberg: ``If you can dominate a trading area, it'smuch more difficult and expensive for competitors to take customers awayfrom you.''   Dominance matters to food processors, too. They're struggling toincrease scale and efficiency to satisfy the likes of supercenters, whichcombine cut-rate supermarkets and discount stores under one roof. Foodprocessors also hope to give their ho-hum U.S. results a boost by pursuingfast-growth markets overseas. And sharp operators such as H.J. Heinz, CPCInternational, Campbell Soup, and others will be trying to lock inrelationships with fast-growing food-service operators. ``Everybody has thesame three strategies--lower domestic costs, grow internationally, and pushinto food service,'' says analyst John M. McMillin at Prudential SecuritiesInc.   With all hands reaching for the same brass ring, the strongest brandsrule. As in 1995, industry players will sell off weak units to moredominant competitors and buy businesses that enhance existing strengths.The goal? Be No.1. ``I'm not even sure being No.2 is enough anymore,''McMillin says. For investors, the message is clear: In the scrap over``share of stomach,'' bet on the top dogs.Prognosis '96Positives   -- With more consumers eating on the run, companies emphasizingconvenience will find eager customers.   -- Food-service operators will grow by opening outlets in stores,supermarkets, and gas stations.Negatives   -- Value-conscious shoppers will resist price increases.   -- Supermarkets will continue to lose ``share of stomach'' to sharperfood-service operators, such as Boston Chicken.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Food Manufacturing, Restaurants, & FoodStoresIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Eating OutCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER REARRANGERSDeregulation will transform the industry--and continue to pinch profitsBy:By Mark Maremont in Boston`Exciting, intense, and fun'': That's how a prominent electric-utilityexecutive describes his job these days. Surprised? If you thoughtelectricity was about as thrilling as dentistry, look again. Athree-year-old drive toward deregulation is causing new upheavals, fromcut-rate pricing to an unprecedented surge in mergers.   On the regulatory front, the action in 1996 is likely to get a jumpstart from an innovative plan approved by California's Public UtilitiesCommission at the end of 1995. The plan, subject to change, would let somecustomers shop for electricity from rival suppliers starting in 1998. Thelong-awaited decision is another sign that the economic and politicalforces propelling deregulation are too powerful to halt. Even AmericanElectric Power Co., the nation's second-largest investor-owned utility--andat one time a staunch opponent of competition--proposed its ownfar-reaching deregulation plan in 1995. Rather than fight the tide, saysCharles A. Falcone, an AEP senior vice-president, ``we have decided we wantto help shape the industry's new structure.''SMOOTH SHIFT. AEP and other utilities had little choice. Profits will beboosted or ravaged for years depending on how the industry and regulatorsresolve some vexing questions. One big one is how far competition shouldgo. The most radical approach would let customers choose an electricitysupplier just as they choose a long-distance phone carrier, with powerflowing over still regulated lines maintained by the local utility. A moremoderate approach would retain today's basic structure but requireutilities to set rates based on prices in a wholesale power pool, whichproponents say would cut down on confusion. Muddying the waters, Californiaregulators decided to let both approaches coexist.   Then there's the issue of the billions of dollars in uneconomical powerplants and long-term power contracts on the books of many utilities. Thesewill become millstones in a world where the cheapest power suppliers willprevail. Big customers and some low-cost utilities contend that overlyexpensive power plants and contracts should be written off, forcingshareholders to bear the brunt of utilities' past poor decisions. But mostutilities argue that their costs are largely a legacy of poor regulations,so customers should continue to foot the bill for a period. Allowingcustomers to disregard their obligations ``is like asking your bank to letyou walk away from half your mortgage just because you want a new house,''argues Thomas J. May, CEO of Boston Edison Co.READY TO BID. More states will grapple with these and other contentiousissues in 1996, starting with Massachusetts and New Hampshire. Meanwhile,utilities are shedding costs and their monopolistic mind-sets. BostonEdison dumped one-fifth of its managers in 1995 and tried to spur newthinking by reassigning most of those remaining to new jobs. WPL HoldingsInc., a low-cost Wisconsin utility, has offered to show rivals' bigcustomers how much they could save by switching to WPL. It can't wrest awaythe customers now, but it hopes to have the chance soon. ``Nobody ownscustomers,'' says Erroll B. Davis Jr., WPL's aggressive CEO.   Despite cost-cutting, profit margins aren't likely to improve much aftera five-year slide. Why? To stop defections, many utilities are cuttingprices to big customers 10% to 40% in return for long-term commitments.Average aftertax profit margins declined to 17.2% in 1995, from 18.9% in1991, says Daniel Scotto, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co.   Moreover, some high-cost utilities are carrying artificial assets ontheir books, such as payments due from customers over the next 20 to 30years. If deregulation proceeds far enough, utilities may have to switch toindustrial accounting standards that don't recognize such assets. Theresulting megawrite-offs ``could get very ugly,'' says analyst Scotto, whocites Centerior Energy Corp. as a prime candidate. Some utilities could beforced into a restructuring or even bankruptcy.   Also on tap for 1996 are more dividend cuts by an industry wheredividends once provided almost the only investment appeal. And mergers,which reached a record $11.9 billion in 1995, are likely to keep surging,especially if stock prices start to plummet as competition takes hold. Noquestion about it: The electric-utility industry isn't boring anymore.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Low interest rates have lightened debt loads.   -- Delay in deregulation is allowing utilities more time to prepare.   -- Demand for power is rising, and capacity is ample, so there's no needfor costly construction.Negatives   -- Demands by big customers for lower prices are hurting margins.   -- High-cost utilities face a bleak future in   -- deregulated world.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: UtilitiesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Utility ProfitsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHO SAYS YOU CAN'T FIND GOOD HELP?Business-service firms boom as companies around the globe retoolBy:By Richard A. Melcher in ChicagoOn some recent continent-hopping business trips, George T. Shaheen,managing partner for Andersen Consulting, became thoroughly convinced thatchange knows no boundaries. The rage in China was all about restructuringand developing new markets. A Brazilian TV company was worried about how tocompete in foreign countries. ``It doesn't matter where you're doingbusiness,'' says Shaheen, ``everyone is going through a massiveretooling.'' While that may be wrenching to many, for Andersen and otherproviders of business services, upheaval is a boon.   Business services--a new category in BUSINESS WEEK's IndustryOutlook--encompasses legal services, advertising, personnel supply,research and consulting, accounting, engineering, architecture, andmiscellaneous others, such as equipment rental and leasing. While theirgrowth rates vary, all of these industries to some degree cash in on thecontinuing global trend toward seeking outside help. In 1996, predictsDRI/McGraw-Hill, business services will grow 3.5% after inflation, to $806billion in 1995 dollars.   Consultants such as $4 billion Andersen should do far better than that.Andersen, which specializes in providing advice on systems and so-calledchange management, expects business to rise 20% for a second year and toadd as many as 8,000 people to its workforce of 37,000. Meantime, Bain &Co. figures its business will jump 30% this year on the back of its``growth'' consulting, which advises once shrinking clients how to grabmarket share and find new customers overseas.TEMP FEVER. Business-service providers will take on jobs of increasingsophistication. Corporate layoffs will remain in the range of last year's420,000 or so, figures outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas, socompanies will continue to off-load everything from public relations tocomputer services. That will ensure a fourth year of strong growth for thetemporary-help sector, which the National Association of Temporary &Staffing Services estimates has annual revenues of $40 billion (chart).``Temporary help used to be for emergency needs,'' says ManpowerInternational Inc. Chairman Mitchell S. Fromstein. ``Now, it's part of acompany's ongoing workforce strategy.'' Fromstein expects Manpower revenuesto be up some 15%--even higher than the industry's healthy 9% rise.   At Manpower, as at scores of other companies, growth is being fueled bydemands for special skills. Today, Manpower is supplying computerprogrammers and systems integrators as well as clerical workers.Industrial-design specialists such as Boston's Design Continuum Inc. areworking with clients from research to final production. In advertising,efforts to commercialize the Internet are providing golden opportunitiesfor nimble upstarts. ``The Internet will pose a major challenge for the bigagencies,'' says analyst James D. Dougherty of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.WORK, WORK. Generally, though, size seems to be an advantage. As industriesconsolidate, companies turn to providers that can handle business globally.In the advertising business, where growth is expected to be nearly 8%thanks to election and Olympics spending, ``it's increasingly difficult formidsize [advertising] agencies to compete,'' says Rochelle Lazarus, CEO ofgiant Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide Inc.   So look for the fragmented business-services sector to spawn plenty ofmergers. Last year, EDS Corp. purchased A.T. Kearney for $600 million,marrying computer systems and engineering knowhow. This year, law firms areripe for combination, says consultant Bradford W. Hildebrandt. While lawfirms are recovering from the depressed early '90s, Hildebrandt expectsrevenues to rise 10% in 1996, so regional, national, and even internationalmergers should be on the uptick. ``We'll see global consolidation like webegan seeing in accounting 10 years ago,'' predicts Hildebrandt.   Other forces driving the mergers: difficulty in finding topprofessionals and pricing pressure from customers. More and more companiesare demanding fixed fees from law firms. The outplacement industry has seencommissions on large contracts drop from as much as 17% per individual toabout 10%, according to John A. Challenger. Yet across most of the growingservices sector, ``the No.1 risk and temptation'' is to take on more workthan firms have the ability to handle, say Bain's worldwide managingdirector, Thomas J. Tierney. For now, that's a hurdle most serviceproviders are eager to attempt.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Continued industry restructuring favors a variety of services, fromtemporary help to consulting and engineering.   -- Booming economies in Asia and other markets offer new work to U.S.architects, engineers, and advertisers.Negatives   -- A shortage of quality staff looms as businesses demand moresophisticated services.   -- Consolidation among clients adds price pressures and kills smaller orless specialized firms.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Business ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Temporary HelpCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILL WALL STREET HIT A WALL?It will be tough to match '95, but low rates could keep the market robustBy:By Leah Nathans Spiro in New YorkWall Street should get another gift from the Federal Reserve in 1996:continued low interest rates. DRI/McGraw-Hill predicts that 30-yearTreasury bonds will end the year at 6.26%, up just a tad from 6% at yearend1995. Rock-bottom rates mean another super year for the securitiesindustry, since investors will keep deserting bank certificates of depositsto seek higher returns in the stock market, boosting the market and WallStreet commissions. ``From everything we see, it's going to be another goodyear,'' declares John J. Mack, president of Morgan Stanley & Co.   After a slow start, 1995 blossomed into a very good year for thesecurities industry. New York Stock Exchange firms reaped an estimated $6.5billion in pretax profits. That's the second-best year ever after 1993's$8.6 billion blow-out. Fueling the industry was record stock-market volume,thanks to a Standard & Poor's 500-stock index that soared 37% and strongunderwriting and mutual-fund sales.   For 1996, the BUSINESS WEEK profit estimate is just $5.5 billion,though. That's because it would be tough for rates to decline in 1996 asmuch as they did in 1995, when they fell from 8% to about 6%. Decliningrates are Wall Street's dream environment, since they boost corporaterefinancing as well as the stock market.TAKEOVER RUMORS. The new year is starting off with lots of momentum.Mergers and acquisitions were red-hot in 1995, racking up $450 billion indeals, topping the previous record of $355 billion in 1994, according toSecurities Data Co. ``There is no reason to believe the robust M&A marketwon't continue,'' says Kim Fennebresque, a managing director at UBSSecurities Inc. Initial public offerings were another winner, with anestimated $29 billion in new issues in 1995, almost reaching the 1993record of $34 billion.   Wall Street is notoriously cyclical, though, so the gold rush could slowin '96. The stock market is unlikely to sustain its record performance fortwo years in a row. The securities industry also faces excess capacity: Toomany firms are fighting for the same business. Aggressive up-and-comersrange from Germany's Deutsche Bank and Union Bank of Switzerland to U.S.commercial banks. ``It's a difficult challenge to continue to maintain highmargins,'' says Jerome P. Kenney, a Merrill Lynch executivevice-president.   With so much competition, consolidation is expected to continue in 1996.Rumors constantly have firms dressing themselves up for sale. Some of them,such as Lehman Brothers Inc., PaineWebber Inc., and Prudential Securities,are medium-size firms that are finding it expensive to competeinternationally. Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and MorganStanley are spending heavily to position themselves as global competitorsthat can remain independent. ``In 1996, the large will get larger, smallboutiques will prosper, and those in the middle will get squeezed,'' saysBruce S. Foerster, president of South Beach Capital Markets Advisory Corp.in Miami.   Whether large or small, brokerage stocks are due for a correction.Analysts aren't as hot on them, since they had a spectacular rise in 1995.Merrill Lynch & Co. shares rose 51% through mid-December, and CharlesSchwab & Co. was up 86%. Mergers and acquisitions, hottest in banking andmedia, might lose some steam.   There are bright spots. Merrill Lynch, the biggest brokerage, seescontinued growth in its retail business. Its equity assets under managementhave grown significantly in 1995 simply because the stock market was up37%. This increase means more asset-management fee income in 1996, even ifthe growth of assets slows. And following a dismal 1995 in many emergingmarkets, Merrill is looking for an improvement in 1996.   The entire industry may get a boost from Washington. A capital-gains taxcut and a restoration of tax deductibility for individual retirementaccounts look likely in 1996, says Marc E. Lackritz, president of theSecurities Industry Assn., since ``there is broad agreement among theHouse, the Senate, and the Administration that this is a good idea.'' TheSIA estimates the IRA change alone could earn the industry as much as $200million a year in additional IRA mutual-fund fees.   Of course, it's the unexpected that hurts markets the most, as in thelast big market plunge with the gulf war in 1991. A recession or sharplyhigher rates are constant worries. But it now looks as if Wall Street canspend another happy year looking forward to bonus time.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The soaring stock market is boosting the brokerage business.   -- Mergers, acquisitions, and IPOs should remain strong.   -- Congress may cut capital-gains taxes and restore deductibility ofIRAs.Negatives   -- Brokerage stocks are due for a correction after their big 1995runup.   -- Overcapacity in the industry will keep restraining margins.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: SecuritiesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Securities FirmsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A YEAR OF HIGH-RISE EXPECTATIONSThe office market expects a banner year, while other markets look lessrobustBy:By Amy Barrett in WashingtonFor much of the past two years, the real estate and construction industrycelebrated the return of growth. Having survived the dark days of the early1990s, investors savored the recovery of apartment and retail properties,followed by offices and hotels. But 1996 will be more of a mixed bag. Onthe downside, there are early signs of overheating in some markets forconstruction of apartment and retail space. On the upside, a strongerhousing market should help pick up the slack. And with office occupancy andrents improving, 1996 will mark the return of one fixture of the 1980s:high-rise office projects.   The generally good news for real estate stems largely from the continueddecline of interest rates. Lower rates helped spark homebuilding in thesecond half of 1995. And National Association of Home Builders ChiefEconomist David F. Seiders figures moderate economic growth will lead toeven lower mortgage rates in 1996, averaging about 7.3% for 30-yearfixed-rate mortgages. That should nudge multi- and single-family housingstarts up about 3%, to nearly 1.4 million. The days of speculative boom andbust are gone: ``People look at houses as shelter rather than as aninvestment strategy, and frankly that's pretty healthy,'' says Bruce E.Karatz, chairman of Los Angeles-based Kaufman & Broad Home Corp.   Apartment construction continues to pick up steam. According to theNAHB, construction will begin on 290,000 apartments in 1996, up a bit from1995's 274,000. While that is still less than half the 1985 frenzied peakof nearly 670,000 units, industry pros are warning that some Sunbeltmarkets, such as Phoenix and Las Vegas, may already be overbuilt.BANNER YEAR. In retail construction, megamerchants such as Wal-Mart StoresInc. and Circuit City Stores Inc. are aggressively expanding. But itdoesn't appear that the market is headed for a repeat of the overbuildingbinge of the 1980s. Retail construction should fall 10% in 1996, accordingto The McGraw-Hill Companies' F.W. Dodge unit. One reason: Aside from theretail giants that can finance their own expansion, ``capital is prettywell cut off to that sector,'' says Douglas A. Tibbetts, president ofEquitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc.   Players in the office market expect 1996 to be a banner year. Thanks inno small part to the explosive growth of high-technology companies, officevacancy rates continue to slide. And the strength of the market is sparkingnot only build-to-suit construction but some partially speculative buildingin tight markets. Arthur J. Mirante II, chief executive officer of Cushman& Wakefield Inc., says some cities will see construction with as little as50% of the project pre-leased. ``The fundamentals for office haven't beenthis good in 10 years,'' says Thomas A. Carr, president of Carr RealtyCorp. in Washington, D.C.   Still, not all markets are booming. Los Angeles and downtown Dallas,which has a staggering vacancy rate of 35%, are still struggling. AndArthur Andersen & Co. Managing Director Barry D. Libert warns that betterand cheaper telecommunications will allow more tenants in the future toavoid downtown locations. As a result, office operators will be forced tobeef up their marketing and improve the flexibility of lease packages.   Perhaps the best buys around remain high-end hotel properties. Outsideof Las Vegas, there is little new construction of luxury hotels. AndJapanese investors who overpaid for such properties in the 1980s continueto sell. A Japanese bank recently sold the 539-room Ritz Carlton Hotel,Mauna Lani, in Hawaii, built for $180 million, for just $75 million.SMALL FAVORS. While the Japanese are selling, U.S. real estate continues toattract U.S. pension funds, which should cautiously expand their holdingsin 1996, as well as foreign investors, from such places as Hong Kong,Taiwan, and Germany. Real estate investment trusts aren't raising a lot ofmoney through public offerings--investment dollars have gone into thebooming stock market instead--but they're discovering that privateplacements can work, too. For instance, Carr Realty struck a deal inNovember that will result in a $250 million investment in the REIT bySecurity Capital U.S. Realty. Carr plans to use the capital to build andbuy offices across the country.   1996 won't see a return to the glory days of leaping prices. But thesedays, most real estate executives are thankful for slow but steadyprogress.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The office sector will continue to recover, thanks in part to strongdemand by high-tech companies.   -- Upscale hotels should enjoy rising room rates and healthy occupancylevels.Negatives   -- Some shopping centers will feel the squeeze from a sluggish retailmarket.   -- With apartment construction still picking up steam, some Sunbeltmarkets may already be overbuilt.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Construction & Real EstateIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Downtown Office VacanciesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LOOKING FOR SAFETY IN NUMBERSConsolidation--and competition from other investments--are changing thebusinessBy:By Tim Smart in New HavenIf there is one word that sums up prospects for the insurance industry in1996, it's consolidation. Last year saw a record $18 billion worth ofinsurance-company mergers and acquisitions, and there's no letup in sight.``There are too many players competing for too little return in a crowdedmarketplace,'' says Eric Simpson, a vice-president at rating agency A.M.Best Co.   The late November announcement of Travelers Inc.'s $4 billion purchaseof Aetna Life & Casualty's property-casualty unit capped a year in whichCNA Financial swallowed Continental Insurance for $1.1 billion and ZurichInsurance took over Home Insurance. The same pressures that forced thesedeals--weak returns, large exposures to environmental claims, and lack ofsufficient capital to keep ratings up--are expected to continue in 1996.While the companies have said nothing publicly, analysts believe that CIGNACorp. and Prudential Insurance Co. are among the big-name companiesconsidering selling their property and casualty units.CUTTING OVERHEAD. For property-casualty insurers, two big helpers are lowinflation and low interest rates. The benign operating environment in 1995led to a doubling of net income, to $22.3 billion from $10.9 billion in1994.   In 1996, however, property-casualty insurers should see only a modestuptick in their business. A survey of Wall Street analysts by InsuranceInformation Institute found them expecting growth in premium dollar volumeof about 4.6% in 1996. While that would be better than the 3.9% rate ofgrowth in 1995, it will still lag behind the growth of the early 1990s. Theproblem: continued price pressures from overcapacity, especially incommercial lines, such as general business liability and workers'compensation. ``There has been no fundamental improvement in underlyingperformance during the last five years,'' says Robert Stein, director ofErnst & Young's insurance-industry practice.   With paltry premium growth, property- casualty insurers will have to cutoverhead, now a quarter on every dollar of premium. Travelers hopes to trim$300 million from operating expenses and cut 3,000 jobs when it takes overthe Aetna unit.   The consolidation trend affecting property-casualty writers is no lessdramatic in life insurance. Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and New EnglandMutual Life Insurance Co. have announced plans to merge, while severaloperators, such as General Electric Capital Services Inc., went on buyingsprees. Here, the motivation is increasing assets under management tocompete with gargantuan mutual-fund houses and other financial-servicesconglomerates.EXPENSIVE DISTRIBUTION. Life insurers enter 1996 facing continued weaknessin their core business as more Americans turn away from traditional lifeinsurance to investment products such as mutual funds. While mutual fundsare sold through low-cost, consumer-oriented direct marketing such astelevision, life insurers still sell their products mainly face-to-facethrough an expensive network of agents.   A survey by consultant Towers Perrin found that the No.1 issue ofconcern for life-insurance chief executive officers is improving theirdistribution system. Towers Perrin consultant Rick Berry estimates thatdistribution makes up two-thirds of the cost of a life-insurance policy.``Traditional life companies have delegated to their agents decisions likewhat mix of products to sell, what markets to pick, and how to promote theproducts,'' says Berry. Many life insurers have begun striking deals withbanks to sell their products, a trend that is likely to accelerate in1996.   Insurers have had good results selling annuities, which typically offerincome or capital gains as well as life insurance. The 13% rate of growthfor annuities is four times the rate for traditional life insuranceproducts. But competition is getting fierce. ``It's a changing landscape,''says CNA Chairman and CEO Dennis H. Chookaszian. ``Banks will be a muchmore significant seller of these products in the future.'' A positive forlife insurers is that their mortgage and real estate problems of the early1990s have largely dissipated, while strong financial markets have helpedinvestment returns.   A couple of years back, few would have imagined alliances such asTravelers' bold deal with Aetna or life insurance companies allowing theircompetitors in banking to sell their products. But as the historicallyunderperforming insurance industry tries to catch up to the new world orderin financial services, it is learning to adapt.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Life insurers are holding on to their share of retirement assets.   -- Property-casualty writers are increasing reserves for environmentalclaims.   -- Losses from claims are moderating.Negatives   -- Much of the industry's increased capital is coming from investmentgains, not core earnings.   -- With 2,400 competitors, the business is ripe for consolidation.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: InsuranceIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Property-CasualtyCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995What did it take for an executive to succeed in the past year?Good managers know how to cut: They trim costs, reengineer, andrestructure. Great managers know how to grow: They realize you can't shrinkyour way to greatness. In 1995, the best managers in the world grew theirway to greatness.   The men and women of BUSINESS WEEK's Top 25 Managers of theYear--Americans, Europeans, Asians--all rode the tiger of growth tospectacular success. In a global economy of vast technological change,intense competition, and political upheaval, these managers cranked outannual increases of 20%, 30%, sometimes even 40% in profits andsales--while other corporate ``titans'' were still trimming their sails andeking out marginal gains.   What did it take for an executive to make it into BUSINESS WEEK's Top25? Begin with product innovation--the hot strategy of the year formanagers who had already wrung out their corporate inefficiencies. When thebureaucratic layers are gone, when the marginal competencies are dumped,the only strategic assets left to corporations are the products they sellin the global marketplace. This was proved in 1995, when the most reliablepath to fast growth was to bring out new products adored by lots ofconsumers.   Riding the technological currents was the favorite tactic used bymanagers in bringing out their innovations in 1995. But managers also hadto take risks, especially the risk of cannibalizing old models with newproducts. There was new software for personal computers and the Internet,color copier/printers for the home office, and even new first-class seatsthat fold out into beds. All were smash hits.   BUSINESS WEEK's top managers used corporate alliances to drive theirgrowth. American and European managers divvied up the incredibly successfulDBS launch--direct broadcast satellite transmission of TV and stereo music.A French-owned company built the 12-inch satellite dishes for the home, andthe Americans developed the satellites and software to close the loop.Nearly two million homes in the U.S. now have DBS. This global cooperationgenerated tremendous growth for all concerned. So did alliances betweenindustries: One software giant linked up with a corporation running a TVnetwork to provide new information products over the wire.   Top managers used globalization strategies wisely to boost growth. Asianterritories outside Japan proved once again to be the fastest-growingmarkets in the world in 1995. Every smart manager wanted a bigger piece ofthe Asian pie. Some succeeded, as did one investment banker who was able tocut a deal enabling his firm to do business inside China. Another Americanmanager reversed strategy and revitalized his heavy capital equipmentcompany by focusing on new opportunities in Europe.   Then there were Asian managers using the global markets to move outsidetheir region into other parts of the world. One computer maker divided hisoperation into 21 smaller companies so that each could list on the stockmarket where it did most of its business.   Of course, reengineering remained important as a catalyst for growth forsome top managers. One new Japanese manager quietly restructured ingrownbusiness practices of his company and led it to a projected doubling of netprofit and a record year. An American continued to reshape a traditionaldefense-base conglomerate into a tough market-oriented competitor.   How did BUSINESS WEEK come up with its Top 25 Managers of the Year? Themagazine polled its 220 editors around the world, including its largeforeign bureau system, the largest of any global business magazine. Themethodology was deceptively simple: screening the financial figures,questioning the best analytical minds, and talking to the leading corporatemanagers around the world. The bureaus asked: Who was the best in 1995?Here's the collective reply.THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995ROBERT AYLING British AirwaysMIKE ARMSTRONG Hughes ElectronicsANA BOTIN Banco SantanderCASEY COWELL US RoboticsGEORGE DAVID United TechnologiesMICHAEL EISNER Walt DisneyGEORGE FISHER KodakWILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG Li & FungANDREW GROVE IntelGERALD GREENWALD United AirlinesRALPH LARSEN Johnson & JohnsonJAN LESCHLY SmithKline BeechamJOHN MACK Morgan StanleyARTHUR MARTINEZ Sears RoebuckSCOTT McNEALY Sun MicrosystemsPAUL O'NEILL AlcoaBERND PICHETSRIEDER BMWLEW PLATT AND RICHARD BELLUZZO HPALAIN PRESTAT Thomson MultimediaJEAN-PIERRE ROSSO CaseTADASHI SEKIZAWA FujitsuSTAN SHIH AcerWILLIAM SIART First Interstate BankWILLIAM STEERE PfizerPATTI STONESIFER MicrosoftCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST MANAGERSManaging big corporations in 1995 was tougher than ever. It was hard toraise prices, technological change accelerated, and globalization meantmore competition. Achieving growth meant taking more risks. These 25managers were the top winners in the global game.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW'sBERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW'snew American-made Z3 roadster featured in the latest James Bond movie,GoldenEye. In 1995, Pischetsrieder, 48, drove BMW into the big leagues as amillion-unit-a-year producer with a new auto plant in the U.S. Sales in theU.S. zoomed to over 90,000 Beemers, the best since 1986's record.Photograph(s):Photograph: BERND PISCHETSRIEDERPHOTOGRAPH BY WOLFGANG WILDECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GERALD GREENWALDIt isn't easy running a huge employee-owned airline, but GERALD GREENWALD,chairman of UAL, managed to make lots of people happy in 1995. By more thandoubling the stock price, to $211, Greenwald, 60, put big smiles on allinvestors: Wall Street, pilots, and machinists, although fourth-quarterearnings estimates didn't meet analysts' expectations. Earnings are stillexpected to hit about $900 million, triple 1994's figure.Photograph(s):Photograph: GERALD GREENWALDPHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL L. ABRAMSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995.PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995.The 39-year-old manager, known for ``crisp'' thinking, drove the divisionto launch 20 new CD-ROMs and software products for the home, includingFury3--Microsoft's first shoot-'em-up game--and a souped-up joystick calledSide Winder. The division had estimated sales of $800 million, making itthe country's No.1 multimedia company.Photograph(s):Photograph: PATRICIA Q. STONESIFERPHOTOGRAPH BY REX RYSTEDTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STAN SHIHWith the booming sales of Acer's Aspire personal computer, a multimediadesktop designed for the home, Acer Chairman and CEO STAN SHIH solidifiedhis position in 1995 as Asia's paramount entrepreneur. By decentralizingownership (he is spinning off 21 independent companies), Shih remains closeto his customers. Revenues for the Taiwan-based group in 1995 are expectedto be up 77%, to $5.7 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: STAN SHIHPHOTOGRAPH BY HUANG SHIH-TINGCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do itMICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do ithis way, without close pal and President Frank G. Wells, who died in ahelicopter crash in 1994, or studio chief Jeffrey Katzenberg, who left inanger. The 53-year-old Eisner made a $19 billion deal for CapitalCities/ABC, lifting Disney to global media's top tier. Theme parks areminting cash anew. Even EuroDisney turned a profit.Photograph(s):Photograph: MICHAEL D. EISNERPHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID STRICK/ONYXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ARTHUR C. MARTINEZIt all came together in 1995 for ARTHUR C. MARTINEZ, CEO of Sears Roebuckand the mastermind of the Big Store's comeback. His drive to renovate dowdyoutlets and upgrade women's apparel paid off with big revenue hikes lastyear as rivals floundered. His risk-taking was duly rewarded. Martinez, 56,was named chairman of the parent in July.Photograph(s):Photograph: ARTHUR C. MARTINEZPHOTOGRAPH BY LARA JO REGAN/SABACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SCOTT G. MCNEALYHot Java! Sun Microsystems CEO SCOTT G. McNEALY went eye to eye with BillGates in 1995 with Java, the revolutionary Internet software. But that wasjust icing for McNealy, 41. Sun's ``servers'' became serious contenders incorporate computing. For Sun, it meant an 82% rise in profits, to $356million, on sales of $5.9 billion in fiscal 1995.Photograph(s):Photograph: SCOTT G. McNEALYPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world'sROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world'smost profitable airlines in 1995. His reward: being made CEO as of Jan. 1.BA is expected to report $890 million in pretax profits on sales of $12billion for the year ending March, 1996. Smashing! Ayling, 49, skippedcollege and climbed the corporate ladder without family or school ties. Henow must decide whether to put more money into USAir. Don't bet on it.Photograph(s):Photograph: ROBERT AYLINGPHOTOGRAPH BY COURTESY OF BRITISH AIRWAYSCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment.ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment.Botn shares the penetrating gaze and workaholic drive of her father,Emilio, chairman of Banco Santander. In using Santander's strong capitalbase in Latin America, Botn has built market share and won for Santanderthe lead role in bringing Mexico back to the capital markets.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANA PATRICIA BOTNPHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL BEITRA/GAMMA-LIAISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TADASHI SEKIZAWAFor TADASHI SEKIZAWA, 1995 was the year Fujitsu finally cast off theshackles of a weak economy and soaring yen. Sekizawa, 64, restructuredingrown business practices and dumped nationalistic policies. Fujitsustarting selling PCs built 90% with non-Japanese components. It expects todouble group net profit to a record $887 million.Photograph(s):Photograph: TADASHI SEKIZAWAPHOTOGRAPH BY MITSUHIRO WADACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995digesting $5 billion in acquisitions of managed-care and consumer-medicinemarkets, then turned his attention to heartburn--by managing the transitionof ulcer drug Tagamet, once the world's largest-selling drug, toover-the-counter. SKB's sales could hit $10 billion in '95.Photograph(s):Photograph: JAN LESCHLYPHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL MASSEY/FRANK SPOONER PICTURESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great newC. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great newproduct launch--DirecTV, a satellite-to-home television service that beamscrystal-clear programming to rooftop dishes. Armstrong took a stodgymilitary contractor and used its high-tech smarts to tap into newcommercial markets. The stock is up 50% on the year.Photograph(s):Photograph: C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONGPHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN S. ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of aWILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of anew Asian corporate elite. William, 46, is a Princeton grad with a HarvardMBA, while Victor, 50, is a Massachusetts Institute of Technology grad witha Harvard PhD. The brothers are converting their Chinese-style familyexport-trading business, into a modern, publicly owned corporation. In1995, they bought British rival Inchcape Buying Services, doubling Li &Fung's annual sales, to $1.5 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNGPHOTOGRAPH BY MARY BETH CAMP/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JEAN-PIERRE ROSSOWhen JEAN-PIERRE ROSSO took over heavy-equipment manufacturer Case in 1994,it hadn't turned much of a profit in years. Cost-cutting by parent Tennecostopped the bleeding, but there was no strategy. He redesigned Case'soutdated construction- and agricultural-equipment lines and focused onEurope. The payoff? Earnings in 1995 should double, to $250 million, on an11% hike in sales, to $4.8 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: JEAN-PIERRE ROSSOPHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS CORSMEIERCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PAUL H. O'NEILLIn early 1994, an avalanche of cheap Russian metal threatened to buryAmerica's world-leading aluminum companies. Aluminum Co. of America's CEO,60-year-old PAUL H. O'NEILL, pushed for a multinational solution, whichincluded painful smelter shutdowns in the U.S. He also pressed forward withglobal acquisitions, from Italy to Australia. With aluminum prices on therebound in 1995 and world supply and demand on a more even keel, Alcoamotored to strong earnings.Photograph(s):Photograph: PAUL H. O'NEILLPHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL L. ABRAMSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he'sWILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he'sabout to lose his job. As bank president since 1990 and CEO since January,Siart, 48, helped turn the lender around, raising shareholder return onequity from a dismal -10% in 1991 to 26% last quarter. Now, Wells Fargo andFirst Bank System are vying for Siart's bank.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM E.B. SIARTPHOTOGRAPH BY THIERRY LEDOUXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazingALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazing$599 12-inch dish and set-top box that made direct satellite broadcast oneof the biggest hits of 1995. Thomson's RCA Digital Satellite System soldnearly 2 million units in a year. Operating profits jumped fourfold. Nextup: new Digital Video Disks with more capacity.Photograph(s):Photograph: ALAIN PRESTATPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being theANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being theworld's biggest chipmaker to being the biggest force in the entire computerindustry. Grove, 59, pushed into motherboards, logic chipsets, and evenentire computers. Intel's next targets include engineering workstations andlarge servers. Its 1995 sales are expected to be up more than 40%, to $15billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANDREW S. GROVEPHOTOGRAPH BY DOUGLAS LEVERECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM C. STEERE JR.For WILLIAM C. STEERE JR., 59-year-old CEO of Pfizer, the big payoff camein 1995. He sold off nondrug operations and refused to shell out billionsfor distributors, as rivals have. Instead, the avid helicopter skier hasfocused on riskier new products. Driven by antidepressant Zoloft andantihypertensive Norvasc, Pfizer's net income in 1995 rose 20%, to nearly$1.56 billion, while sales gained 23%, to $10.2 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM C. STEERE JR.PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN LEVENSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's coreGEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's corephotography business still had vigor by boosting consumer-imaging revenues19% for the first nine months. Also, he filed a complaint that Fuji Photoconspired with Japan's government to limit Kodak's share there. Kodakstock, up 39%, is back as a Dow leader.Photograph(s):Photograph: GEORGE M.C. FISHERPHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN S. ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOHN J. MACKIn one of Wall Street's best years ever, Morgan Stanley Group PresidentJOHN J. MACK had a nice one of his own. Mack, 51, forcefully integratedindependent departments. It worked. The firm's stock rose 43%, and itsearnings soared 73%. Under Mack, Morgan became the only foreign investmentbank allowed to do business inside China.Photograph(s):Photograph: JOHN J. MACKPHOTOGRAPH BY PETER SCHINZIER/AGENTUR HAMANNCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457RALPH S. LARSENJohnson & Johnson Chief RALPH S. LARSEN doesn't shrink from a fight. In1995, he won J&J's first-ever hostile takeover battle, snaring Cordis.Using ads that slammed a rival's product, Larsen also turned an obscureMerck prescription drug, Pepcid AC, into an over-the-counter heartburnpowerhouse. J&J had one of its most profitable years on the 57-year-oldCEO's watch. Net income is expected to be up 19%.Photograph(s):Photograph: RALPH S. LARSENPHOTOGRAPH BY BRAD TRENTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GEORGE A. DAVIDFor GEORGE A. DAVID, an ocean sailboat racer, 1995 was the year his companyfinally delivered. United Technologies saw earnings and margins risedespite falling defense spending and modest revenue growth. The 53-year-oldCEO galvanized the $21 billion conglomerate to capitalize on its great namefranchises--Otis, Carrier, Sikorsky, and Pratt & Whitney. Wall Streetcheered: The stock rose about 48%.Photograph(s):Photograph: GEORGE A. DAVIDPHOTOGRAPH BY ANDY FREEBERGCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CASEY G. COWELLHe's chairman of the hottest U.S. modem manufacturer. Thanks to theexplosion of computer networks, CASEY G. COWELL's U.S. Robotics sawrevenues explode to $889 million in 1995, up from $378.6 million in '94.Cowell, 43, built new plants and designed faster modems. He also bid forbankrupt Hayes Microcomputer Products, once the country's largest modemmaker. Cowell is shooting for a $5 billion company by 2000.Photograph(s):Photograph: CASEY G. COWELLPHOTOGRAPH BY BLACK/TOBYCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LEWIS E. PLATTHow do you make a huge company grow 20% a year? In 1995, Hewlett-PackardCEO LEWIS E. PLATT showed 'em how again. Sales are up 26%, to $31.5billion; profits are up 52%, to $2.4 billion. Platt, 54, tapped RICHARD E.BELLUZZO, 42, to merge the retail-minded PC and printer division with theold Big Iron business. Platt believes corporations want one-stop shoppingfor information technology, and he's giving it to them.Photograph(s):Photograph: LEWIS E. PLATTPHOTOGRAPH BY RAY MAINSCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MANAGERS TO WATCH IN 1996Abigail Johnson, 34, is heir very apparent at Fidelity Investments. Theboss's daughter owns 24.5% of Fidelity. That makes her a billionaire, butis she a manager capable of taking over from Dad, Edward C. ``Ned'' JohnsonIII, who is 65? So far, Abby has dodged a role in senior management tomanage money. Will she become chairwoman and leave day-to-day management toothers?Eric A. Benhamou, chief executive officer of 3Com, loves to manage--otherbusinesses, that is. He is Silicon Valley's gentlest takeover artist. His3Com pulled off 10 acquisitions worth $1 billion in three years. Now he'strying to persuade Wall Street that he can make money in the expandingmarket for lower-end networking gear and PC network cards for smallbusiness and the home. Tired of slowpoke modems? Call Benhamou.Ford Chairman Alex Trotman probably has the toughest job in Detroit in1996. Customers aren't stampeding to his newly styled Taurus. Ford isoverhauling 40% of its entire U.S. product line and 35% of its Europeanofferings. Trotman is under pressure to find a way to move all these new,more expensive models in a market that is interested only in bargains. Willlower rates give Trotman some breathing room by cutting leasing costs?In April, 1995, Nobuyuki Idei, 58, became the first nonengineer to leadSony, replacing Norio Ohga. He quickly dumped Mickey Shulhoff, Sony'shigh-profile U.S. head. Idei speaks fluent English and French, but it hasyet to be seen whether he can speak Hollywoodese.Bill Gates faces his biggest challenge in years. While the 40-year-oldchairman of Microsoft has the PC software market sewn up--not so themushrooming Internet world. In December, Gates mapped out an ambitiousInternet strategy. Then he licensed Java, the hot Internet software. Isthis a new beginning or the end of his hegemony?For as long as Jerry Levin has been chairman of Time Warner, investors havewondered if he had the ``it'' of leadership. This fall he acted boldly andacquired Turner Broadcasting System. But now he has to stir up that magicsynergy, something he couldn't do between Time Inc. and Warner. Is this hislast shot?Gerhardt Schulmeyer, chief executive at German computer and telecom companySiemens Nixdorf Informations Systems, is aiming to topple Big Blue inEurope. But can he break the great resistance to change within Germany'stelecom industry? If Schulmeyer can't do it in 1996, Germany will only fallfurther behind.Whoever thought an obscure animal-feed ingredient could lead to so muchfuss? But for Dwayne O. Andreas, chairman of Archer Daniels Midland, lysinecould be his Waterloo. Federal antitrust investigators are reviewing hoursof taped conversations provided by a former employee, Mark Whitacre, whoclaims ADM fixed lysine prices. Meantime, under fire from shareholders,Andreas, 77, has appointed a committee of outside directors to put ADMcorporate governance under a microscope. Can he survive another year?Ditto for Michael H. Spindler. With first-quarter results ending Dec. 31 inthe red, following a year of takeover rumors and boardroom turmoil, AppleComputer's embattled CEO is hanging on by a thread. The board is backinghim for now.Insiders says W. James McNerney Jr., a 46-year-old Yale graduate andHarvard MBA, is a front-runner in the race to succeed Jack Welch as CEO ofGeneral Electric. In October, Welch pulled McNerney away from a criticalpost as head of GE's Asia operations to take over management of the $3billion lighting unit.Lester M. Alberthal Jr. may soon find himself running an independentElectronic Data Systems, the information services giant in Plano, Tex. EDShas been part of General Motors since 1984, when it was sold by famousfounder Ross Perot. GM announced in August, 1995, that it planned to spinoff EDS if it can get the Internal Revenue Service's approval for atax-free deal. Analysts expect EDS's independence day to come by thespring.When you're running for your life, do you reach for a Snapple or aGatorade? William D. Smithburg, CEO of the Quaker Oats, has his hands fullwith both. His dominant Gatorade franchise faces a terrific challenge in'96 as Coca-Cola promotes its rival sports drink, Powerade, at the 1996Olympics. He has even knottier problems with his Snapple franchise.Can Hiroshi Okuda cure Toyota's big-company disease? In August, the63-year-old finance man became president of Japan's largest auto maker, thefirst non-Toyoda family member to run the company. Many see the boldexecutive as the best hope for a fresh breeze at Toyota.Can a power-tool marketing whiz finally put some drive back into Polaroid?On Dec. 1, 44-year-old Gary T. DiCamillo took the reins as the new CEO.Given credit for reviving Black & Decker's consumer power tool business,he's now charged with resurrecting a company that has been driftingsideways for years.Journalists recoiled in 1995 as new Times Mirror CEO Mark H. Willes closedNew York Newsday and ordered layoffs at the flagship Los Angeles Times.Willes, a 15-year veteran of General Mills, was brought in to repair yearsof sluggish profits at Times Mirror. His goal: boost earnings per share by50% in 1996.Photograph(s):Photograph: Abigail JohnsonPHOTOGRAPH BY JAMIE TANAKAPhotograph: Eric A. BenhamouPHOTOGRAPH BY LARRY FORDPhotograph: Alex TrotmanPHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN LEVENSONPhotograph: Nobuyuki IdeiPHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN SMITH/OUTLINEPhotograph: Bill GatesPHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK HARBRON;Photograph: Jerry LevinPHOTOGRAPH BY GEORGE LANGE/ONYXPhotograph: Gerhardt SchulmeyerPHOTOGRAPH BY STEVE WOITPhotograph: Dwayne O. AndreasPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENPhotograph: Michael H. SpindlerPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENPhotograph: W. James McNerney Jr.PHOTOGRAPH BY PAN FRANCIS/GAMMA-LIAISONPhotograph: Lester M. Alberthal Jr.PHOTOGRAPH BY ILENE ERLICHPhotograph: William D. SmithburgPHOTOGRAPH BY PETER GREGOIREPhotograph: Hiroshi OkudaPHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLINE PARSONSPhotograph: Gary T. DiCamilloPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZPhotograph: Mark H. WillesPHOTOGRAPH BY EDWARD SANTALONECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST ENTREPRENEURSAn amazing year for entrepreneurs! A new club was formed:double-billionaire winners. Jim Clark did it once with Silicon Graphics andcame back with Netscape. Steve Jobs hit it big with Apple-took a longbreak-and won again with Pixar. The hurdle was certainly raised in '95.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allowsSHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allowsdogs in his company's Cambridge (Mass.) offices, but that's his only quirk.Open Market builds secure software for critical commercial applications onthe Internet. It has helped set up the hottest commercial Web sites,including those of Banc One and Ziff-Davis, which rely on Open Market'ssoftware for handling credit-card transactions and filling orders. Ghoshmay be the one holding the keys to really doing business on the Net.Photograph(s):Photograph: SHIKHAR GHOSHPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STEVE JOBSHow sweet it is. STEVE JOBS, co-founder of Apple Computer, has been tryingto come up with a second hit for a decade. No such luck--until Nov. 29.That's when his company, Pixar Animation Studios, makers of the smash hitmovie Toy Story, went public with a bang. The stock, priced at 22, zoomedto 49 before falling back to 24. Jobs's 80% stake was briefly worth $1.1billion. What's next? His other company, NeXT, is making Web software, andJobs may see his third IPO in early 1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: STEVE JOBSPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD MORGENSTEIN; ANIMATION BY THE WALT DISNEY COMPANYPHOTO COMPOSITION BY JAIME BEAUCHAMPCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, AND DAVID GEFFEN.Not many companies start life with $2 billion in capital. But then, notmany upstarts come with JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, and DAVIDGEFFEN. Hollywood's DreamWorks company will begin 1996 with a new comedy onABC and a George Michael album. Down the road: Prince of Egypt, an animatedfilm about Moses, and interactive games with Microsoft.Photograph(s):Photograph: JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, and DAVID GEFFEN.PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID STRICK/ONYXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSENJAMES H. CLARK, 50, founder of Silicon Graphics, has done it again. HisNetscape Communications makes the Internet's top software. Clark took itpublic 18 months after founding it with cyberwizard MARC L. ANDREESSEN, 24.Its market cap is now $5 billion. Now, that's an IPO!Photograph(s):Photograph: JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSENPHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM MERCER MCLEODCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneursDENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneursevery American venture capitalist would be glad to have discovered. TheirParis-based software company, Business Objects, is No.1 in the fast-growingdecision-tools market. It ``IPO'd'' at 17 1/2 in 1994 and hit a 52-weekhigh of 54 in 1995. Sales and profits boomed with the launch of a sizzlingsecond generation of products.Photograph(s):Photograph: DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUDPHOTOGRAPH BY THIERRY LEDOUXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBERT PRIDDYThe third time's a charm for ROBERT PRIDDY, who founded two other airlinesbefore creating ValuJet Airlines. Using unorthodox techniques liketicketless travel, flying secondhand DC-9 aircraft, and maintaining alow-frequency route system, Priddy has helped ValuJet grow to $350 millionin sales, with regular service to 26 cities. Earnings should hit $67million in 1995.Photograph(s):Photograph: ROBERT PRIDDYPHOTOGRAPH BY SHONNA VALESKACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST NEW PRODUCTSProduct innovation was the key to growth in 1995. And boy, were there greatproducts! Hot Web sites and cd-roms captured imaginations, but there wasalso room for jazzy cars, toys for grownups, and the laptops, pagers, andother stuff needed for work these days.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A BIKE FOR ALL MOUNTAINSElectric Bicycle's ev Warrior is a battery-powered electric mountain bikethat hums along at 20 mph and has a range of 15 miles. Price: $800 to$1,400.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FITS IN A TIGHT SPOTPackard Bell Electronics' Corner Computer offers wing-style disk drivesthat eliminate the problem of cd-rom trays that spill out over the top ofthe keyboard. The price starts at $1,899.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457AN EXEC MARCHES ON HIS SEATHerman Miller's award-winning Aeron chair features space-age materials andadjustable height, armrests, hip pivot, and lumbar support. Theeye-catching piece costs $700.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FOR THE TROUT IN YOUR LIFETo a fly fisherman, the Sage rpl+ rod is the last word in yin and yang. Therod is strong yet sensitive to the slightest nibble. Line running throughthe rod can handle weight and still form a graceful arc. Cost: $400 to$500.Photograph(s):Photograph: (FISHING ROD) BART GORINCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ONE FOR THE MONEYIntuit's newest Quicken software lets users bank online from home, pickmutual funds, and otherwise tackle personal finance chores. The new $60Quicken Deluxe cd-rom also includes a Finance 101 section to help demystifymoney management.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FLOPPIES MAY BE ENDANGEREDFew tasks are more time-consuming than copying data from your pc's harddrive onto floppy disks. But Iomega's $200 Zip add-on drive stores 100megabytes--70 times as much as a floppy--on one $20 removable disk.Photograph(s):Photograph: (ZIP DRIVE) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HARD WORK, BIG FUNSony's hot new game machine, Play Station, expands the meaning of ``play.''Mastering the sophisticated controller and cd-based action games is hardwork, but the 3-D graphics are stunning. Price: $299 for the console.Photograph(s):Photograph: (SONY PLAY STATION) JOHN ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOLTIN' JAVAIt's the hottest Internet software on the planet. Java, a new programmingscheme from Sun Microsystems, is shaking everyone up--including Microsoft.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A GIANT LEAP FOR MINIVANSChrysler invented the minivan segment, but it has broken the mold with itscompletely redesigned new model. Hottest new feature: the driver-sidesliding door, an option rivals are scrambling to copy. Handling andsuspension are dramatically improved. Chrysler covers all the price points,from its Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager ($16,575) base models up to itsoption-packed, long wheel-base Chrysler Town & Country lxi ($30,045).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST WEB SITESTHE SPOT(www.thespot.com)A daily soap opera about twentysomethings.EDGAR(www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm)Repository for sec filings by companies since '94.CENSUS(www.census.gov)If it's demographic information you want, this is the place.ESPN SPORTSZONE (espnet.sportszone.com)Up-to-date scores of college and pro games.WOODROW (woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us)Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis' site has tons of financial info.IBM's Almaden Reseach Center (www.almaden.ibm.com:80/vis/stm/gallery.html)Breathtaking portraits of atoms, made by scanning tunneling microscopes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A MULTIMEDIA MAC FOR ALL SEASONSApple Computer's Macintosh Performa 5215CD is an all-in-one multimedia PC.Its 15-inch screen can be tilted and swiveled. It fits nicely in the home,with a single cable containing power cord and printer hookup that lets itscrunch right up against walls, saving desk space. The 5215 has a remotecontrol for CD playing or TV viewing. Price: $2,000.Photograph(s):Photograph: (PAGER AND COMPUTER) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE EYE HAS ITCanon's ES5000 Eye Control camcorder does just that--it lets youeye-activate focus shifting, quick zoom, and other features. Whatever youlook at stays in focus. This top-of-the-line model, with Hi-Band, 8mmresolution is priced at $2,200.Photograph(s):Photograph: (CAMCORDER) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NET GAINSIt changed everything on the Net. The power of Netscape Communications'Navigator software is remaking the entire information industry. Thanks tofast downloading and enhanced graphics, it's widely considered the best``browser'' for surfing the World Wide Web. Available for free on the Net,Navigator now commands 70% of the Web browser market--far surpassing itspredecessor, Mosaic, which was invented by Netscape co-founder Marc L.Andreessen. It's a tenuous lead, because nearly everyone, includingMicrosoft, is aiming at Netscape.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SO WHO NEEDS A PHONE?Motorola's Tango Two-Way Paging System is the first pager of its kind: Itallows businesses and individuals to respond to their pagers without havingto get to a phone. Users can simply select from a menu of up to 120preprogrammed messages. Through Skytel, the service provider for Tango, theprice for national service starts at $74.95 per month. Cost of the pageralone: $399, or $15 a month to lease.Photograph(s):Photograph: (PAGER AND COMPUTER) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE LONG, LONG RACKETThe 1970s gave tennis buffs the oversize racket; the 1980s, the widebody;and now, in the 1990s, there's the extralong. With its Max series, DunlopSlazenger led the pack with the newest racket technology, adding 1 1/2inches to the standard 27-inch frame. It's 125 square inches--15 more thanmost big rackets. At 9 1/2 ounces, the extralongs are extremely light.They're best suited to average-size men, seniors, beginners, and women whodon't pound the ball and want a little more on their serve. Price: $225.Photograph(s):Photograph: (TENNIS PLAYER) JOHN W. MCDONOUGHCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457COLOR COPIES FOR A SONGIt hit shelves in December, and already Hewlett-Packard's CopyJet is makingwaves. Home-office and corporate types are grabbing the gizmo, both a colorprinter and copier, rather than schlepp to Kinko's for color. At $2,500, itbeats the $20,000-plus machines on the market. HP figures color copies run7 cents on this baby, vs. $1 to $1.50 at an outside copy center.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HANDS UP, YOU LOUSE!Putting in a long night? Break the stress with the air-powered Burp Gun, arecreation of the 1950s ping-pong ball shooter that boomers remember. Greatbraaap! sound when you squeeze off a round. Price: $19.95.Photograph(s):Photograph: (BURP GUN) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MOVE OVER, MR. ANDRETTIBlasting off in the new Porsche 911 Turbo is the closest you'll probablyget to driving a real race car. A pulse-revving 400 horsepower in the '96model gets it from 0 to 60 miles per hour in 4.4 seconds. Top speed is 180mph. Price: a cool $105,000.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST CD-ROMSSo your son wants to be the next Spielberg? Microsoft's Windows 95 CD-ROM3-D Movie Maker ($44.95) lets kids create 3-D films on PC.-- Art lovers like to see works from many perspectives. Corbis Publishing'sA Passion for Art is a splendid $40-to-$50 CD-ROM that takes them throughthe Barnes collection.-- Delrina's Echo Lake is a cozy $60 program for housing photos, videos,and sound clips of your loved ones.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ONE PRETTY PICTUREThe titanium-clad Contax G1 is a classic range finder camera withstate-of-the-art automation. It has a beautiful retro look and accepts fourinterchangeable Carl Zeiss lenses. Price for the body: $1,500.Photograph(s):Photograph: (CAMERA) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FLEXIBLE FLYERfter three years of development and a battle with Bombardier, theGulfstream V is corporate globetrotters' hot new tool. The G-V, which seats12 to 19 and retails for $35 million, can fly nonstop from New York toTokyo, 6,500 nautical miles.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SNAPPY SHOTSWant a photo of dearAunt Martha on your PC? Play Inc.'s $200 Snappy plugsinto a PC and links to a camcorder, VCR, or TV. Click to freeze a framethat can be enhanced or morphed on the PC.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NOTEBOOK NONPAREILIBM's ThinkPad 760CD is the ultimate notebook computer. The brilliant12.1-inch color display and advanced video features allow Hollywood and adagency types to view commercials or the daily rushes. Price: a hefty$7,500.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DOUBLE-DUTY DRIVERThe Taylor Made Burner Bubble is one of the hottest drivers on the golfcourse. Taylor Made Golf shifted weight on the shaft from under the grip acouple of inches toward the head. That hikes centrifugal force and clubheadspeed during the swing. A low center of gravity moves the ball into the airfast and allows the driver to double as a jazzy fairway wood. Price: $299for steel, $499 for titanium.Photograph(s):Photograph: (GOLF CLUB) BRIAN SMITHCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BOOMING BOXA no-show in home PCs until 1995, Hewlett-Packard is on track to hit thetop three by '97, thanks to the Pavilion. It allows each family member toset up his or her own library of commonly used software. Price: $2,100 to$3,500.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NO TOY BOATFeathercraft's fold-up Khatsalano-S kayak can fit into a backpack and openinto a full-length, sea-touring craft. Price: $3,600.Photograph(s):Photograph: (MOTORCYCLE AND KAYAK) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PRODUCTS TO WATCH IN 1996Cadillac is counting on its new German-engineered, entry-level Catera sedanto entice boomers away from the Lexus and the Beemer. Price: $33,000.-- With its Pentium chips, Intel cemented its dominance of thepersonal-computer market. Now, with the next-generation Pentium Pro, Intelgoes for the server and workstation market.-- Can the revamped Ford Taurus get it in gear in 1996? The sedan'sundulating styling and stiff price (close to $20,000) scared off lots oftire kickers in 1995. Will Ford Motors make it worth their while to givethe new Taurus a try?Photograph(s):Photograph: (FORD TAURUS) DEAN SIRACUSACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457RELIVING YESTERDAY'S TRIUMPHSThe Triumph Thunderbird 900 is a redo of the legendary Triumphs of the'50s--presumably without the equally venerable oil leakage and electricalproblems. The guts are all modern, with three- and four-cylinder multivalveengines. The 885 cc Speed Triple will bring joy to any leather-cladoffice-bee seeking thrills. Price: $9,995.Photograph(s):Photograph: (MOTORCYCLE AND KAYAK) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HAS CADDY TURNED THE CORNER?   I have received numerous inquiries from your readership concerning ``ACaddy that's not for Daddy'' (The Corporation, Dec. 18). Despiteconsiderable disclosure of facts and open discussion, your author chose toinclude her opinions and the clearly biased opinions of our competitorswithout including any of our perspective.   With regard to our reduction in sales volume: Cadillac's planned andprofitable reduction of daily rental fleet sales accounts for much of thereduction in the division's sales from 1989 to 1995. While we chose not toforeshadow our 1995 calendar year forecasts to competitors by providingthem for this story, we did provide a yearly accounting of our daily rentalfleet reduction statistics (from 32% of total sales in 1991 to 18% in1994). We expected that disclosure of this plan and accompanyingperformance would not be omitted from your review of our salesperformance.   As for our dealers, you characterized the perception of them as``salesmen in white belts and plaid sport coats'' and continued toperpetrate a disservice to our very professional dealer personnel. Ourdealers consistently earn high customer-satisfaction scores and were onceagain rated No.1 domestic luxury nameplate in a recent J.D. Power &Associates Inc. Sales Satisfaction Survey, second only to Infiniti andahead of Lexus, Mercedes, Lincoln, BMW, and all other luxury brands.   You also raise questions about our customer demographics. Fundamentalchanges in our owner demographic profile have resulted from theintroduction of the 1992 Seville, Seville Touring Sedan, and Eldoradomodels. The author accurately quoted the average age of ``some model''owners at nearly 70. Specifically, this model is the Fleetwood, which weare eliminating from the model line this year. A fair accounting of ourprogress would also have noted that the average age of Seville STS ownersis 52 years, an average age that has been reduced by six years since theintroduction of this model in 1991.   Regarding side air bags, we were disappointed to note that your authorchose to omit the rollout of air bags in the 1997 DeVille model, mentioningonly the introduction for Catera in mid-1997 and again creating theappearance that Cadillac was behind other luxury manufacturers in theimplementation of this technology. The introduction of the side air bags atthe beginning of the 1997 model year on the DeVille was made very clear inour interview.   Finally, you refer to us as ``an industry joke.'' In spite of the factthat nine new models have been added to the luxury market from two all-newmanufacturers (Lexus and Infiniti) since 1989, Cadillac continues as volumeleader in the U.S. luxury market--a title held for the last 46 years. TheDeVille remains America's most-purchased luxury sedan--a title held for thepast nine years. The Northstar-powered Seville STS is a recognizedtechnology tour de force among automotive critics and enthusiastic owners.The all-new Catera has been reviewed favorably by all of the author'scolleagues.   The above-listed facts and many other positive points concerningCadillac's overall performance were omitted from your story. Our marketleadership and product leadership makes preposterous the notion thatCadillac is the brunt of jokes in the industry. To the contrary, ourproduct technology and large loyal owner base are the envy of theindustry.John O. GrettenbergerGeneral ManagerCadillac Motor Car Div.Warren, Mich.Editor's note: Cadillac supplied numbers on fleet sales only through 1994and acknowledged that it expected total sales to decline by 15% in 1995.Our description of the negative perception of Cadillac dealers focused onyounger buyers it hopes to attract with the Catera and matches the Caterateam's own characterization of its consumer research.   Your story on the Catera missed the mark. As I see it, Catera is yetanother encouraging step as Cadillac transforms itself. Why keep harping onthe Cimarron, unquestionably a Stone Age disaster? Cadillac left the StoneAge long ago. Why not mention the Seville Touring Sedan, Detroit's mostexciting world car? What about the national Baldrige Quality Award Cadillacreceived in recognition of quality and changes in culture? And what aboutthe Northstar system? You're much too bleak. At 57, I am most certainly aDaddy. But Catera just may be the Caddy I've been waiting for--and myboomer son, too.Dan PanshinSt. Paul, Minn.   Regarding General Motors Corp.'s plans for the new Catera, your articleleft out a few more mistakes that the Cadillac Div. has made in past yearsbesides the Cimarron and the Allante. How about the 8-6-4 engines and theearly model Sevilles?   Cadillac had better be satisfied with its grandfather image, because anymiddle-aged luxury-car buff worth his salt would not even think about a newCadillac, considering the company's track record for the past 15 years.Especially with introductory models.Frank CredendinoMt. Vernon, N.Y.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`TERRORISTS SHOULD NEVER BE CONFUSED WITH DISSIDENTS'   I must take exception to your story about Saudi Arabia in your Nov. 27issue (``A dangerous spark in the oil fields,'' International Business).BUSINESS WEEK played into the hands of terrorists by trying to create alink between the terrorist car bombing in Riyadh that claimed the lives offive Americans and the internal situation in our country.   Even though no one knows yet who committed this act of murder, yourarticle stated that the car bombing ``suggests once again that internalenemies, not external ones, may now be the biggest threats'' to states onthe Arabian Peninsula.   Whether in the U.S., Israel, France, Egypt, or Saudi Arabia, people maydisagree about internal policies. But terrorists should never be confusedwith dissidents. Terrorists kill because they are criminals and murderers.They do not need an ``excuse,'' especially feeble ones such as ``belttightening,'' as cited in your article.   The ``internal situation'' that you described did not cause the carbombing any more than the U.S. budget crisis caused the Oklahoma Citybombing. Terrorism is a meaningless act. As your story revealed, if yousearch for ``reasons,'' you will only be led astray.Bandar bin Sultan bin AbdulazizAmbassadorRoyal Embassy of Saudi ArabiaWashingtonCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457EXPORT DIVERSION, MAYBE. DUMPING, ABSOLUTELY   Regarding ``Exports that aren't going anywhere'' (Legal Affairs, Dec.4), I'd feel sorrier for companies whose low-priced exports are beingdiverted back to the U.S. if they weren't meeting the classic definition ofdumping: selling at a lower price in a foreign country than they dodomestically.   When a foreign manufacturer sells at a lower cost in the U.S. than itdoes in its own country, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission is all overthem. Are American companies claiming injury when their dumping activitiesresult in the obvious economic consequences? Wait until the othercountries' FTC equivalents get through with them.   The reality is that price differentials are extremely difficult tomaintain in the global economy. If the law doesn't get you, economicswill.Dick LockePresidentGlobal Procurement GroupSan FranciscoCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TRAVELERS DOESN'T TRAFFIC IN HARD SELLING   Your recent article on ``How Travelers got moving again'' (Finance, Dec.4) stated that CEO Robert I. Lipp ``began pushing Travelers homeowners' andauto policies through the PFS network of 100,000 hard-sell part-timeagents, who work for commissions far below the typical 15% paid...'' Thearticle was great, but the connotation that PFS agents employ hard-selltactics is incorrect. Roughly 80% of the sales force is in fact part-timeand does not rely on commissions to make a living. Thus, the basic PFSapproach is educational, not confrontational. Part-time PFS agents do nothave to make the sale to put food on the table. Hard sell? Nothing could befurther from the truth.David BeemerVirginia Beach, Va.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHERE TO INVEST IN 1996: PHONE NUMBERS (DEC. 25)The correct phone number for ordering additional copies of our previousissue, ``Where to invest in 1996," is 609 426-5594.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A WINNING NUMBER FOR THE LABORITES?The national lottery flap may further undermine the ToriesBy:By Julia Flynn in London`Scamalot.'' That's what critics are now calling Camelot Group PLC, thefor-profit, Anglo-American consortium running Britain's national lottery.After barely a year of operation, Camelot Group is weathering a storm ofcontroversy. Among the allegations are offering bribes, cozying up togovernment regulators, and paying top executives unseemly salaries for thelow-risk chore of peddling lottery tickets to wager-loving Britons.   The consortium denies any impropriety, and no one at Camelot has beenformally charged with any wrongdoing. No matter. The Labor Party is turningScamalot into a referendum on the ruling Tories' laissez-faire approach tobusiness. With elections just a year away, Labor will do everything to keepthe issue hot. Pressure already is mounting to revamp government oversightof the lottery and to turn the operation over to a not-for-profit groupwhen Camelot's license expires in 2001.   The Conservatives had reasoned that a for-profit business would operatea lottery more efficiently than a state-run firm. So after reviewing bothfor-profit and not-for-profit bids, the government went with Camelot. It'scomposed of four British companies--candy and soft-drinks giant CadburySchweppes, computer maker ICL, Racal Electronics, and banknote printer DeLa Rue--and one U.S. company, lottery operator GTech Corp. A new governmentagency--the Office of the National Lottery, or Oflot--oversees Camelot.``SMELL FACTOR.'' By December, Camelot was estimating it would sell $7billion worth of tickets and scratch cards in its first year, making thelottery one of the world's biggest. Then controversy flared. On a BBCinvestigative program, Richard Branson, owner of Virgin Atlantic Airways,alleged that Guy B. Snowden, GTech's co-chairman and a Camelot director,had offered him a bribe to withdraw his group's bid for the lottery.Branson said he informed Oflot's director general, Peter Davis, of thealleged bribe, but Davis denies being told. Snowden labels the charges``beneath contempt'' and is considering a libel suit against Branson, whois already suing GTech for libel. On Dec. 20, Davis said an investigationwould begin in January.   The same day as the BBC broadcast, Davis admitted to a House of Commonscommittee that he had accepted rides in GTech's jets, helicopters, andlimousines while touring state lotteries in the U.S. Davis also hasacknowledged a close friendship with GTech board member Carl B. Menges. Ina heated debate, Labor member Donald Anderson argued that the ``smellfactor'' prevents Davis from having ``the credibility necessary for theperformance of his functions.'' The government so far has refused to sackDavis.SCRUTINIZED. Labor MPs also are raising questions about whether Oflot letCamelot profit at the expense of the good causes it is supposed to fund.Camelot made a $37 million profit on revenues of $3.9 billion during thehalf-year ended in September and paid out a $14.6 million dividend to itsfive shareholders, the maximum payout allowed under its license. Yet in aSeptember 1994 letter to an MP, Oflot's Davis wrote that based on theconsortium's forecast he expected it would be ``over four years beforeCamelot shows a cash return on its investment.'' Camelot says it did not``deliberately understate'' its expected returns.   Meanwhile, Camelot's pay packets are raising eyebrows, too. CamelotChief Executive Tim Holley received $682,785 for 1995, including a $184,800bonus. Holley declines to comment. Oflot says it doesn't regulate the payat Camelot, but in a country where high salaries arouse ire, this argumentis hardly convincing. Says Denis Vaughan, an orchestra conductor whostarted the move for a lottery to help the arts: ``Oflot is more of alapdog than a watchdog.''   GTech merits far closer watching as well, Camelot's critics say. TheRhode Island-based company, which operates 74 lotteries for governments andother public authorities, has endured scrutiny for its methods of winningcontracts in the U.S. Its former national sales manager, J. David Smith,has been charged by federal prosecutors with taking kickbacks in NewJersey. GTech has never been charged with a crime and says it wasvictimized by Smith, who is vigorously defending himself. Nonetheless,critics are calling for a reexamination of GTech's role in Camelot.   Scamalot will make even more headlines when the inquiry starts probingBranson's allegations. The way things are going, Camelot's partners maycome to regret that they ever bet on this business.Photograph(s):Photograph: PLACING A BET: Is the watchdog agency asleep?LAURIE SPARHAM/NETWORK/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TOSSING A LIFELINE TO MEXICO'S BIGGEST BANKSEven Banamex and Bancomer are getting a state bailoutBy:By Geri Smith in Mexico CityMexico's yearlong economic crisis has been murder on the country's bankingsystem. The government has been forced to take over six banks and bail outnine others. But the prevailing wisdom was always that the system's crownjewels, Banamex and Bancomer, would easily weather the storm. Now they,too, are in sufficient distress that the government is preparing to assumechunks of their troubled loan portfolios--and those of two other banks. Thecost: More than $4 billion on top of the $11 billion the government hasalready spent on bailouts. The government effort has already grown somassive that some critics are saying that the banks are beingrenationalized.   It's a stunning reversal. Just four years ago, the government made $13.5billion selling off the state-controlled banks to some of Mexico's cockiestentrepreneurs. They plunked down an average of three times book value for18 banks, figuring that the economic reforms of then President CarlosSalinas de Gortari, coupled with free trade with the U.S., would guaranteevigorous economic growth and handsome profits.SICK SYSTEM. Instead, the new owners have seen the value of their holdingsdevastated by the high interest rates and bad loans that are the hallmarksof the financial crisis. With borrowers unable to pay, past-due loans nowexceed $17 billion--18% of the system's portfolio. If tougher U.S.accounting standards were applied, the figure would be as high as35%--meaning the system is very sick. One big loser is financier AgustinLegoretta III, whose investor group has lost nearly all the $1.4 billion itpaid for Grupo Financiero Inverlat--now a ward of the state.   The banks' problems present a big threat to President Ernesto ZedilloPonce de Leon's pledges that the economy will recover in 1996. The countryneeds healthy banks to finance any recovery. Yet, Standard & Poor's Corp.says Mexican banks won't start to turn around until the third quarter of1996 because banks and borrowers are still being hit by 50% interestrates.   The worry is that Mexico's banking problems will be a drag on theeconomy for years. Moody's Investors Service warns that the bank bailoutcould cost 10% to 15% of GDP, or up to $40 billion. That would slow growthand suck Mexican and international funding away from other uses. With manyeconomists expecting the economy to shrink in early 1996, the governmentmay have to step in with more money soon. ``The government is providingBand-Aids to the banks as they come for help, but the real cancer--thepast-due loans--has not been eliminated,'' says economist Rogelio Ramirezde la O.   The government doesn't have any easy way out of this mess. Confidence inMexico is so low that if the government tries to help the banks by bringingrates down, the markets will likely pummel the peso and Mexican securities.That's what happened last fall when market jitters forced an upward spikein rates, producing a flurry of new defaults.WARY INVESTORS. In October, Standard & Poor's downgraded Banamex' peso debtto BBB-, S&P's lowest investment-grade rating. In response, the loan-buyoutprogram, previously used to help smaller banks, was extended to Banamex andBancomer, which together control 39% of the system's assets. ``Banamex andBancomer are the most important banks in Mexico, and we simply can't runthe risk that their finances might deteriorate,'' says Eduardo Fernandez,president of Mexico's Banking & Securities Commission.   The banks' troubles present a buying opportunity for foreignbanks--though most are wary of getting entangled in a Mexican bank now. ButSpain's Banco Bilbao Vizcaya paid $340 million to buy control of troubledMercantil Probursa in July. Canada's Bank of Nova Scotia is negotiating toassume control of Inverlat. And Bancomer is shopping around for a foreignminority investor to inject fresh capital.   As they grapple with the banks' problems, Mexican officials now concedethat they mishandled the bank sell-off in the early 1990s. Too muchemphasis was placed on obtaining high prices and too little emphasis on thebanking skills of the buyers. ``In retrospect, I would have applied some ofthe purchase price to better capitalization of the banks,'' says FinanceSecretary Guillermo Ortiz, who was in charge of the privatization programthen and is responsible for bailing the banks out now. He is probablydoomed to spend a long time correcting his mistake.Photograph(s):Photograph: BANAMEX TRADERS: Aid hasn't solved the bank's real problem, badloansKEITH DANNEMILLER/SABACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457APPLE: ANOTHER BOUT OF BAD TIDINGSProfit pressure may bring layoffs and suitorsBy:By Peter Burrows, with Kathy Rebello, in San Francisco and Steve Brull inTokyoMike Spindler just can't get a break. Instead of celebrating the blowoutsales he expected this Christmas quarter, Apple Computer Inc.'s CEO isbracing for a very rough ride. In mid-December, the company warned of apossible loss during the period, and analysts fear the worst--layoffs,projects killed, maybe more losses. Some even say Apple will have littlechoice but to sell off parts, if not all, of the business. And there areagain rumors that Spindler's job is in jeopardy. Says Robertson, Stephens &Co. analyst John T. Rossi, who doesn't foresee profits again until nextfall: ``Apple is in a tougher spot than it's been in for a long time.''   The reason? Banking on a strong season, Apple pumped up production byabout 30%. To move its many Macintosh models, the company slashed prices.Simultaneously, it faced a shortage of profitable high-end models. To makematters worse, Apple was slammed by a vicious price war in Japan. The netresult: On Dec. 15, Apple announced that its unit sales and revenue for theChristmas quarter were running above last year's level but below internalforecasts. Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. analyst Eugene G. Glazer now expectsApple to report a $5 million loss for the quarter, down from a $178 millionprofit on sales of $2.8 billion for the same quarter a year ago. Glazerfigures Apple's gross margins for the period slipped to a tiny 18.2%.CREDIT WATCH. Apple has gained market share worldwide, hitting 9.3% of thePC market this fall, up from 7.9% at midyear, figures New York-basedresearcher Link/IDC. Apple execs see the share improvement as critical,maintaining that software developers--and then customers--will abandon theMac if it loses more ground to PC rivals. But to make its market-sharegains, Apple sacrificed profitability--and its long-held tenet thatconsumers are willing to pay a premium for its computers. Recent price cutsnarrowed the gap between Macs and PCs from $1,000-plus in 1994 to $320, IDCfigures.   Apple isn't giving up on its strategy. It recently sweetened discountsto big resellers with $20 million worth of Mac sales a year. And dealerssay Apple will cut prices 10% again in January on some PowerBook laptopsand high-end 9500 Power Macs. But outsiders worry that Apple can't affordits crusade. Analysts figure Apple's cash balance is down to $200 million.Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investor Services started reviews of Apple'scredit on Dec. 18.   That makes internal cost-cutting crucial. Insiders say between 1,000 and2,000 employees--7% to 15% of the workforce--could be let go beforequarterly results come out on Jan. 17. More manufacturing also may beoutsourced, and nascent businesses--such as multimedia set-top boxes--maybe sold or axed.   Some outsiders contend even that won't do it. Glazer says slashing 1,500jobs translates into $100 million in yearly savings, vs the $450 million hethinks Apple needs to reach Compaq Computer Corp.'s 23.5% gross margins andearn its 10% net. To fuel development of the Mac alone, Apple spends about5.6% of sales on R&D, vs. 1.8% for Compaq.   Spindler engineered Apple out of a similar crisis in 1993, when he laidoff 13% of the workforce and took a one-time quarterly loss of $188million. Can he do it again? With gross margins way down, he has less roomto maneuver. Thanks to a bloody price war started by Fujitsu Ltd., Apple'sJapanese unit, normally the source of 30% of the company's profits, will belucky to break even this quarter, analysts in Japan say.   Despite rumors, insiders think it's unlikely Spindler will get the bootat Apple's scheduled board meeting in mid-January. ``The board standsbehind the statement in October in support of Michael Spindler,'' says adirector.TROIKA TALES. Apple's troubles, meanwhile, have lowered its share price by34% since mid-July, to about $32--not far above the company's book value of$23.50. That has made Apple takeover bait. Two new suitors said to besniffing around: Sun Microsystems and a three-way partnership of Appleco-founder Steve Jobs, who left in 1985; Lawrence Ellison, CEO of softwaregiant Oracle; and Jim Manzi, former chief of Lotus Development, thesoftware company recently taken over by IBM.   Sun execs won't comment on rumors, though Eric E. Schmidt, its chieftechnology officer, calls Apple ``a strong brand.'' As for the troika? Noway, says Jobs: ``The rumor ain't true. Though there might be romance inthe idea, I'm afraid one can't go home again.'' The question: How muchbreathing room does Spindler have left?Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Apple's Discounting Hurt Profits...CHARTS BY ALBERTO MENA/BWIllustration: Chart: ...Without Improving Sales GrowthCHARTS BY ALBERTO MENA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: Spindler seems willing to sacrifice margins for market share.But can Apple afford it?PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUIS PSIHOYOS/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE COMEBACK KID OF RUSSIA?Yeltsin has no charismatic rival, and the economy looks betterBy:By Peter Galuszka in MoscowOn election day, voters thronged to the brick school building that servedas the voting place in precinct 1465--a working-class Moscow neighborhood.One of the voters favoring the Communists--the big winners--was 83-year-oldMaria Artshenava. In her youth, the Communists brought stability and pride,she said. Today's market reformers have brought only pain. With a pensionof only $45 a month, ``all I can buy is bread,'' she complained.   For the second time in two years, Russian voters have given PresidentBoris Yeltsin the same message: Reforms have enriched just a sliver ofRussian society while impoverishing the rest. At the same time, Russia'ssuperpower status, achieved under the old regime, has collapsed. That's whyvoters made the revived Communist Party the leaders, with 22% of theparliamentary vote. Ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky's misnamedLiberal Democratic Party did better than predicted, coming in second.   It is certainly a disappointing outcome for Yeltsin and the whole reformcamp. But it is not quite a disaster. Indeed, Yeltsin will even find someencouraging nuggets in the results as he ponders his strategy for the farmore important June presidential elections. Yeltsin hasn't yet declaredwhether he will be a candidate in that crucial vote, which will choose aleader for a five-year term.FALLING FLAT. As he mulls his options, the Russian President will note withsatisfaction that the parliamentary elections have not produced acharismatic challenger for the presidency. Grigory Yavlinski, the onlyreformer with much popularity, gained just 9% of the votes. Yeltsin's mostfeared rival, Alexander Lebed, the nationalist former general, fell flat onhis face. His party received less than the 5% minimum for parliamentaryrepresentation.   While Yeltsin will face a strong campaign from the resurgent Communists,their leader, Gennady Zyuganov, is a bumbling-professor type who lackscharisma. Says Nikolai Petrov, a senior analyst at the Carnegie Endowmentfor International Peace in Moscow: ``This does improve Yeltsin's chances.There's danger from the Communists and nationalists, but he'll get a chanceto mobilize the democratic electorate.''   The big question is Yeltsin's health. If he is able to run in June, hewill likely enjoy the heavy backing of the financial and business groupshis policies have enriched as well as the old military and industrialelite. But if he takes himself out of the race, the reformers couldsplit--opening the way for Zyuganov or Zhirinovsky.   There is also concern that the Communist resurgence may frighten Yeltsininto abandoning his relatively austere economic program. Such a move couldbe self-defeating if inflation, which he has chopped from 2,000% in 1992 toaround 170% for 1995, shoots up again.   But Yeltsin should be able to hold the line on reform. Although theCommunists are likely to pick up at least 150 of the Duma's 450 seats andZhirinovsky did surprisingly well, with more than 50 members, thePresident's powers are much greater than those of the Duma. Moreover, anyCommunist effort to roll back reform will be hurt by the poor showing oftheir allies, the Agrarians, a group led by collective farm managers, whodread privatization of agriculture. They only won about 20 seats. Finally,the Communists and Zhirinovsky disagree on economics. The otherwise erraticZhirinovsky tends to support sound fiscal policies.   Yeltsin is not acting as if he's going to cave in to his rivals. Moscowinsiders say he will likely ditch unpopular Foreign Minister Andrey V.Kozyrev. But key aides such as Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin andprivatization chief Anatoly Chubais are likely to stay on.   If Yeltsin can hang on until June, he may be helped by real economicimprovement. With inflation down and the ruble relatively stable, theindications are that economic output is likely to rise in 1996 for thefirst time in six years. Russians are no longer seeing their savings eatenaway to the degree they were two years ago. By June, they may see moreRussian goods on the shelves and perhaps more competitive pricing. Whilesuch changes may not win the votes of big losers such as Maria Artshenava,they could be enough to gain Yeltsin another five years.Photograph(s):Photograph: OLD GUARD: Communist chief Zyuganov won 22% of the votesJEREMY NICHOLL/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NO SMOKE, BUT PLENTY OF HEATWhy the smokeless tobacco biz is starting to hackBy:By Tim Smart, with Ed Brown, in New HavenFor years, UST Inc. has chewed up the competition and spit out pure gold.Partly because the Greenwich (Conn.) maker of Skoal and Copenhagen brandsnuffs has avoided the political and legal hassles that have plaguedcigarette companies, it has posted profit numbers most consumer-productsoutfits can only dream about. Earnings have doubled in five years, to $387million last year--enough to generate a hefty 32% net margin on $1.2billion in sales.   Now, UST may be about to get chewed up. A study released on Dec. 18 bythe American Health Foundation, a Valhalla (N.Y.) organization that focuseson research about the health hazards of tobacco, found that a single can ofsmokeless tobacco contains three times the dosage of cancer-causingchemicals found in a pack of cigarettes. (The average user of smokelesstobacco consumes three cans per week.) In Kansas, a team of lawyers ispreparing a nationwide class action alleging that UST and others have knownfor years that their products are addictive and harmful. Meanwhile, tobaccohas until Jan. 2 to respond to Food & Drug Administration proposals thatwould sharply curtail marketing of smokeless tobacco.TRIPLE WHAMMY. Perhaps more ominously, UST's fundamental business ischanging for the worse. Analysts expect profits to increase by 11% in 1996,but much of the rise will come from higher prices. Unit-sales growth forUST's smokeless tobacco through the first nine months of this year was apaltry 0.5%--after increases of 2.6% in 1994 and 2.3% in 1993 and twicethose rates in the 1980s. From about 90% in the late 1980s, UST's marketshare has fallen to about 84%.   The problem: UST's traditional market of mostly young blue-collar malesisn't expanding. Attempts to lure new buyers to smokeless tobacco--mainlyformer cigarette smokers or younger users--have failed. Competitors,meanwhile, have begun chipping away at UST. Swisher International Inc.'sHelme unit offers its Silver Creek brand in a two-for-one package, whileConwood Co. is selling its new Cougar brand for about half the price ofUST's Skoal.   UST is fighting back, but slowly. It recently unveiled Skoal FlavorPacks, a pouch-like version of Skoal designed as an alternative tocigarettes. But similar products have had only limited success with theirtarget market: cigarette smokers. Meanwhile, Joseph R. Taddeo, head ofUST's tobacco unit, resigned in June after a dispute with CEO Vincent A.Gierer Jr.--analysts say over the course of new-product initiatives.Taddeo's replacement is marketing executive Robert D. Rothenberg. Gierer,Rothenberg, and other company executives refused interview requests.   Analysts expect Rothenberg to further shift UST's advertising emphasisaway from stock-car racing and rodeo audiences to rock concerts and collegecampuses. Advertising spending is going up, too. One splashy promotion isUST's Rock The Smokies campaign, which offers a drawing for free tickets toa country-music concert to be held on Fourth of July weekend in Newport,Tenn. Anyone who sends in a coupon can ask for free samples of USTproducts.   But aggressive marketing could easily ignite more opposition fromactivists and regulators. ``Statistics show that it's young people thatstart using tobacco, not adults,'' says Mitchell R. Zeller, a deputyassociate commissioner at the FDA. ``It's the President's goal that thenext generation grow up without becoming addicted to tobacco.'' The new FDArules would limit marketing efforts such as sponsorships and the handingout of free samples. The agency also is likely to pressure UST and storesto ensure that they don't sell to minors.I.D., PLEASE? Some states aren't waiting for Washington. In October,Massachusetts forced UST to consent to stringent restrictions on the use ofmail-order samples there, including checking driver's licenses to verifythe age of those writing in for samples. This came after a six-month stingin which the state had minors clip coupons in Rolling Stone and othermagazines, then write for free samples after claiming to be adults. ``Ifyou could fill out a coupon and sign something without showing any proof ofage and get a six-pack of beer in the mail, people would be outraged,''says Assistant Attorney General George Weber.   Diversification would seem prudent at this point. UST got intowinemaking in the mid-1980s under the Chateau Ste. Michelle and ColumbiaCrest labels, but wine still only accounts for 7% of sales and 1.3% ofoperating profits, hardly enough to offset pressures on its main business.UST may have to come up with something else--or endure some bites into itspeerless financial record.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: No Profit ProblemCHART BY RAY VELLA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: STINGMassachusetts forced tighter rules after it proved minors got free samplesfrom ads in Rolling StoneCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILL FLIPPER PLAY IN ESTONIA?Why John Kluge is on a buying binge in HollywoodBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesJohn W. Kluge didn't get to be one of the richest men in America by beingstupid. A onetime Ford assembly-line worker, he invested in a Washingtonradio station in 1946 and later a string of TV stations. That made hisfortune in a big way in 1984, when he sold the TV stations to RupertMurdoch for $2 billion. He was among the first to jump into cellular,too--picking up a cell-phone operation in 1983, which he sold three yearslater for a cool $1.6 billion.   Yet for all his lucrative dealmaking, the 81-year-old Kluge has nevermanaged to conquer Hollywood. He has lost an estimated $275 million onOrion Pictures Corp., the production outfit he began investing in duringthe mid-1980s--only to see it sink into bankruptcy. Orion emerged fromChapter 11 in 1992, but it still gushes red ink. So why would Kluge'sMetromedia International Group Inc. swoop in on Dec. 21 to bid $115 millionfor debt-plagued Samuel Goldwyn Co.? Or, among other apparently oddballdeals, agree on Nov. 30 to pay an estimated $533 million for AllianceEntertainment Corp., a distributor of golden-oldie music by the likes ofMel Torme and Rosemary Clooney? The answer: Eastern Europe.PICK OF SHOWS. Since the Berlin Wall came down, Kluge and his aides havebeen aggressively buying up licenses to provide wireless cable TV, radio,and telephones in such places as Riga, Tallinn, and Nizhny Novgorod. Now,Kluge's troops are hustling to line up the programming they intend to sellto these new customers. If it outbids Dutch media giant Polygram for theSamuel Goldwyn studio, Metromedia will gain the rights to a library of1,100 films, including such classics as Guys and Dolls and Pride of theYankees, as well as some 700 episodes of TV programs such as Flipper andGentle Ben.   Will they line up in Estonia to see Flipper? Hard to say. But Kluge andcompany certainly think so. In a flurry of deals since August, 1994,Metromedia has also snapped up two smallish film companies. If you add inOrion and Goldwyn, the deals would give Metromedia rights to more than2,100 films and television shows.   One problem: Much of Kluge's new empire isn't making any money. In arecent filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission, Metromediaacknowledged that its collection of companies lost $51.2 million in thefirst six months of 1995, on sales of $179.9 million. Moreover, the companyis clogged with $399 million in short-term and long-term debt.   Kluge isn't talking about how he intends to turn his money-losersaround. And he shows no sign of altering his strategy. Associates sayMetromedia continues to bid for licenses not only in Eastern Europe butalso in Asia. The company already ships such U.S. programs as MTV, CountryMusic Television, and the Discovery Channel to wireless cable-TVsubscribers in such cities as Moscow, Bucharest, and Tashkent. It also ownsradio stations in Moscow, Budapest, and elsewhere, and is building wirelessphone systems in other regions.   Looking for financial stability, last April Kluge merged Metromedia withActava Group Inc., a mishmash of companies formerly known as FuquaIndustries. Its chairman, John D. Phillips, is a 52-year-old turnaroundspecialist who has sold off everything but Actava's Snapper Power Equipmentunit. An executive whose tastes run to denim and Harley Davidsons, Phillipswill act as CEO of Kluge's entertainment companies from from Actava'sAtlanta headquarters.   As a source of new programming, Kluge is counting on Motion PictureCorp. of America (MPCA), a production house he agreed on Nov. 27 to buy for$32.5 million in stock and cash. MPCA, which produced such low-budget hitsas Dumb and Dumber and Threesome, plans to turn out 14 to 16 films nextyear for Metromedia. If Metromedia wins Goldwyn, which specializes in artfilms such as The Madness of King George, it would get ownership of a dozenother films in the works, including American Buffalo with Dustin Hoffman.   Can a library of movies and some startup production help put Kluge'sentertainment biz in the black? Possibly. More likely, they will keep himin the game long enough to make back the losses from his Orion debacle--andfind another, bigger company to buy him out. After all, some of JohnKluge's shrewdest moves have come from knowing when to sell.KLUGE'S MEDIA EMPIREORION PICTURES Has a film library of 1,200 movies, including Platoon,Terminator, and Silence of the Lambs. Emerged from bankruptcy in late 1992.Lost $18.9 million on $73 million in revenues for the six months ended Aug.31.METROMEDIA INTERNATIONAL Provides wireless cable TV, paging, and telephoneservices to Eastern Europe and former Soviet-bloc nations. Lost $13.1million on $3.3 million in sales for the first six months of fiscal 1996.SAMUEL GOLDWYN* Owns a 52-theater chain and a library of 1,100 films,including Pride of the Yankees and Guys and Dolls, and 700 TV episodes. Italso has film production and distribution. Lost $12.3 million on sales of$53.5 million in the six months ended Sept. 30.*Bid to acquire company on Dec. 21DATA: COMPANY REPORTSPhotograph(s):Photograph: BRAVE FACE: His new empire is losing moneyPHOTOGRAPH BY ANDY FREEBERG/OUTLINEPhotograph: GOLDWYN'S THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGEPHOTOGRAPH BY PHOTOFESTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE NAACP BETS ON A NEW BREADWINNERKweisi Mfume hopes to show donors the crisis is overBy:By Susan B. Garland in WashingtonLast March, officials of the scandal-plagued National Association for theAdvancement of Colored People asked members of the AT&T Foundation to lunchat Manhattan's Remi restaurant. Myrlie Evers-Williams, who had just takenover as NAACP chair, quickly got down to business. What could the nation'svenerable civil rights organization do to persuade the foundation to renewa three-year, $225,000 education grant that had expired in 1993? AT&T'sanswer: Put your house in order. ``We were looking for strong leadership,strong financial controls, and a strong mission,'' recalls Milton J.Little, an AT&T Foundation vice-president who was at the meeting.   Enter Representative Kweisi Mfume (D-Md.). On Feb. 15, Mfume will leaveCongress to become president and CEO of the NAACP, a move that figures tobolster its clout--and its bottom line. Already, his appointment may havewon over one big donor: On Dec. 28, Nissan Motor Corp. USA is expected toannounce it will donate $100,000 to the NAACP. The organization's backershope others will follow. ``We wanted someone whose integrity wasfirst-rate,'' says Nancy L. Lane, director of corporate affairs for Johnson& Johnson, who served on the NAACP's search committee.DAUNTING TASK. Mfume's challenges are twofold: He must attract young blacksnow drawn to militant leaders like Louis Farrakhan while reassuringCorporate America that the NAACP is worthy of support. ``We need to changethe hearts, minds, and direction of young people so that they seeappreciation of work, respect for elders, and individual responsibility asbedrock principles,'' he says.   Mfume thinks this message of self-reliance will appeal to donors. ``Ihope corporate partners who have not shied away will say to others thatit's all right to come home to the NAACP,'' he says. The task is daunting.The 87-year-old organization has been reeling since August, 1994, when itousted Executive Director Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. after discovering he hadpaid $300,000 to settle a sexual-harassment suit. Auditors found otherevidence of gross financial mismanagement. The scandal led to longtimeChairman William F. Gibson's defeat last February to Evers-Williams.   Mfume is meeting with auditors to come up with fiscal controls for thegroup, which is $3.8 million in debt. He hopes to build a $150 millionendowment by 2001, improve efficiencies by merging regional offices, andask some suppliers to restructure or forgive debt.   Business, which contributed almost half of the NAACP's 1995 budget of$8.5 million, is key to his efforts. Despite financial disarray, manycompanies, including Procter & Gamble, Sears, Quaker Oats, and IBM, havekept up support. Companies argue that business has an interest in backinggroups that promote minority opportunities. ``It's important we have askilled and qualified workforce,'' says Eric R. Graves, manager ofconstituency affairs at Texaco Inc.   Other corporate donors couldn't ignore the disorder. In 1995, corporategiving declined some 30% from 1994. Joseph E. Seagram & Sons Inc. withheldits annual $50,000 grant in 1994 and 1995. Seagram spokeswoman Patsy Glazersays the company had been waiting to see who would head the organization.Now, she wants to meet with Mfume. Merrill Lynch & Co. also is withholdingsupport until it sees how the NAACP's game plan shapes up. AT&T is waiting,too, but Little is hopeful: ``We believe Mr. Mfume's leadership is what isneeded.''SALES TOUR. Backers say Mfume proved his leadership mettle as a member ofthe House Banking Committee. There, he emerged as a consensus-builder,mediating disputes among the banking, insurance, and securities industries.Says Banking Committee Chairman James A. Leach (R-Iowa): ``There are somepeople who think that what's good for the free market is bad forlower-income people. Kweisi believes the reverse--that what makes themarket work will be better for lower-income people.''   That philosophy is behind Mfume's plans to set up NAACP mentoringprograms to match students with corporate volunteers. He also wants to workwith companies to set up apprenticeship programs and with officials toimprove public schools. He may also push for incentives to encouragecorporations to work with small minority companies.   Over the next few weeks, Mfume intends to embark on a nationwide tour tomeet with corporate leaders. But with the NAACP's programs barelyfunctioning, many branch offices virtually closed, and one-third of itsstaff on furlough, the organization could be a tough sell. It will take allof Mfume's skills as bridge-builder to convince Corporate America that theNAACP won't be just another bad investment on corporate books.WHERE THE MONEY GOESNAACP programs that draw corporate supportFAIR SHARE Helps corporations set and reach goals regarding minority hiringand purchasing from minority suppliersACT-SO Nationwide competition among students on academic subjects such asarts, humanities, and sciencesBACK-TO-SCHOOL Encourages dropouts and troubled students to continue theireducation by providing tutoring and counselingPhotograph(s):Photograph: IDEA BROKER: Mfume was an effective Capitol Hill mediatorMANTEL/SIPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457REPACKAGING THE POST OFFICEFacilities are getting face-lifts, clerks are getting friendlierBy:By Mark Lewyn in WashingtonWhen retired CIA analyst William R. Dodge stopped at Furr's supermarket inAlbuquerque on Dec. 22, his shopping list included butter, chocolate chips,nuts, and postage stamps. Stamps? Sure. Overnight delivery, too. TheAlbuquerque facility is one of eight that the U.S. Postal Service recentlyhas tucked inside popular retail outlets around the country.   The new offices are just one sign that the USPS is trying to reinventitself. Aside from opening facilities in outlets such as Furr's and Kmart,it is sprucing up old offices and improving customer service.Stamps--including new, self-adhesive ones--can now be purchased at ATMs, byphone, and with credit cards. During the holidays, sales clerks directedtraffic and branch hours were extended. Workers even dressed as Santa todeliver Express Mail.   Why the changes? After all, the agency is flush from last year's ratehike, higher mail volume, and better cost controls and cash management.Postmaster General Marvin T. Runyon says he ended fiscal 1995 with a recordsurplus of $1.77 billion on revenue of $54.3 billion. But in many markets,the Postal Service is losing out to private carriers and new technologiessuch as fax machines (chart). ``We just can't sit here and say to people,`Here are our hours and, if you feel like it, bring your mail to us,'''says Runyon. ``We need to get [market share] back.''   The new approach was evident over the holidays. Runyon hired 40,000part-time workers to sort mail, leased 116 planes to carry it, and set up acommand center in Washington to make sure it got through. The effort seemsto have worked: On Dec. 20, 1995's busiest mail day, the service delivereda record 725 million pieces of mail, up 6% from 1994.   To publicize the reforms, Runyon hiked his ad budget 50% in 1995, to$143 million. Last fall, he also hired Loren E. Smith, a former Citibankexecutive who did stints at Kraft General Foods Inc. and Colgate-PalmoliveCo., to oversee marketing.   At the heart of the new strategy are the new postal ``stores.'' So far,200 of the 40,000 local offices have had face-lifts that include attractivelighting and salesclerks trained to be friendly and helpful. It's lookinggood: On average, the new shops have posted 20% sales gains over theoffices they replaced. Now, Smith is stepping up the pace--all postalfacilities in Albuquerque and Atlanta are getting makeovers. Philadelphia;Columbus, Ohio; Boston; and Richmond, Va., are next. New services includephone debit cards and a ``Pack-and-Send'' wrapping service.   Shoppers who endured surly postal service and long lines over theholidays likely are skeptical of such reforms. But Runyon knows he has tomake the strategy work--or see a lot less mail with a USPS postmark.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Why The Overhaul?CHART BY ALAN BASEDENCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A HEAVYWEIGHT CONTENDERThis breakthrough may be the key to a fat pillBy:By Geoffrey Smith in BostonLast July, Amgen Inc. looked like it had a lock on one of the drugindustry's most heated races: the search for a ``fat drug.'' In amuch-heralded study whose announcement boosted Amgen's stock by $900million, researchers disclosed that a protein called leptin, produced bythe newly discovered OB gene, stripped away body fat when injected intoobese mice.   Barely five months later, an Amgen rival may have taken the lead: OnDec. 28, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., was toannounce that it had found the ``receptor'' for leptin--the structure oncell walls that is a crucial part of regulating leptin's function.Receptors don't make anyone skinny, but many drugs target receptors toinhibit or stimulate a bodily function. While Amgen is testing aninjectable drug, Millennium says its receptor may be the key to anantiobesity pill, which would be far more lucrative.MIND-SET. Researchers had hoped a shortage of leptin--the protein thatsignals the brain to stop eating--was a big factor in obesity. But studiesnow show that obese people often have high leptin levels. Millenniumbelieves the receptor it found will lead it to another obesity gene, calledDB, that determines whether the brain can recognize leptin's stop-eatingsignal. ``The receptor may lead to drugs for potentially the most prevalentform of human obesity--one resulting from the brain's resistance to leptinrather than the lack of leptin,'' says Millennium CEO Mark Levin.   Weight-watchers shouldn't rethink New Year's resolutions yet:Researchers say a wonder drug is years away.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457EXHALE BLOWS 'EM AWAYBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONBy Ronald GroverCall it a Christmas miracle. No one was more surprised than execs atTwentieth Century Fox when its Waiting to Exhale opened on Dec. 22 andimmediately became the unexpected hit of the holidays. Fox had targeted itsmarketing for the film, starring singer Whitney Houston and three otherblack actresses, heavily at black women. Exhale opened primarily in largecities; the studio hardly even opened the movie in the 'burbs until afterChristmas.Hollywood isn't sure why, but despite its segmented marketing and limiteddistribution, Exhale is knocking 'em dead. The film, based on a novel byTerry McMillan, was made on a budget of $15 million, about half theHollywood average. In its opening weekend, the movie had a huge $14.3million box office, beating out six other new films, including WarnerBros.' Grumpier Old Men and Universal Pictures' Sudden Death. Being one ofthe few women-oriented films helped. Whatever other reasons for Exhale'ssuccess, Hollywood won't ignore the lesson: Look for a wave of black-femalebuddy movies --glitzier, big-budget ones.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TRUNKFUL OF PINK SLIPS AT BUDGETBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONWITH THE RENTAL CAR BUSIness wrapping up one of its worst years ever,Budget Rent a Car's new chairman, Jack Frazee, had a Grinch-like holidaymessage for 500 salaried employees: Your services are no longer needed.Frazee hopes to save $20 million annually by cutting 20% of the salariedworkforce. The cuts are part of a massive shakeup at Budget, the No.3rental agency with estimated 1995 U.S. revenues of $1.5 billion. Frazeealso showed the door to his CFO and two senior vice-presidents and closed40 unprofitable offices. Handing out pink slips over the holidays was ``notfun,'' Frazee says. ``But I try to remind the people who are left that thecompany is a lot more stable as a result of the actions we've taken.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PIER 1'S $20 MILLION QUESTIONBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONPIER 1 IMPORTS ALSO HAD A lump of coal in its Christmas stocking: Theretailer disclosed on Dec. 26 that it would post a pretax loss of $20million because of ``inappropriate trading activities'' by a financialconsultant--Capital Insight of Beverly Hills, according to the consultant'slawyer--hired to manage excess cash and short-term investments. Pier 1,otherwise enjoying strong sales gains, says the loss won't materiallyaffect liquidity or operations, but a board committee is investigating.Pier 1 CEO Clark Johnson didn't return phone calls.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IS CYRIX LOOKING AT A DEFAULT?By:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONCHIPMAKER CYRIX IS SPUTtering. On Dec. 22, the company warned that it maylose $8 million or more in the fourth quarter. A price collapse forcedCyrix to write down its inventory of chips compatible with Intel's 486.Cyrix said the loss could force a default on $88 million in loans used topurchase production equipment to build its newest chip, which is designedto rival Intel's new Pentium Pro. The company hopes to get a waiver fromcreditor IBM, which manufactures Cyrix' newest chip.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A DESERT DEAL FOR BRITISH PETROLEUMBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONDESPITE A BLOODY INSURgency by Islamic militants in Algeria, BritishPetroleum on Dec. 23 signed a five-year deal with Sonatrach, Algeria'sstate-owned oil company, to explore and develop gas fields in the remoteI-n-Salah region of the Sahara desert. BP will foot 65% of the $3.5 billioncost of the project and will get one-third of the gas's salesvalue--enough, it figures, to boost its worldwide gas production by up to30%. A spokesman says BP is hoping that energy installations, which accountfor 95% of Algeria's foreign earnings, won't be targeted by the insurgents.Exxon and Atlantic Richfield also are mulling deals in Algeria.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CALLING CORPORATE AMERICA'S BLUFFBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONIN THE MAYBE-IT-DOESN'T-PAY to-stick-your-neck-out category: House MinorityLeader Richard A. Gephardt and 45 fellow Democrats are challenging morethan 90 executives to detail business tax breaks they would be willing tosacrifice to help balance the federal budget. The challenge, in lettersmailed Dec. 22, was prompted by national newspaper ads signed by thebusiness leaders imploring Congress to put ``everything on the table'' toreach a budget deal. Among others, the letter went to Paul Allaire ofXerox, Lou Gerstner of IBM, Bob Allen of AT&T, and Joe Dionne of TheMcGraw-Hill Companies, parent of BUSINESS WEEK.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ET CETERA...By:EDITED BY THANE PETERSON-- The Feds and Occidental Chemical settled the 16-year-old Love Canalcleanup case.-- Cordis shares fell after Johnson & Johnson extended its review of itsbuyout offer.-- Daiwa's ex-N.Y. general manager was indicted for allegedly helping hidelosses.-- Goldman Sachs is mulling whether to dissolve its partnership and gopublic.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE JOBS MARKETBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONGood thing Steve Jobs knows the ups and downs of entrepreneurship. Hiscompany, Pixar Animation Studios, maker of Toy Story, went public on Nov.29, sending the stock to 39. Then Pixar fell to 23 on worries that the bulkof Toy Story's earnings will go to partner Walt Disney. But just afterChristmas, Pixar shares edged back up, to $28, after several analysts ratedthe stock a ``buy.'' The current value of Jobs's 80% stake: $840 million.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Pixar Inc. Stock PriceCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ARTHUR LEVITT SPEAKS SOFTLY AND CARRIES A LITTLE STICKBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHTBy Amy Barrett, with Michael SchroederWhen President Clinton unexpectedly vetoed a securities-litigation reformbill on Dec. 19, it marked a setback for Securities & Exchange CommissionChairman Arthur Levitt Jr. The SEC chief had toiled for months to forge acompromise that satisfied Republicans' desire to curb nuisance suits andthe Administration's insistence on protection for small investors. Congressoverrode the veto, but the debacle dealt a blow to Levitt's dream ofbecoming a consensus-builder able to bridge the gulf on Capitol Hill.   Because the veto blindsided GOP lawmakers, Levitt comes off lookingineffectual. White House pols seeking favor with the trial lawyers' lobbyswayed the President, rather than Levitt. And Levitt's O.K. of a``safe-harbor'' section of the bill that protects companies from suits overfalse projections riled consumer groups. ``Levitt's credibility has beendeeply wounded by playing politics,'' says Michael A. Calabrese, a directorof Congress Watch and an opponent of the bill.BIT PLAYER? Levitt, 64, former chairman of the American Stock Exchange, wasviewed as a savvy regulator when Clinton appointed him in 1993. Since theRepublican takeover of Congress, he has skillfully courted GOP legislators.His modus operandi: seizing chances to get with the Republicans'deregulatory program. For example, after winning GOP concessions on thesafe-harbor provision of the securities-reform measure--including theexclusion of such protection for initial public offerings--Levitt signedoff on that portion of the bill. High-tech companies with volatile stockprices had sought the change to reduce their exposure to costly lawsuits.   While Levitt contends he would have opposed the legislation if thesafe-harbor provision had not been modified, critics grumble that he choseto blink rather than duke it out with Republicans. ``I was stunned,'' saysformer SEC Commissioner Richard Y. Roberts, a Republican, of Levitt'sposition.   More surprising, though, was Levitt's nonrole in the President's vetodecision. Clinton relied mainly on longtime Arkansas adviser Bruce Lindseyand Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes in arriving at his no-go decision.Levitt, for his part, insists his views were well known to the WhiteHouse.   The perception that Levitt was a bit player in the affair could hurtnext year when the House will consider paring back securities regulations.Rather than mounting an all-out assault on the bill's objectionableprovisions, the SEC chief is trying to win a place at the negotiating tablewhile pushing to eliminate overlapping state and federal regulations. Yetwith Levitt's White House clout now in question, the bill's sponsors may beless inclined to make concessions.   Levitt's efforts to protect his agency's funding could also take a hit.So far, his accommodating approach has paid off. Republicans who havesavaged other regulatory agencies are expected to hold the SEC budgetsteady at $300 million in 1996. But Congress could well make another run atthe regulator's budget next year, while Levitt appears weakened.   Despite his recent wounding, Levitt shows no signs of a retreat from hisagenda. He still intends to pressure the National Association of SecuritiesDealers to reform the NASDAQ market and make it more equitable for smallinvestors. And the SEC chief is about to unveil a proposal to require moredisclosure of derivative holdings, which could greatly complicatecompanies' public filings. ``I expect flak from all quarters,'' Levitt saysserenely. But his success in dodging the next round of artillery shells maydetermine the legacy Levitt leaves behind at an embattled SEC.Photograph(s):Photograph: VETO: It makes him look ineffectualBARBARA REISCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHAT'S BUGGING THE FEDSBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- It seemed like farce to many foreigners, but it's no laughing matter atthe Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.Both agencies have launched probes to find the source of press reports lastfall that the CIA snooped on the phone calls of Japanese officials duringU.S.-Japan auto trade talks. And they're aiming high: They interviewedDeputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers and other economic officials.Summers, who says he played no role in the auto talks, denied involvement.The CIA no longer considers him a suspect, but investigation continues.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BALKANIZED AID PACKAGEBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- Bringing peace to Bosnia may be easier than getting Congress to O.K. $600 million in reconstruction aid. The Clintonites will sell it as a U.S.job creator. But there's a hitch: The White House wants to divert some workto the Eastern European countries hurt most by a trade embargo againstSerbia. The Hill may balk at that.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BUDGET SLOW BOATBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- Protracted wrangling over the fiscal 1996 budget has dashed any chancethat President Clinton will send Congress a fiscal 1997 budget by Feb. 5,the statutory deadline. After two government shutdowns and marathon budgettalks, the Office of Management & Budget is two months behind in its reviewof agency spending proposals for the next fiscal year. The most likelyoutcome: The White House may send just a letter to Congress explaining thedelay.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAPAN'S SHADOW KINGMAKER IS BIDDING FOR THE SPOTLIGHTBy:EDITED BY STANLEY REEDBy Brian Bremner in TokyoIchiro Ozawa has always preferred the role of shadow kingmaker in Japanesepolitics. Back in 1993, the brash political heavyweight helped lead a massdefection from the then ruling Liberal Democratic Party, snapping its38-year reign. When his reformist government collapsed in 1994, Ozawapulled off an improbable merger of nine parties into an opposition bloccalled the New Frontier Party but didn't take the top leadership post.   Now, Ozawa, 53, has emerged from the shadows. In mid-December, heannounced a surprise bid to challenge longtime colleague Tsutomu Hata tolead New Frontier. And when the results were tallied on Dec. 27, Ozawa wonby more than 2 to 1. The stage is now set for an epic battle between Ozawaand LDP President and International Trade & Industry Minister RyutaroHashimoto in a general election sometime in 1996. At stake will be controlof the Diet's 511-seat lower house and the Prime Minister's chair.``AS VAGUE AS POSSIBLE.'' Ozawa's bid for the spotlight is timely. Afterfour years of economic stagnation and a string of bank failures, theJapanese public is fed up with the Socialist-LDP government's dysfunctionalmanagement of the economy. Socialist Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama'scoalition is coming under withering attack for a plan to use $6.6 billionin public money to bail out seven insolvent housing-loan corporations,which made reckless real estate loans in the 1980s. ``The intent is to beas vague as possible about the assignment of blame,'' Ozawa told BUSINESSWEEK. ``This is the kind of society Japan has become.''   Ozawa wants to remake the Japanese system. He champions sweepingderegulation. He also wants to give the now weak Prime Minister's officeenough power to set clear policy directions. Japan's glacialconsensus-style decision-making threatens to consign the nation to decline,he warns. ``No leader has come up with a strong vision of how to goforward,'' he says.   Ozawa's biggest liability aside from heart problems is his associationwith the money politics he says he wants to clean up. After all, he was akey LDP fund-raiser and power broker for years. He is taking heat right nowfor his ties to a Buddhist organization that turned out 6 million votes tosupport Ozawa candidates in last July's Upper House elections. Ozawa's risecould also bust up New Frontier if he can't keep Hata on board.   Hashimoto, who made a big splash by staring down Washington in lastsummer's auto talks, is much more popular than Ozawa. Still, there isgrowing sentiment in Japan that Ozawa may be the only leader who canproduce significant change. ``He's very determined, and the time left forJapan to pull out of this stagnation is limited,'' figures Masaya Miyoshi,president of the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations, or Keidanren.   Indeed, Ozawa has won plaudits from some economists for his proposal tohalve income and corporate taxes, wipe out special-interest loopholes, andeventually make up some of the difference by hiking Japan's sales tax from3% to 10%. But with Japan's budget deficit projected to hit 4.2% of grossdomestic product in 1996, vs. 2.0% in the U.S., Ozawa has to be careful notto lead Japan into a fiscal mess.   Ozawa could also help heal strained ties with the U.S. He is apragmatist on trade who is well regarded in Washington. Ozawa says he isworried that Washington has started to lose interest in Japan. He finds itregrettable that there is a tendency in Washington ``to treat theU.S.-Japan alliance more lightly than before.'' If Ozawa becomes PrimeMinister, that would certainly command American attention.Photograph(s):Photograph: OZAWA: The next Premier?NARUYOSHI YAMAGUCHI/SYGMACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PRIVATIZING A BRAZILIAN GIANTBy:EDITED BY STANLEY REEDBy Ian Katz in Sao Paulo-- Brazil's slow-moving free-market reforms are getting a fresh impetusfrom the sale of Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, the state-controlled mininggiant. In what's likely to be Latin America's biggest privatization, Brazilon Dec. 20 picked a group headed by Merrill Lynch & Co. and Rothschild Inc.from a star-studded field of competitors to manage the sale of thegovernment's 51% share in CVRD. The sale, set for late 1996, should fattenstate coffers by at least $5 billion.   Privatization of CVRD will mark ``the point of no return'' for Brazil'smove away from decades of statism, says Amaury Bier, chief economist ofCitibank in Sao Paulo. Recently, investors had been growing uneasy over theslow pace of free-market legislation in Brazil's Congress. The naming ofthe sale managers shows the government ``is serious about moving ahead,''says Ricardo Gallo, vice-president for capital markets at Bank of Boston inSao Paulo.   The Merrill Lynch group will earn a 1.9% commission on CVRD's saleprice. The lucrative job drew bids from such heavyweights as Citibank, J.P.Morgan, and Salomon Brothers. A key issue is whether to sell thegovernment's shares in a global public offering or auction off operationssuch as mining, forestry, and transport separately. But the choice ofMerrill Lynch, which joined with CS First Boston to manage a $3 billionstock sale of Argentine oil company YPF in 1993, indicates that Brazilfavors privatizing CVRD through a similar high-profile public offering.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HOW TO EVALUATE TAX REFORMThis is shaping up as the year of America's great tax debate. About time.The U.S. tax system is a mess, riddled with exemptions, deductions, andcredits that serve little purpose beyond rewarding favored constituents.The tax system is expensive for individuals and corporations to complywith, too.   Tax reform is already an issue in the Presidential race. A GOPcommission headed by former Representative Jack F. Kemp will soon issuerecommendations. All the main tax-writing committees plan to hold hearingson tax reform this year. To evaluate all the competing proposals foroverhauling the byzantine tax code, ranging from a single income-tax rateto a national sales tax, we suggest a guide that's over 200 years old: TheWealth of Nations. Adam Smith laid out four maxims with regard to taxes ingeneral: certainty, convenience of payment, economy in collection--andequality.   The flat tax is in the forefront of tax reform, and three of Smith'smaxims--certainty, convenience of payment, and economy in collection--wouldbe well served by a one-rate structure. The leading proponents of a flattax are Hoover Institution economists Robert Hall and Alvin Rabushka, andtheir ideas powerfully shaped the flat-rate tax legislation of HouseMajority Leader Richard K. Armey (R-Tex.). Hall and Rabushka would levy asingle 19% flat rate on wages and salaries; Armey wants to get the rate aslow as 17%. There would be no deductions, though to keep the systemsomewhat progressive Hall and Rabushka exempt from income taxes $16,500 fora married couple and $4,500 a child. Capital gains, interest, and dividendswould be exempt from taxes. Businesses would lose many deductions, althoughinvestment spending would get an immediate 100% first-year tax write-off.Business would pay a 19% rate on total income (17% for Armey), afterdeducting wages, salaries, pensions, and costs of goods and materials.Bottom line: a highly simplified and more efficient system where incomegets taxed only once as close as possible to its source.   Still, even with generous up-front exemptions, an all-or-nothingone-rate tax is less progressive. In the past decade, global economicforces have increased income inequality. Most Americans have only one majorasset to their name: the home they bought using generous tax incentives.Losing the mortgage-interest deduction would squeeze the middle class. Aflat tax raises other questions, such as ditching charitable deductions andthe deductibility of state and local taxes while the federal governmentasks charities and local governments to assume more responsibilities.Perhaps a ``modified,'' streamlined tax approach is called for, one basedon two or three rates and allowing for a few of the most justifiabledeductions, such as charitable contributions and home-mortgage interest.   The good news: The gale winds of creative tax reform are sweepingWashington. Radical simplification would go a long way toward creating aless intrusive government and a more efficient economy. But some equitymust be preserved.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DON'T TREAD ON FREE TRADEWhat will the new year bring? An agreement between the White House andCongress to slash federal deficits for the rest of the century. Inflationwill remain subdued, and since inflation powerfully influences the stockand bond markets, investors should enjoy decent returns. And, as our 1996Industry Outlook makes clear (page 72), the U.S. economic expansion thatbegan in 1991 should continue.   Of course, as in any forecast, a lot could go wrong. One particularlydisturbing threat to continued growth lies with the virulent voices ofeconomic reaction--protectionists such as Pat Buchanan and the rapidlyexpanding number of politicians who know better but make sympathetic noisesto garner votes. The rallying cry of today's isolationists and their fellowtravelers may be, ``no more free-trade agreements''--not with Chile norwith anyone else. But what they are calling for, if heeded, would lead onlyto slower growth. Instead, policymakers should push hard for fewer tradebarriers--and faster economic growth.   True enough, there are losers as well as winners from freer trade. Buttrade is not a zero-sum business. It's freer trade that helped slay theinflation dragon that terrorized the U.S. economy for much of the '70s and'80s. White-hot foreign competition is a key reason for disinflation fastbecoming the norm in the once inflation-prone U.S. economy. Trade spursgrowth by offering entrepreneurs and companies bigger markets. U.S.companies are getting more and more of their sales overseas. Perhaps mostimportant, freer trade encourages the creation and spread of newtechnologies and commercial ideas. In sharp contrast, steep trade barrierscan leave an economy stagnant. Look at Latin America for much of the periodafter World War II--or the former Soviet Union, for that matter.   Isolationists are far more powerful in Europe and Japan than they are inthe U.S. Many developing nations are still maneuvering to boost exportswhile protecting their home market, too. It is more important than everthat the world's remaining superpower provide free-trade leadership. In thetumultuous period following the end of the cold war, the most importantdecision made by the Bush and Clinton Administrations and Congress was tocontinue the free-trade policies America has championed since 1945. Thisbet has paid enormous economic dividends in the 1990s. The bounty fromtrade and stronger economic ties among nations is plentiful indeed.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NEWBORN BABIES, BAWLING MOMSThey want laws to make insurers pay for longer hospital staysBy:By Keith H. Hammonds in New York, with bureau reportsIt is likely the most reviled fiat in recent medical history: 24 hoursafter childbirth, mother and baby are out the hospital door, cut off bytheir insurer. ``So negligent,'' says Kathy Sargent, an expectant mother inWestport, Conn. ``Appalling,'' says Randi Curran of San Francisco, who willgive birth this spring. ``It must be men who made up this policy.''   Managed care has met the masses--and the masses aren't happy. Perhaps40% of newborns currently are discharged after one day, say hospitals,twice the number in 1990. The economics driving that shrinkage arecompelling: Childbirth is by far the most common reason Americans enterhospitals, and reducing stays would save insurers hundreds of millions ofdollars a year. Most mothers, though, would rather stay put, and doctorsdon't want medical decisions taken out of their hands. The result is ``arallying point for people who have bad feelings about managed care,'' saysMichael A. Maffetone, CEO of University Hospital at Stony Brook, N.Y.STATEHOUSE ACTION. The outrage has found an outlet: In 1996, 25 states areexpected to introduce legislation that would require insurers to pay for a48-hour inpatient stay for normal deliveries when a physician prescribesit. Five already have passed such laws. In California, wherehealth-maintenance organizations pioneered the one-day stay years ago,insurer pressure to reduce postpartum stays to 12 hours has legislatorspromising a bill on Governor Pete Wilson's desk in January. Senator BillBradley (D-N.J.) is amassing support for similar federal legislation.   In this debate, pure medicine may be on the insurers' side. While somedoctors and hospitals say they're seeing more cases of jaundice anddehydration in newborns, the hospital readmission rate for babies remainsaround its traditional 2%. Several studies have found no link betweenone-day stays and consequent complications. ``There is virtually noclinical evidence that there's a technical medical necessity for an acutemedical stay of more than 24 hours,'' says A. Bruce Campbell, chief medicalofficer at Aetna Health Plans.   Insurers and HMOs have joined with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce andgroups such as the American College of Nurse-Midwives to battleminimum-stay legislation. Many hospitals, too, worry that governmentremedies, while intended to give doctors and patients decision-makingpower, risk setting a precedent for wide-ranging regulation of medicalpractices--or simply will force insurers to cut compensation elsewhere.   Some hospitals have devised an alternative solution: A growing numberare offering to absorb the cost of a second night's stay for mothers whoseinsurers don't pay. Hospital executives say they're motivated primarily bysafety concerns, but they admit the attending publicity doesn't hurt. ``Iwill not lie,'' says T.J. Padden, administrator at Box Butte GeneralHospital, a 44-bed facility in rural Alliance, Neb. ``It's not a badmarketing thing.'' Incremental costs for additional nights are low--rarelymore than $200 a night, and far lower at Box Butte. Stony Brook, the firsthospital to underwrite longer stays, says its maternity admissions are up8% in the past six months.FLAT FEES? The downside to this approach, say other hospital executives, isthat it ultimately could weaken their negotiating power with insurers:Eating the cost on one procedure could encourage HMOs to cut back onothers. For now, though, the commotion may be gaining the desired effect.Hospitals that pay for a second night say some insurers have quietly agreedto foot the bill when patients so desire--although just one company,Independence Blue Cross and Pennsylvania Blue Shield, has publiclyannounced such a retreat.   Ultimately, managed care likely will offer a different solution.Insurers are starting to compensate hospitals on a flat-fee basis for manyprocedures, much as Medicare does, rather than negotiating per diem rates.As that happens, providers will take on some of the financial risk ofgiving care--but also much of the decision-making power. The 24-hour staymay yet survive, but it won't be on managed care's head.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Babies Out The DoorCHART BY ALBERTO MENA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: MUCH ADO?Shorter initial hospital stays for newborns haven't led to a higherreadmission ratePHOTOGRAPH BY LISA QUINONES/BLACK STARCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BUSINESS WEEK INDEXPRODUCTION INDICATORS                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGSTEEL (12/23) thous. of net tons     NA          1,798#      NAAUTOS (12/23) units                  133,174     141,894r#   -5.4TRUCKS (12/23) units                 112,949     122,358r#   4.1ELECTRIC POWER (12/23)  millions of kilowatt-hrs.          NA          64,899#     NACRUDE-OIL REFINING (12/23)  thous. of bbl./day                 NA          13,892#     NACOAL (12/16) thous. of net tons      19,793#     19,438      -2.7PAPERBOARD (12/16) thous. of tons    NA#         828.3       NAPAPER (12/16) thous. of tons         NA#         800.0       NALUMBER (12/16) millions of ft.       404.4#      442.4       -19.1RAIL FREIGHT (12/16)  billions of ton-miles              24.6#       25.1        0.4Sources: American Iron & Steel Institute, Ward's Automotive Reports, EdisonElectric Institute, American Petroleum Institute, Energy Dept., AmericanForest & Paper Association, WWPA1, SFPA2, Association of AmericanRailroadsLEADING INDICATORS                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGSTOCK PRICES (12/22) S&P 500         609.42      618.65      32.8CORPORATE BOND YIELD, Aaa (12/22)    6.88%       6.83%       -18.6INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS PRICES (12/22)  111.4       112.3       -0.5BUSINESS FAILURES (12/15)            NA          333         NAREAL ESTATE LOANS (12/13) billions   $503.4      $503.9r     9.4MONEY SUPPLY, M2 (12/11) billions    $3,735.7    $3,735.0r   4.5INITIAL CLAIMS, UNEMPLOYMENT  (12/9) thous.                      341         378         4.0Sources: Center for International Business Cycle Research (CIBCR), Standard& Poor's, Moody's, Journal of Commerce (index: 1990=100), Dun & Bradstreet(failures of large companies), Federal Reserve, Labor Dept. CIBCRseasonally adjusts data on business failures and real estate loans.PRICES                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGGOLD (12/27) $/troy oz.              387.050     387.600     1.4STEEL SCRAP (12/26) #1 heavy, $/ton  134.00      134.00      -6.6COPPER (12/23)  cents/lb.            134.2       139.1       -4.4ALUMINUM (12/23)  cents/lb.          79.0        79.0        -13.2COTTON (12/23) strict low middling  1-1/16 in.,  cents/lb.             80.35       83.84       -2.2OIL (12/26) $/bbl.                   19.26       19.12       9.2Sources: London Wednesday final setting, Chicago market, Metals Week,Memphis market, NYMEXINTEREST RATES                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEAR                                     WEEK        AGO         AGOFEDERAL FUNDS (12/26)                5.50%       5.90%       5.60%COMMERCIAL PAPER (12/26) 3-month     5.62        5.61        6.31CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT  (12/27) 3-month                    5.55        5.67        6.37FIXED MORTGAGE (12/22) 30-year       7.46        7.45        9.34ADJUSTABLE MORTGAGE (12/22) one-year 5.60        5.70        6.73PRIME (12/27)                        8.50        8.50        8.50Sources: Federal Reserve, HSH Associates, Reuters Holdings PLCFOREIGN EXCHANGE                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEAR                                     WEEK        AGO         AGOJAPANESE YEN (12/27)                 102.81      102.34      100.32GERMAN MARK (12/27)                  1.43        1.44        1.57BRITISH POUND (12/27)                1.56        1.54        1.54FRENCH FRANC (12/27)                 4.89        4.95        5.43ITALIAN LIRA (12/27)                 1579.5      1589.8      1642.8CANADIAN DOLLAR (12/27)              1.36        1.36        1.40MEXICAN PESO (12/27)3                7.635       7.560       4.975Sources: Major New York banks. Currencies expressed in units per U.S.dollar, except for British pound in dollars#Raw data in the production indicators are seasonally adjusted in computingthe BW index (chart); other components (estimated and not listed) includemachinery and defense equipment. 1=Western Wood Products Assn.   2=SouthernForest Products Assn.    3=Free market value   NA=Not available   r=revised  NM=Not meaningfulIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: PRODUCTION AND LEADING INDEXESThe production index edged up during the week ended Dec. 16. Beforecalculation of the four-week moving average, the index rose to 129.8, from128.5. Increases in the seasonally adjusted output of autos, trucks, andelectric power led the advance.The leading index was up slightly in the latest week. The unaveraged indexdropped to 262.4, from 263.1 in the previous week. Higher stock prices andlower bond yields are signaling solid economic growth ahead.BW production index copyright 1996 by The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBW leading index copyright 1996 by CIBCRCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WEEK AHEADDue to the prolonged Washington shutdown, all government release dates arecertain to be postponed.NAPM SURVEYTuesday, Jan. 2, 10 a.m. -- The National Association of PurchasingManagement's business activity index probably rose to 47.8% in December,according to the median forecast of economists surveyed by MMSInternational, one of The McGraw-Hill Companies. That low reading suggeststhat the industrial sector was struggling in December. For the previousfour months, the NAPM index slid below the 50% mark that signals ashrinking factory sector. The index was 46.5% in November.CONSTRUCTION SPENDINGTuesday, Jan. 2, 10 a.m. -- The MMS survey expects that constructionoutlays probably dropped by about 0.5% in November, after jumping 2.7% inOctober. Following a surge in October, spending on public-works projectslikely fell back in November.NEW HOME SALESWednesday, Jan. 3, 10 a.m. -- New single-family homes probably sold at anannual rate of 675,000 in November, little changed from the 673,000 salesrate in October, says the MMS report. Home buying has declined for threeconsecutive months, but lower mortgage rates in 1996 could stabilize homesales in the first quarter.FACTORY INVENTORIESThursday, Jan. 4, 10 a.m. -- Factory inventories probably grew by about0.3% in November, after a 0.4% gain in October. That's suggested by thesmall increase in factory output for the month.EMPLOYMENTFriday, Jan. 5, 8:30 a.m. -- The MMS median forecast calls for a gain of125,000 new nonfarm jobs in December, less than the 166,000 added inNovember. However, the survey also calls for manufacturing jobs to rise by15,000, the first increase since August. The unemployment rate probablystood at 5.6% last month, unchanged from November's rate.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HEALING THE SOIL IN A LUSH VALLEY...BUT JUST IN TIME FOR AN URBAN FLOOD?By:EDITED BY HARRY MAURERBy Susan Jackson in Los AndesArturo Turesca likes what he sees--nothing--as he walks among his grapearbors, peeling off dead bark and looking underneath. During the spring,Turesca released test tubes of mealybug parasites among the 20 hectares ofvineyards he farms. He'll probably save money by using parasites instead ofpesticides to combat mealybugs, which are the worst enemies of grapeplants. And he'll make the Aconcagua Valley a healthier place.   Why is Turesca phasing out pesticides when neither chemical-free dietsnor environmentalism are exactly at the forefront of national debate inChile? His agricultural muse is Maria Helena Moreira, an exuberant51-year-old Brazilian economist who put a successful academic career onhold to start Aconcagua Verde, an ambitious project that aims to minimizepollution while maximizing production in this lush valley 100 kilometerseast of Santiago. Moreira, with backing from the MacArthur Foundation inthe U.S., is looking to spark a mini-revolution in the Aconcagua. ``If wesucceed, this will be the only valley in Chile that will be able to producelarge-scale in an environmentally friendly way,'' says Moreira.   Fruit is big business in Chile. Exports equaled 18% of gross domesticproduct in 1994 and have been rising in 1995. The Aconcagua, always anagricultural area, really started booming some 20 years ago, when Chiletore down its trade barriers. Now, nearly 70% of the valley's irrigableland--some 35,000 hectares--is devoted to export fruit production, morethan half of it in table grapes.   But while exports have skyrocketed, the soil has suffered, admitsClaudio Garcia, Aconcagua Valley manager for Chiquita Exportadoras Ltda.``There's a lot of natural degradation--the soil is heavily worked bymachines and people, so it has become much less porous.'' Then there arepesticides. Like most grape farmers, Turesca has to abide by exporters'rules. The exporters are in turn bound by the rules of importers--mostlythe U.S.--which require that fruit be 100% pest-free. Many farmers sprayfruit with twice as many pesticides as necessary just to make sure.   The ravages of grape monoculture began to bother Moreira during a visitshe made to Chile in 1990. Late that year, she applied, along withsociologists and scientists from the University of California and theUniversity of Rio, to the MacArthur Foundation for aninternational-cooperation grant. The project: to study the effects ofmonoculture on the valley and figure out how to grow fruit with less damageto the soil. A tall order for $500,000, but that's how much Moreira wasawarded in 1991, when she and a team of professors began surveying localfarmers and exporters. In November, 1995, the project was handed over tothe town of Los Andes, but Moreira has stayed on.   So far, only a handful of producers are using Aconcagua Verde's methods,but this is just the first year. Garcia expects the numbers to grow: ``Iwould imagine that costs will drop as productivity rises,'' which happensas soil regains its health.   Moreira and her crew recommend that farmers let certain weeds grow undertheir arbors to prevent erosion. What controls the weeds? Geese. ``They dothe mowing--and we plan to start a side business selling down for sleepingbags and quilts,'' she says.   When a Basque dandy bought the Aconcagua Valley in the 19th century, hisplan was to cut a mule route to Argentina through the middle of it. Theplan didn't take hold, but a century and a half later the concept of thevalley as a throughway is coming back. The main road from Santiago is goingto be widened, which will halve travel time to 45 minutes, a temptingthought for smog-sick city dwellers longing to escape. Residential plotsare now selling for four times as much as they would as farmland.   A proposed tunnel from Argentina could also threaten the valley'sagricultural future. Chile's congress is considering carving a tunnelthrough the Andes that would serve as a bridge between the Pacific and theAtlantic. The resulting commercial and residential development ``would doomthe valley in terms of agriculture,'' says Moreira. Cars, notcontamination, could be the valley's biggest threat.Illustration(s):Illustration: Map: Los Andes, ChileMAP BY MATTHEW KOPITPhotograph(s):Photograph: PIONEERS: Moreira with agronomist Sebastian Burgos andfeathered friendsPHOTOGRAPH BY SUSAN JACKSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEKCOMMENTARYAs the stock market's best year in two decades drew to a close, investorstook profits. After reaching a high of 5216.5 on Dec. 13, the Dowindustrials fell as low as 5059 and then rebounded to 5106 on Dec. 27. Asexpected, the Federal Reserve cut short-term interest rates, but thatdidn't count for much with bond buyers, who instead focused on the budgetimpasse between President Clinton and the GOP-controlled Congress. Lookingabroad, the long-ailing Japanese and Mexican stock markets staged yearendrallies.MARKET ANALYSIS                                                        % changeU.S. STOCKS                               Latest    Week     52-weekDOW JONES INDUSTRIALS                     5105.9    -0.1     33.0MIDSIZE COMPANIES (S&P MidCap Index)      216.4     2.1      28.6SMALL COMPANIES (Russell 2000)            314.1     2.6      28.1ALL COMPANIES (Russell 3000)              350.5     0.9      33.1FUNDAMENTALS                              Latest    Week ago Year ago90-DAY TREASURY BILL YIELD                5.02%     5.22%    5.59%30-YEAR TREASURY BOND YIELD               6.00%     6.10%    7.83%S&P 500 DIVIDEND YIELD                    2.23%     2.24%    2.79%S&P 500 PRICE/EARNINGS RATIO              17.4      17.3     17.0                                           % change (local currency)FOREIGN STOCKS                            Latest    Week     52-weekLONDON (FINANCIAL TIMES 100)              3676.4    2.8      18.8TOKYO (NIKKEI INDEX)                      20,011.8  4.6      1.8TORONTO (TSE COMPOSITE)                   4684.2    0.7      11.5TECHNICAL INDICATORS                      Latest    Week ago ReadingS&P 500 200-day moving average            557.5     554.4    PositiveStocks above 200-day moving average       64.0%     62.0%    NeutralSpeculative sentiment: Put/call ratio     0.56      0.72     NegativeInsider sentiment: Vickers sell/buy ratio 1.24      1.24     PositiveBLOOMBERG FINANCIAL MARKETSINDUSTRY GROUPS                        % change                     % change                       1-    12-   Strongest stock  1-    12-ONE-MONTH LEADERS      month month in group         month month Price1 HEALTH CARE SERVICES 18.6  55.8  AMGEN            21.6  96.8  57 5/82 OIL AND GAS DRILLING 18.4  33.8  ROWAN            24.2  54.0   9 5/83 DRUGS                10.7  66.6  ELI LILLY        15.2  73.2  56 1/24 OIL WELL EQUIPMENT    8.8  33.7  McDERMOTT        22.4 -14.2  21 7/8  AND SERVICES                     INTERNATIONAL5 MEDICAL PRODUCTS      8.8  64.9  ST. JUDE MEDICAL 20.6  54.6  39 15/16                        % change                     % change                       1-    12-   Weakest stock    1-    12-ONE-MONTH LAGGARDS     month month in group         month month Price1 ALUMINUM             -9.6  19.2  ALCOA            -11.2  22.4 51 1/22 SPECIALTY APPAREL    -9.5   6.1  GAP              -13.8  38.5 41 3/8  RETAILERS RETAILERS3 GENERAL MERCHANDISE  -6.7   8.4  KMART            -18.8 -51.4  6 1/2  CHAINS4 PAPER CONTAINERS     -6.7  -8.6  STONE CONTAINER   -9.8 -22.5 13 3/45 METALS               -6.1   7.0  ASARCO           -13.2   5.7 30 3/8MORNINGSTAR INC.MUTUAL FUNDSLEADERS                             LAGGARDSFour-week total return          %   Four-week total return         %1 FIDELITY SELECT             11.7  STEADMAN AMERICAN            -5.8  ENERGY SERVICE                    INDUSTRY2 EVERGREEN U.S. REAL         11.4  KEYSTONE AMERICA HARTWELL    -5.4  ESTATE EQUITY Y                   EMERG. GR. B3 WRIGHT EQUIFUND-MEXICO      11.4  AMERICAN PERFORMANCE         -5.4                                    AGGRESSIVE GRTH.52-week total return            %   52-week total return           %1 ALGER CAPITAL APPRECIATION  77.5  EV MARATHON GREATER INDIA   -33.22 FIDELITY SELECT ELECTRONICS 73.8  WRIGHT EQUIFUND-MEXICO      -32.33 GOVETT SMALLER COMPANIES A  72.4  STEADMAN TECHNOLOGY GROWTH  -28.0DRI/McGRAW-HILLRELATIVE PORTFOLIOSDollar amounts represent the present value of $10,000 invested one year agoin each portfolioPercentages indicate five-day total returns   U.S.      Treasury   Foreign   Money   stocks    bonds      stocks    market fund   Gold$13,678$13,334$12,030$10,564$10,198   +1.23%    +1.40%     +2.80%    +0.12%        +0.61%All data on this page are as of market close Wednesday, Dec. 27, 1995,unless otherwise indicated. Industry groups include S&P 500 companies only;performance and share prices are as of market close Dec. 26. Mutual fundreturns are as of Dec. 22. Relative portfolios are valued as of Dec. 26. Amore detailed explanation of this page is available on request. r=revisedIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: STOCKSIllustration: Chart: BONDSIllustration: Chart: THE DOLLARIllustration: Chart: MUTUAL FUNDS - 4-week total returnIllustration: Chart: MUTUAL FUNDS - 52-week total returnCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GLOOMY DAYS ARE HERE AGAINDEPARTMENT STORES SHOW PROMISE, BUT SLUGGISH SALES COULD SINK MANYMERCHANTSBy:By Susan Chandler in ChicagoConsumer confidence is up, and the stock market is at record highs. Butinstead of merchants expect a Darwinian shakeout in 1996. "The strong aregetting stronger. The weak are disappearing or consolidating," says ArthurC. Martinez, chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck & Co.   Many retailers have reason to be gloomy. Retail sales rose only 4.5%during 1995, far below the 7% annual growth common during the roaring1980s. They're expected to rise by the same 4.5% in 1996, while profitswill remain restrained by heavy discounting.   Roughly 15,000 retail companies sought protection from creditors inbankruptcy court by late 1995, pushing Chapter 11 filings up 20% from 1994.Retail economists expect even more in 1996 (chart). That's because thislatest round of financial troubles isn't just from taking on too much debt.It's concentrated among regional retailers with outdated computer systems,yesterday's merchandise, and aging stores. For many, liquidation may be theonly answer, says Carl E. Steidtmann, chief economist of ManagementHorizons, a consulting unit of Price Waterhouse based in Columbus, Ohio.   The trouble is, consumers just aren't spending much. Incomes are fairlystagnant, and consumers' non-mortgage debt-to-income ratio hit an all-timehigh of 19% in late 1995. What's more, baby boomers are paying more forservices, from child- to elder-care leaving them less for shopping. Andconsumers have discovered that they can get hefty discounts by waiting forsales. "Now that we've taught them to do that, we shouldn't sit around andwonder why," says John Ronzetti vice-president of the National RetailFederation.KMARTS CONSTRACTION. Discounters are feeing a lot of pain. A raft ofregional chains, including Bradlees Inc, and Caldors Corp., sought Chapter11 protection in 1995 as competition from fast-growing Wal-Mart Stores Inc.and Target Stores intensified. The shakeout many even claim Kmart Corp.,the nation's third-largest retailer, retail expects say. Kmart CEO FloydHall, who replaced the ousted Joseph E. Antonini in June, says he willclose 70 stores in 1996, cut $300 million in costs, and continue to unloadinventory. 'The best answer to Chapter 11 [talk] is to have a solidperformance under our belt," he says.   Easier said than done. Just ask specialty retailers, who are expectinganother drab year for apparel sales. Clothing sales are expected to growonly 3.5% in 1996 after a 2.5% increase in 1995. St. Louis-based EdisonBrothers Stores Inc. filed for Chapter 11 in November and plans to close500 of its 2,700 mall-based shops. Ann-Taylor Stores Corp. is heading for amakeover after suffering a double-digit tumble in same-store sales in1995--the result of fashion and pricing miscues in an unforgiving market,says retail consultant Alan Millstein, who publishes the New York-basedFashion Network Report.HITTING THE GAS. For beleaguered catalog companies, 1996 may spell a bit ofrelief. Hit by higher paper and postage costs, catalogers saw their bottomline take a beating in 1995; Lands' End Inc. profits throught Octoberdropped 61%. A survey of U.S. catalogers by consultant A.T. Kearney Inc.found 62% expect sales to increase in 1996.   Department stores should continue to slowly regain maket share fromoutlet stores and off-price retailers. Lower prices--and thinnermargins--are the key. "We've had to get our costs down to offer fashionthat's also a value," says Allan Questrom, CEO of Cincinnati-basedFederated Department Stores Inc., parent of Macy's and Bloomingdale's.   Consumer-electronics stores are ecxpected to have another hot year, asshoppers snap up computers and related items. That means strong revenuegrowth for category killers--high-volume specialty chains such as Best BuyCo. and Circuit City Stores Inc. But they, too, must settle for theslimmest of margins.   Sears seems to be getting the formula right. It's one of the lastdepartment stores with a broad array of hard goods, such as appliances andcomputers. With these products going gang-busters and its apparel shareexpanding, Sears is winning market share. Says CEO Martinez: "When thathappens, you push the accelerator a little harder." But in what looks likea treacherous 1996, many other retailers will be satisfied just to stay inthe road.Prognosis '96Positives  -- Housing purchases should continue to help sales of home-relatedgoods.  -- Consumer confidence is rising, and that bodes well for sales ofbig-ticket items such as home computers.Negatives  -- Apparel sales will continue to slow as consumers focus on home-relatedpurchases.  -- Retail bankruptcies will increase as the shakeout among discountersand off-price retailers continues.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List