WT03-B02-1IA086-000615-B039-110http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015153 text/html 145597HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:49:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:35 GMTContent-length: 145409Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh73.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Data Management Briefs (1252 words) Assessing the role of drug companies (816 words) Working for the Common Good (2612 words) The Scientific Method (689 words) Newsline (773 words) The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse Consolidations (772 words) Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal Grants (1065 words) Digest (673 words) Earning the Public Trust (1493 words) "What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?" (2499 words) The market leader sticks with today's technology (228 words) The next generation of software (776 words) A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims Growth (1977 words) Facing the Outpatient Coding Challenge (2146 words) Putting the Pieces Together (3351 words) Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategy (535 words) CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Data Management Briefs* Columbia Pharmacy Solutions, the Greensburg, Pa.-based pharmacy benefitsmanager for Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., has entered a preliminary agreementwith MedE America Corp., Mitchel Field, N.Y., to roll out an electronicprescription program.  Columbia/HCA, the nation's largest investor-ownedhospital chain, plans to market the program to other providers nationally.* The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, The Mayo Foundation, The Midwest RuralTelemedicine Consortium and Texas Children's Hospital have contributed $5,000each to create The Center for Telemedicine Law.  The Washington, D.C.-basedresource center was designed to explore legal issues that could presentbarriers to the increased use of telemedicine nationwide.  Providers, vendorsand others interested in telemedicine issues are invited to join the centerfor annual membership fees ranging from $3,500 to $7,000.* IDX Systems Corp., a Burlington, Vt.-based practice management softwarecompany, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and ExchangeCommission to offer more than four million shares of stock at $15 to $17 pershare.  The company is expanding into the clinical information services areaand is testing its Clinical Information System, which automates informationgathering related to treatment.* The Visible Woman-a three-dimensional, computer-generated female"cadaver"-has joined her male counterpart on the Internet as part of theongoing Visible Human Project by the National Library of Medicine.  Createdfrom thousands of images collected with radiographic and photographictechniques, the Visible Woman will enable scientists and medical professionalsto view and study female anatomy in detail.  Information on the project isavailable at the National Library of Medicine's World Wide Web page(http:\\www.nlm.nih.gov).* Donald Simborg, M.D., a pioneer in electronic health information software,has joined with two partners to form KnowMed Systems, a Berkeley, Calif.-basedcompany that will create a data entry and display product that physicians canuse as a replacement for paper charts.* CIS Technologies, Tulsa, Okla., is the third claims clearinghouse to obtainnational accreditation of its EDI services from the Electronic HealthcareNetwork Accreditation Commission.  Since the program began in early 1995, TheHalley Exchange, Bartlett, Ill., and Synaptek, Oklahoma City, also have beenaccredited.* Systems Plus Inc., the Mountain View, Calif.-based publisher of The MedicalManager physician practice management software, and PCS Health Systems Inc., aScottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacy benefit manager, have agreed to jointlydevelop PCS Link.  The software package will give physician users of TheMedical Manager access to two PCS services, Rx Inquiry and Rx Authorization,for electronically filing prescriptions.* Visteon Corp.  is the new name for EMed Systems Corp.  The Orlando,Fla.-based company has introduced BigVision, an ambulatory care softwaresystem for large medical groups that covers clinical, financial andoperational information.  Visteon also closed a $4 million venture capitalfinancing arrangement with InterWest Partners and Canaan Partners.* James Pickering, formerly vice president of managed care at NationalElectronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., has been named president ofMed-Link, Kendall Park, N.J.  He succeeds Anil Kapoor, who remains with thecompany as vice president of administration.* Managed Care On-Line, a Modesto, Calif.-based on-line service for healthcare professionals involved with managed care, has introduced a comprehensivedatabase of almost 200 managed care and health care-related World Wide Websites.  The web site for the service is located at http:\\www.mcol.com.* HPR Inc., Boston, and Resource Information Management Systems, Naperville,Ill., have formed an alliance to broaden the market for HPR's Episode Profilerand Patterns Review software to include RIMS' third-party administrator andself-insured employer clients.  The HPR software tracks services physiciansprovide during the course of care for specific illnesses, as well as generalphysician practice patterns.* Fred Rothenberg & Associates Inc., developers of EZ-Cap managed caresoftware, has merged with Resource Health Partners, an Exton, Pa.-based healthcare software company.  Rothenberg will operate as a unit of Resource HealthPartners.n PeopleSoft Inc., Pleasanton, Calif., and Shared Medical Systems Corp.,Malvern, Pa., have entered an agreement under which SMS will market, sell,install and support PeopleSoft's client/server general accounting, materialsmanagement and human resources/payroll software to SMS' customers andprospects.* Phamis Inc., Seattle, developer of the Lastword health care informationsystem, will distribute a point-of-care critical care information system fromPicis S.A.* Advanta Systems Inc., a Rockville, Md.-based managed care company, haschanged its name to Amisys Managed Care Systems Inc.  The move is in reactionto a challenge to the Advanta trademark.  The renamed company planned aninitial public stock offering for December.* 3M Health Information Systems, Murray, Utah, has introduced a pre-releaseversion of 3M Coding Reference Software, which will be available early thisyear for use with the company's new 3M Coding and Reimbursement System forWindows.  The software provides on-line coding reference materials linked tocoding pro-cesses in the Windows-based system.  The company also hasintroduced 3M All Patient Refined Diagnosis-Related Groups Software, Version12.0.* The American Medical Association, Chicago, has endorsed PulseCard, OverlandPark, Kan., as its preferred vendor for card processing services.  PulseCardwill offer electronic credit card processing services to all 475,000 AMAmembers as well as 125,000 affiliated members.* Dynamic Healthcare Technologies Inc., Maitland, Fla., has announcedDynamicVision, a multimedia, client/server electronic health records system,will be available in June.  The cornerstone of the system is InternationalBusiness Machines Corp.'s document imaging software, Medical RecordsPlus/400.* Lawson Software, Minneapolis, has signed an agreement to integrate andresell Dallas-based Sterling Software's Gentran EDI software for AS/400 andUnix platforms with Lawson's enterprisewide business applications.* Emtek Health Care Systems Inc., Tempe, Ariz., has signed a cooperativemarketing agreement with Medasys Digital Systems Corp., Norcross, Ga., tomarket Dx Multimodality, Medasys' medical imaging product, as part of Emtek'sContinuum 2000 clinically based hospital information system.* Intelus, a Rockville, Md.-based health information management systemsvendor, has been acquired by SunGard Data Systems Inc., a Wayne, Pa.-basedcomputer service and application software company.  Intelus has introducedChartFlo 2000 Clinical Data Management, a client/server, Windows-based systemwith modules for medical records abstracting, utilization review, qualityassurance, risk management, infection control and other clinically relateddepartments.* Clinitec International Inc., Horsham, Pa., has formed an alliance withNYNEX, New York, as part of the NYNEX Telemedicine Solutions program.Clinitec produces NextGen, a pen-based electronic medical records system formedical practices and provider networks.* HealthVision Corp., Santa Rosa, Calif., has signed an agreement withSoftware Technologies Corp., Braintree, Mass., to remarket STC's DataGateinterface engine as part of its Care Vision Patient Focused Management System,a computerized patient record/clinical information system.* Context Software Systems Inc., Burr Ridge, Ill., has introduced CodeLink forWindows.  The program provides a complete listing of ICD-9-CM, CPT and HCPCScodes with specialty-specific links between procedure and diagnosis codes.* Dairyland Computer and Consulting, Glenwood, Minn., has signed an agreementwith Pace Health Management Systems Inc., West Des Moines, Iowa, to marketPace's Clinical Information System.  The system will enable Dairyland to offera clinical pathway/managed care system that captures and reports patientinformation from the point of care.* Micro Healthsystems Inc., West Orange, N.J., has changed its name to USServis Inc.  The new name is intended to reflect the company's strategy toprovide comprehensive management services to physician delivery systems andoutpatient networks affiliated with integrated delivery systems.  Also, thecompany has transferred stock and warrants in exchange for the Chicago-basedFrontenac Co.'s investment of $6 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Assessing the role of drug companiesHealth care provider and payer organizations offer mixed reviews about theentrance of pharmaceutical companies into the disease management market.Some hail the companies' decisions to provide disease management services,saying the corporate backing gives credence to the movement and brings thedrug companies' strong information systems and research capabilities to thefield.  Others complain that pharmaceutical companies' so-called diseasemanagement initiatives are only thinly veiled sales and marketing strategiesto sell more of their products and, because of that, their efforts can't betrusted.While it remains to be seen whether these hopes or fears are exaggerated, it'sclear that consolidation and the growth of managed care are affectingpharmaceutical companies' strategies.Diversification effortMany drug companies have merged in recent years to form pharmaceutical giants.These include Glaxo Wellcome Inc., formed in early 1995 by the merger of GlaxoInc.  and Burroughs Wellcome; Bristol-Myers Squibb, the result of the mergerof Bristol-Myers and Squibb; and the acquisition of Upjohn Co.  by PharmaciaAB.In addition to this horizontal integration, the companies are seeking tovertically integrate to lessen their dependence on drug sales and to evolveinto health services companies.As purchasers increasingly question drug costs and seek lower prices, thepharmaceutical companies are diversifying into many new areas to find newsources of revenue.  Many have started disease management initiatives to meetpayers' business demands.For example, Glaxo is seeking to fashion its disease management initiative sothat it encompasses care management, delivering services "beyond just theperiod of illness," says Pieter Muntendam, M.D., director of healthcaremanagement for the Glaxo Research Institute, Research Triangle Park, N.C.  Inthat way, Glaxo can play a role in integrating care delivery for specificdiseases, such as asthma and cancer, and provide valuable coordination betweenproviders and patients, even those recuperating at home, he says.Pharmaceutical companies are initiating disease management programs so theycan play a role sooner in the care delivery process.  In that way, they'remore likely to share in capitated managed care payments as a value-addedservice provider, rather than just supplying the drugs and being dependent onproviders for payment.Drug makers have expertise in developing treatment plans and in educatingphysicians and patients on the proper prescribing and utilization of drugs.Also, they have experience conducting large-scale studies, and data from thoseefforts is often large enough to support outcomes research.Although some of the companies' diversification efforts hold the promise offurther bolstering disease management research, they're raising red flagsabout the drug makers' motives.Several pharmaceutical companies have acquired pharmacy benefits managers inrecent months, both to vertically integrate and to gain access to the millionsof covered lives the pharmacy benefits managers represent.  Eli Lilly and Co.has acquired PCS Health Systems, Merck & Co.  purchased Medco ContainmentServices, and Smith Kline Beecham acquired Diversified Health Care Services.With data on millions of people from the benefits managers, pharmaceuticalcompanies believe they will have huge amounts of information, both clinicaland financial, from which to build evidence-based disease management programs.Also, pharmaceutical companies plan to use the existing electronic networks ofpharmacy benefits managers when building their disease management programs.Some managed care organizations are turning to pharmaceutical companies fordisease management services, or they may enter joint ventures to developstudies on disease management.  For example, Avon, Conn.-based Value HealthInc., a provider of specialty care management programs, is working on diseasemanagement initiatives with Pfizer Inc.  and Johnson & Johnson.  Value Healthexecutives say they see the ventures as ways of diversifying into new areas ofmedical services.Limiting factorsMany large HMOs and integrated delivery systems will use their own informationsystems to develop disease management programs, rather than turn to thepharmaceutical giants, says Richard Kipp, senior consulting actuary forMillman & Robertson, a Radnor, Pa.-based consulting firm.The market for large-scale disease management may be limited for at least tworeasons.  First, many providers contend that treatment protocols, a basicbuilding block of disease management programs must be developed by those whowill use them, namely the doctors.  Second, as programs are developed fordiseases that are common targets of disease management, such as asthma andchronic heart failure, the approaches could be standardizing, reducing theneed for outside organizations to develop and implement them.Pharmaceutical companies' disease management efforts may be tainted by fearssurrounding their acquisition of pharmacy benefits managers.  Providers noware leery because they say pharmaceutical makers' hidden agenda is to sellmore of their own products.Julie Bonello, CIO at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, doesn't believepharmaceutical companies should or will play a large role in diseasemanagement.  "I think pharmaceutical companies could augment diseasemanagement, but it should be driven by physicians," she says.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Working for the Common GoodFriends and colleagues of Larry Blevins delight in teasing him about hispassion for technology.  "They tell me that if I have a garage sale, they wantto know because I've always got so many gadgets," says Blevins, senior vicepresident of information technology at Harris Methodist Health System, anintegrated health care delivery system based in Arlington, Texas.  "I love totake things apart to see how they work."That's just the nature of Blevins, a man with an insatiable curiosity-"when Icease to learn, I'm ceasing to live"-and an intense desire to use hisknowledge to help others.Information technology is fascinating, he says, but its value lies in itsability to solve problems and improve the common good.  That's the bottom linefor Blevins, who emphasizes the need to give something back to his community.Community focusAltruistic or not, sensitivity to a community need is vital to the success ofmany ventures, particularly community health information networks that enablethe on-line, real-time exchange of a variety of data, he says.Without a common focus on an unmet community need, CHIN initiatives won'tsurvive the political or economic squabbles that are almost certain to eruptamong would-be participants, Blevins says."Look at all of the CHINs that have been started," he says.  "They've all hadwonderful intentions but then often lose focus.  Why are they doing a CHIN?Is it because of a community need or a desire to gain competitive advantageand increase profitability?  If it's the latter, then it's extremely difficultto bring about anything that will really work because everyone is viewing itas a competitive tool."CHIN developers would have more success, Blevins says, if they firstidentified a community need affecting all participants and then built anetwork to meet that need.  "If you bring it from a community need, from asocial need, you have a common bond."Blevins says that approach is working in Tarrant County, where he is headingan effort by 40 social service agencies to build a CHIN.  A desire to increasethe immunization rate of children is one major reason behind the networkinginitiative.The electronic exchange of information via the network will enable socialworkers and providers to develop methods to ensure that more children receiveimmunizations."This is a good example of meeting a community need," Blevins says.  "Believeme, serving the community is not a competitive or political issue if you'reserving from the heart."Community service has long been a guiding light for Blevins, who initiallyselected a career in law enforcement because he thought it represented a wayfor him to repay his community for providing Little League and otheractivities in which he had participated as a boy.Fate intervened, arresting his career with the Arkansas State Police about ayear after it began.During a trip to visit his brother in Wichita, Kan., Blevins, on a lark, tooka computer aptitude test.  Seventy-two people took the test, administered by alocal aerospace company.  Only Blevins got a job offer."I thought it was interesting, and I've always been curious about things,"says Blevins, who began learning the intricacies of International BusinessMachines Corp.'s models 1620 and 1130 as well as other leading mainframecomputers of the mid-1960s."I took advantage of an opportunity that was very unusual at the time," hesays.  "It wasn't like I thought all my life I'd want to be a computer person.In fact, I never had a computer class in school.  But once I started readingabout it, my curiosity became piqued, and I continued down the road."That road led two years later to a job at Sperry Univac Corp.  (now known asUnisys Corp.), which provided a different exposure to computers.  WhileBlevins had seen computers used in highly focused applications, such astesting parts for aircraft, his new role gave him a business perspective oncomputers."I loved solving problems and interacting with customers so much that I movedto the world trade division, which would dispatch me anywhere they had aparticular problem, whether it was customer dissatisfaction or a machine thatwouldn't work.  It was my job to work through that and get it back on track."Recognizing a needBlevins worked with customers in a variety of industries.  But, in health carein particular, he recognized a need for far more computerization than existedat the time."I thought the computer could serve health care in a much broader manner thanjust financials," he says.  "I could see the movement of a tremendous amountof paper and the need to be able to share information pertinent to care."In 1972, Blevins got his chance to bring more computerization to health care.He joined 442-bed Sparks Regional Medical Center in Fort Smith, Ark., as vicepresident of information services.For the next 10 years, he guided the development, operation and maintenance ofthe medical center's information systems.  In the evenings, he taught computerscience and management classes at College of the Ozarks, a local communitycollege."I like to interact with our young people because they have inquisitiveminds," he says.  "They're not necessarily polluted with ideas that havealready been established.  They're curious, and they keep the older generationyoung with their questions."Blevins enjoyed his job, his teaching and his circle of friends, but, in 1982,he couldn't resist an opportunity to have an even greater impact by shapingthe automation initiatives of Harris Methodist, a much larger health careorganization with aspirations of becoming an integrated health care deliverysystem."In visiting with Harris Methodist President Ron Smith and listening to hisvision of where he felt that health care was going and where he wanted to leadHarris Methodist Health System, I knew that I would like to be a part ofthat," he says."To do what we wanted to do, we needed to see significant, measurable changein information technology areas," Smith says.  "We saw in Larry the ability tolead us in the development of technology that would allow us to meet ourmarket objectives."Automation stridesBlevins believed he could make a major contribution by building an electronicinfrastructure that would link the various providers that Smith envisionedadding to Harris Methodist.  Such an infrastructure would support the on-line,real-time collection, storage and exchange of administrative, financial andclinical information necessary to achieve efficiencies, reduce costs andimprove the quality of patient care.But that would be a big job.  Like many other health care organizations,Harris Meth-odist had not pushed automation much beyond administrative andfinancial transactions, with information exchanges typically occurring inbatches."We needed to develop a clinical direction, so we mapped out a master patientindex and a repository with data related to treatment or any other interactionwith the system," Blevins says.  "We didn't know we were building the basicsof what is being defined today.  We were just defining the information weneeded, how we needed to move it and how it could benefit the community andthe organization."Today, Harris Methodist operates eight hospitals with 1,297 beds, a managedcare plan with 200,000 enrollees, a physician hospital organization and anumber of other provider sites.  All are linked electronically by a local areanetwork that provides on-line, real-time access not only to computer-basedpatient records but also data bases built exclusively for clinical analysisand outcomes research.Although it was one of the first integrated health care delivery systems tobuild an enterprisewide network and to begin work on computer-based patientrecords, Harris Methodist "still has a long way to go," Blevins says.  "Infact, I don't think we'll ever be done.  It's not like a house where you put aroof on and you're done.  The end point is not definable because theenvironment in today's business world and tomorrow's business world is notdefinable."Blevins, who is part of Harris Methodist's senior management team, is creditedwith the development of information technology that has contributed to hisorganization's growth.  "We value him highly," Smith says.  "The effectivenessof his leadership is one of our strategic enablers."Fellow CIOs also speak highly of Blevins.  "Larry has been a valued friend andcolleague for a number of years," says Larry Grandia, vice president ofinformation systems at Intermountain Health Care, an integrated health caredelivery system based in Salt Lake City.  "He has done some impressive things,applying technology in very important ways.  There is no question that he hasmade significant contributions to the industry and to the professionalorganizations to which he has donated his time."Grandia and Blevins are members of many of the same professionalorganizations, including Health Information System Executive Association, a30-member organization open only to the nation's top CIOs.With change being a constant both in health care and technology, Blevins iswary of designing obsolescence into an information system."Know that whatever you install today in 90 days won't represent thetechnology of tomorrow and, therefore, probably won't represent the solutionof tomorrow," he says.Health care organizations can help guard against obsolescence by selectinginformation technologies that provide flexibility.  Blevins is a big fan ofobject-oriented programming, for example, because its modular nature enablescomputer programmers to change codes easily."We incorporated it in our interface engine design," he says.  "It saves us alot of time and trouble in rewriting communication structures for differentinformation systems."Open systemsFlexibility also makes open systems the logical choice for health careorganizations that want to be able to use the products and services ofmultiple vendors."Proprietary systems lock you into a particular type of company and the way itis employing the technology," Blevins says.  "We didn't allow that to happen.We still don't today."Health care organizations must be careful, though, when shopping for opensystems."Many vendors say they are Health Level Seven-compliant, for example, and alook at the basics may indicate that, yes, they are.  However, because of theway in which they have interpreted HL7, their products may not be plug andplay," he says.That does not mean, however, that Harris Methodist believes it must programeverything itself.  That's expensive and time-consuming, says Blevins, whoprefers to build long-term relationships with vendors that are willing to workclosely with Harris Methodist to meet its needs.Among the companies with which Harris Methodist has long-term relationshipsare Compaq Computer Corp., IBM Corp., Microsoft Corp.  and Ungermann-Bass Inc.To foster long-term partnerships, Blevins recommends structuring agreements inwhich the customer and vendor share both in the risks and the rewards.For example, Harris Methodist has at least one agreement in which a softwarevendor's licensing fees are based on revenues attributable to the use of thesoftware.  If the health care system makes more money by using the software,the vendor earns more in licensing fees.An incentive-based agreement such as this one gives vendors a vested interestin Harris Methodist's future and encourages the development of long-termrelationships, Blevins says."I need someone that is there for the long term.  I need someone that has aninvestment in my future," he says.  "That may mean changing the way we dolicensing, for instance.  Why not license per patient day or per member permonth cost?  Why not share in that deviation of business?  I'm not saying allthose ideas are right, but we should involve more of the vendors as partnersbecause that's really what we are."Forming and maintaining long-term relationships with trusted vendors is vitalin weathering the changes that are sure to come in health care, says Blevins,who jokes that CIO stands for "change information officer."Preparing for change"You're always designing to position yourself for change," he says.  "Youshould never be designing for the problem as it's stated.  You should bedesigning for the change of that problem because that, I can assure you, iswhat will happen."While change information officer is a good description of a CIO, a bettertitle is continuous improvement officer, says Blevins, a practitioner of themanagement theory that emphasizes constant evaluation and improvement ofsystems and procedures."A CIO must be a combination of a business and a technical person," he says."He or she must be a change agent as well as a business person with atechnical understanding."And ideally a CIO applies those skills to health problems besetting acommunity, which is what Blevins is doing in his work to develop a CHIN forthe area's health care and social service providers."Harris Methodist is a business and we must make money, but we really do havea commitment to the community," Blevins says.  "I am part of that community.My daughter is part of that community.  My grandchildren will be part of thatcommunity.  And hopefully their grandchildren will be part of that community.""Building something that helps the community, working with a group ofprofessionals that increases my knowledge of health care issues, those are thekinds of things that make me want to get up in the morning and come to work,"Blevins says.  "Where I put my time is very important, and, quite frankly, ifI didn't enjoy my job, if I didn't look forward to building, if I didn't lookforward to doing something today that gave back, I would change jobs."Devising a practical CHIN strategyWhen Larry Blevins shared his idea for a community health information networkwith provider organizations in the Fort Worth, Texas area, he got a coolreception.  Undaunted, Blevins started over, developing a new network-buildingstrategy and rallying support from local social service agencies instead.Forty social service agencies, all funded in part by the United Way ofMetropolitan Tarrant County, have agreed to form what's being called a "humanservice information network" to address health and social needs in the county.Blevins remains hopeful that area health care providers eventually will jointhe network.Among the community projects that the emerging CHIN could address, Blevinssays, are tracking childhood immunization rates, measuring the outcomes ofcertain cancer treatments, analyzing health care trends to develop wellnessprograms and sharing computer-based patient records.The networking project originated a year ago when Harris Methodist HealthSystem, abandoned plans to lead the development of a CHIN focusing on healthcare financial and clinical transactions.  Harris dropped its original plansbecause of its competitors' wariness about Harris' motives, concerns overcost, widespread confusion among potential participants about what a CHIN isand the largely unsuccessful experiences of CHIN developers in other markets,Blevins says.Faced with the lack of support in the health care community but convinced thatan electronic network could help meet public health needs, Blevins turned tothe United Way membership.  The strategy was a natural because Blevins servesas chairman of the United Way's information technology committee.  "Wherebetter to start than the social service agencies that are funded to help ourcommunity?"  he says.United Way is developing the network to connect the agencies it funds and toeventually build links to health care players, such as Harris Methodist, largeemployers and not-for-profit agencies.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Scientific MethodFor several years, librarians at the health sciences libraries of the Big 10universities tried to gather relevant information on the Internet.  Butfinding Internet-based information through Internet or World Wide Web searchengines proved disappointing to the librarians because engines searchprimarily by terms only, finding plenty of essential as well as irrelevantinformation during a single search.To put an end to the time-consuming and often frustrating search process forboth themselves and their patrons, the librarians began developing Web homepages that would cull and display or point the way to information on thevarious health sciences fields.But when the librarians realized they were duplicating efforts of their peers,they decided to band together to create and maintain one Internet-based healthsciences information resource for everyone, including non-university healthcare professionals.  The result is HealthWeb, a Web page that eventually willpresent myriad educational, clinical and statistical data covering the threedozen health sciences fields, running the gamut from general surgery andoccupational therapy to health care administration and informatics.HealthWeb's mission is to present an easy-to-use and focused resource thatpoints health care Internet users to health sciences data that they otherwisemight have difficulty finding, says Julia Kelly, reference librarian at theUniversity of Minnesota Bio-Medical Library in Minneapolis and co-facilitatorof HealthWeb."The material included in HealthWeb is selected by librarians and healthsciences staff based on its significance to a particular health sciencesfield," Kelly says.  "Entries in HealthWeb include descriptive annotations tohelp users fully and immediately understand what information is beingpresented.  Users get a one-stop shopping place for all their Internet-basedhealth sciences information needs."The "one stop" is HealthWeb's reason for being, as searching the vast andhighly disorganized Internet for a specific piece of information is not easy."I do Internet searches for a living, and it is a mess," Kelly says.  "Searchengines are not systematic.  People mounting data on the Internet do not titletheir data in effective ways.  Ultimately, searching is a hit-or-miss,time-consuming chore.  HealthWeb alleviates the search process for users andprovides them a clear guide to the information they need."Divide and conquerBecause the health sciences represent an enormous industry, participatinguniversities in HealthWeb opted to divide and conquer the task of creating thehealth sciences Web page.  Each school is responsible for "areas ofexcellence," health sciences fields for which individual universities are bestsuited because of their resources and expertise.  The universities create thefield-specific Web pages that users can access via the HealthWeb home page.Field-specific Web pages that now are up and running include:  a nursing page,created and maintained by the University of Michigan; a minority health page,by Michigan State University; and a radiology page, by Indiana University.Sites due early this year include:  a consumer health page, by the Universityof Illinois-Chicago; and an oncology page, by Indiana University.  Sites thatcould be added later this year include:  a health care administration page bythe University of Michigan and a health informatics page by either theUniversity of Michigan or Indiana University.Northwestern University maintains the HealthWeb home page.  Otherparticipating universities include:  the University of Minnesota, theUniversity of Iowa, the University of Wisconsin, Purdue University, Ohio StateUniversity, Penn State University and the University of Chicago.To access information, users enter the address for HealthWeb,http:\\www.ghsl.nwu.edu\healthweb, into a Web browser to get to the home page.From there, users select a field-specific page that reflects their interests."A nurse can select the hyperlink from the home page to the nursing page toaccess information from a listing of all the Ph.D.  programs in nursing in thenation to newsletter articles to consumer information from professionalassociations.  And it is all free of charge," Kelly says.As more field-specific pages are created over time, the usefulness ofHealthWeb will grow.  "Internet resources need to be found and evaluated fortheir usefulness," Kelly says.  "HealthWeb does that so health care Internetusers don't have to."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996NewslineA bill designed to protect the privacy of medical records has createddivisiveness in the health care community.  Consumer advocacy groups, someclinicians and others argue that the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of1995 doesn't go far enough.  But proponents say the bill represents atremendous improvement over the current patchwork of state legislation on theissue.Critics of the bill say it contains too many exemptions to prohibitionsagainst transmitting patient-identifiable information.  And they contend thatthe bill encourages the development of huge medical databases for the purposeof further disseminating identifiable information, although nowhere in thebill are these databases sanctioned.Leading the opposition are the 40,000-member American Psychiatric Associationand two consumer advocacy groups:  The Center for the Study of Responsive Law,formed by Ralph Nader, and the 75,000-member Public Citizen group.The American Medical Association and the American Civil Liberties Union havereservations about the legislation but haven't taken formal positions.And two organizations, which were among 13 that signed a letter to the U.S.Senate in October supporting the bill, now are having second thoughts aboutthat support.  Leaders of both groups-Bazelon Center for Mental Health Careand New York Public Interest Research Group-say they signed the letter insupport of the concept and intent of the legislation, but the bill as writtenis seriously flawed.In contrast to critics who say the bill doesn't go far enough, some groupsthat helped draft the bill say it goes too far in certain areas.For instance, the Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, anelectronic data interchange trade group, has serious reservations about someprovisions.  Language that places claims clearinghouses under strictrequirements to receive patient authorization to transmit claims and relateddata electronically is unrealistic and would cause the price of claimsprocessing to skyrocket, says Jeanne Schulte Scott, chair of the association.The provisionsSponsored by Sen.  Robert Bennett (R-Utah), S.  1360 gives all Americans theright to examine their medical records and request corrections.  The bill alsoidentifies persons or organizations that come into contact with identifiablemedical information as "health information trustees" and lists circumstancesunder which information may be released.Supporters of the measure include the Center for Democracy and Technology,Association for Electronic Health Care Transactions, AIDS Action Council,American Health Information Management Association, American HospitalAssociation, and American Association of Retired Persons."Every group that signed the letter to the Senate believes the bill can bestrengthened," says Janlori Goldman, deputy director of the Center forDemocracy and Technology, a consumer advocacy group that studies privacy andtechnology issues and was a driving force behind the legislation.  "We havetime to make sure the bill is as strong as it can be.  But if it passed today,it would be a tremendous improvement over current practice."But others say that legislation usually is weakened, not strengthened, as itmoves through Congress.  "We tend to believe it's not going to get tighter asit goes through the process," says Lauren Dame, staff attorney for PublicCitizen's health research group.Critics argue that some major health information services companies played apart in drafting the bill to make sure it protected their interests.They argue that such companies as Equifax, an Atlanta-based credit reportingagency that's now involved in health care electronic data interchange, want todevelop huge databases and sell medical information to employers and insurers.But Equifax says that charge isuntrue.  "We had zero role in putting thelegislation together," says John Ford, vice president for privacy and externalaffairs at Equifax.  The company, which was among the first in the healthinformation services industry to develop and disseminate a set ofconfidentiality principles, supports the concept of the bill but hasn'tfinished a full assessment, Ford says.Perceived weaknessOne of the biggest weaknesses in the current bill, critics contend, is that itprovides too many exemptions to the stated prohibitions against transmittingidentifiable information, especially to law enforcement agencies andresearchers."The bill doesn't do what it purports to do," says Harold Eist, M.D.,president-elect of the American Psychiatric Association.  "It gives away morethan it protects."Eist and others worry that as more medical records are computerized, geneticinformation will fall into the hands of employers and insurers-informationthat, for instance, could show that a person has a higher-than-average riskfor breast cancer.Goldman dismisses that argument.  "The Bennett-Leahy bill not only doesn'tsanction the development of computerized medical databases, it regulates andlimits them," she says.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Big Get Bigger in Latest Clearinghouse ConsolidationsThe electronic claims clearinghouse industry closed 1995 with a bang with theannouncement of two major takeovers.  Both of the deals involve companies witha strong presence in pharmacy electronic data interchange acquiring EDIexpertise in other areas.Envoy Corp., Nashville, Tenn., announced Nov.  30 a definitive agreement toacquire National Electronic Information Corp., Secaucus, N.J., for $89 millionin cash.Earlier in November, National Data Corp., Atlanta, agreed to acquireConceptual Systems Corp., Cleveland, under terms that weren't disclosed.Although clearinghouses have been consolidating in recent years, the latestdeals may signal the start of consolidation among some of the largest playersin the health care EDI market.  The industry is consolidating because of theeconomies of scale that can be achieved by transmitting huge volumes of data."I don't see it as an aberration but as part of a continuing cycle," says LeeBarrett, president of Barrett Consulting Group, Middletown, Conn.NEIC's futureEnvoy expects to complete its acquisition of NEIC early this year after itsshareholders vote on the plan.  Plans call for NEIC to become a division ofEnvoy, with Richard Caliri remaining as NEIC's CEO.NEIC's owners include several of the nation's largest commercial insurancecompanies.  One of the largest clearinghouses for physician, hospital anddental claims, NEIC processes more than 7 million claims each month.In buying NEIC, Envoy gets a national clearinghouse that serves as a centralpoint for most claims destined for major commercial insurance companies.NEIC's recent acquisition of Synaptek, a physician claims clearinghouse, andan alliance with Claims Processing Service, a dental claims clearinghouse,gives it the capability to process claims destined for most payers.Envoy processes more than 34 million claims per month, mostly forprescriptions.Earlier attempts by the company to diversify its health care transactionsbusiness include purchasing a stake in EMC*Express, a hospital claimsclearinghouse, in 1993 and National Computer Claims Services, a dental claimsclearinghouse, in 1994.  Envoy's next step likely will be to increase itshospital claims clearinghouse capability, starting with exercising its optionto purchase all of EMC*Express, says James Kever, co-CEO of Envoy.Excluding pharmacies, Envoy has links to 11,000 providers, compared with themore than 150,000 providers linked to NEIC, industry observers say.For more than two years, NEIC has been attempting to build on-line, real-timetransaction capability by creating its Health Care Information Network,designed to meet the needs of managed care.  NEIC's efforts in this area couldbenefit from Envoy's experience in processing on-line, real-time pharmacytransactions.The commercial insurance companies that own NEIC determined that long-termsuccess in the EDI field requires significant volume-and that requiresconsolidation, Caliri says.  The owners also determined that owning an EDIcompany was peripheral to their core business, he adds.Envoy reportedly received $180 million when it sold its financial transactionsprocessing business in May to First Data Corp.  But the downsized Envoy lostmore than $2 million during the first nine months of this year on $18.9million in revenues.In comparison, NEIC officials have told executives at other claimsclearinghouses that the company expects to earn $5 million to $6 million thisyear on revenues of approximately $40 million.  Once heavily subsidized by itsowners, NEIC has made a profit for at least the last four years, Caliri says.To finance the deal, Envoy has secured debt and equity financing from GeneralAtlantic Partners, First Union Capital Partners, First Union National Bank ofNorth Carolina and NationsBank.National Data dealLike Envoy, National Data Corp.  is bolstering its effort to diversify itshealth care electronic data interchange services with its latest acquisition.The pending purchase of Conceptual Systems Corp.  will give National Dataelectronic connections to physicians and hospitals, adding to National Data'score strength of providing electronic transactions to pharmacies.Conceptual Systems, which processes more than 800,000 claims per month forhospitals and physicians, will be a wholly owned division of National Data andwill continue to be headed by Nicholas Rosenstein.The purchase is the latest in a line of acquisitions made by National Data todiversify its health care services.  Since July 1994, National Data has boughtLytec Systems, a physician and dental practice management vendor; ZandallSystems Group, a pharmacy practice management software company; Learned-Mahn,a hospital EDI software company; and Claim*Net, a physician claimsclearinghouse.Acquiring Conceptual Systems adds expertise in processing hospital claims toNational Data's mix of services, says Craig Eilermann, director of medicalsales and services for National Data.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Idaho CHIN Wins Big in New Round of Federal GrantsA community health information network born out of one CIO's frustration withthe challenge of bringing costly technology to rural America has attractedsupport in high places.The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, a unit of theU.S.  Department of Commerce, awarded the Southern Idaho Medical InformationNetwork a two-year matching grant of nearly $1.7 million, more money than anyof the 12 health care projects for which it announced grants in November.  Thegrants, totaling nearly $4.7 million, are through the Telecommunications andInformation Infrastructure Assistance Program (see chart).Federal officials like the proposed network because it demonstrated anexcellent understanding of how technology can address public health issues,says Steve Downs, a program officer at the Commerce Department unit."We really expect this to be a national model of how to implement a CHIN,"Downs says.  "We see them as pioneers, and we expect other communities,particularly rural communities across the country, to follow them and benefitfrom the lessons that are learned from Idaho."The health problems the network plans to address include:* Improving childhood immunization levels and inaccurate immunization recordsthrough better recordkeeping, collection and sharing of information frommultiple sources.  * Improving care to low-income, nutritionally high-riskwomen and children younger than age 5 by enabling the public health agencies,pediatricians and physicians to have immediate access to medical histories.The project originating when David E.  Garets, CIO of Magic Valley RegionalMedical Center, recommended that his hospital spend more than $6 million for anew, more robust clinical information system.  Although the hospital is thelargest in southern Idaho, management decided it couldn't afford the heftyprice tag.  Undaunted, Garets started over to devise an alternative.The CIO knew that the other, even smaller, hospitals in the region hadvirtually no computerization in place.  So he came up with a plan to help therural provider organizations enter the automation age together.The end result:  An $18 million community health information networkinitiative that already has $12.5 million in financial support, including a$1.7 million federal matching grant, firm financial commitments from twohospitals and tentative commitments from three others.In June 1994, Garets led the formation of the network, which also will servenorthern Nevada.  He chairs the network's board.Unusual approachLike other CHINs, the Idaho network eventually hopes to handle a broad rangeof clinical and financial transactions.  But unlike other CHINs, the Idahoproject will enable many participating small hospitals and remote physicians'offices to gain access to information systems for the first time through linksto two data centers.Providing access to information systems to hospitals and physicians that lackcomputerization was a key to rallying support for the network, Garets says.He convinced the providers that they might not survive the advent of managedcare without clinical information systems, and that cooperation was the onlyway they could afford to acquire such systems.  He also assured them that anindependent board, and not Magic Valley Medical Center, would own and controlthe network and the related systems.The network is in final contract negotiations with HBO & Co., Atlanta, whichtentatively has agreed to provide its Pathways 2000 clinical networkingsoftware at a significant discount to the hospitals participating in thenetwork, Garets says.  HBOC, which declines comment until the contract issigned, views the Idaho project as a testbed for applying its software to theformation of CHINs, Garets says.  The network also will use HBOC's Starhospital information system where appropriate.Data centersThe network will build two data centers that will give hospitals access toHBOC software over an on-line, real-time private network.  In that way,hospitals will avoid making a heavy investment in hardware.  Some 27physicians will gain access to HBOC's computer-based patient record softwareand Scientific Data Management's practice management software through links tothe data centers.The data centers will be located at US West headquarters in Twin Falls and atElko (Nev.)  General Hospital.  In addition to the HBOC systems and severalother software systems, the centers will house centralized data repositories.But the network hopes to eventually build a "virtual repository" based ondistributed databases, Garets says.US West will provide the telecommunication links for the network in southernIdaho.  AT&T will provide the connections between southern Idaho and northernNevada.  Lockheed Martin Idaho Technologies will coordinate the network designand management and perhaps provide integration engine technology."We're trying to improve medical care delivery in rural America, and in orderto do that, you have to provide solid clinical systems, and none of us herehave that," Garets says.Beyond providing access to clinical systems, the network initially will focuson the exchange of clinical information to support outcomes research aimed atreducing the cost of care in all settings, Garets says.In the first phase, to be completed by October 1998, the network hopes tooffer access to several information systems at five hospitals, two publichealth agencies and the 27 physician sites.But the network will be open to any provider who wants to participate,including physicians, pharmacies and public health agencies.  Garets hopes thenetwork eventually will expand to cover all of Idaho as well as parts of otherbordering states.Financial supportSo far, 27 physicians, two public health agencies and two hospitals havecommitted a minimum of $11 million in funding for the five-year networkingproject.Convinced that the cooperative effort offers the most efficient way to makefull use of information technology throughout the region, Magic ValleyRegional Medical Center has committed $8.2 million to the networking project.Only if every provider is linked to the network can the medical center achieveits vision for promoting health in a large rural area served by independentproviders, Garets says.Elko General Hospital has committed $2.6 million, and three other Idahohospitals are negotiating their contributions.  Participating physicians havecommitted an average of $10,000 each.The network expects to generate other funds when additional providers,including another three hospitals in the region, agree to participate, Garetssays.  It also has applied for $3.5 million in shared revenue funds disbursedannually by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission.  -Tyler L.  ChinBack to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996DigestCliniComp Gets Military Hospital PactThe Department of Defense has selected CliniComp International, San Diego, toprovide its clinical information system at military medical facilities.  Theinitial contract with the company includes laboratory and hospitalwideinstallations of the system at two sites.  Pending acceptance of the clinicalcharting system at those sites, it's expected that the system will beinstalled at 35 additional military hospitals worldwide.  The CliniComp systemalready is in use or being installed at three military hospitals.  CliniCompexpected to sign the contract in late December.  The value of the contractwasn't available.Kaiser Alters Its IS StrategyKaiser Permanente, which has encouraged its 12 regional operations to developindependent information technology initiatives, is abandoning itsdecentralized approach.  The nation's largest managed care company hasdirected its regions to develop a common hardware and software architecturethat ultimately will enable Kaiser to build a network linking all itsaffiliated providers.  As a first step, Kaiser will combine separatenetworking projects underway in Northern and Southern California.  Oakland,Calif.-based Kaiser has 29 hospitals, 242 medical offices and 9,395 physiciansserving 6.7 million people.Securing Digitized ImagesResearchers at the University of California, San Francisco, have developed asecurity system to prevent unauthorized access to X-rays and other medicalimages transmitted over computer networks.  The security system is designed towork with the university's picture archiving and communications system, usedto store and transmit digitized medical images.  A modification of the publicdomain Pretty Good Privacy software, the security system protects imagestransmitted between departments at the university hospital as well as thosetransmitted to other sites.ANSI To Prepare Implementation GuidesThe American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N insurance subcommitteewill develop implementation guides for its standardized transaction sets.Until now, at least six other groups have been involved in writing guides forimplementing standard health care transactions.  ANSI X12N hopes that bycentralizing the preparation of guides, the transaction sets will beimplemented uniformly by providers and payers.Sun Introduces New WorkstationsSun Microsystems Computer Co., Mountain View, Calif., has introduced Ultranetwork computing workstations that use a 64-bit Ultra SPARC RISC processor.The desktop workstations accommodate three-dimensional graphics, imaging andvideo required for advanced medical applications such as teleradiology andsurgical simulations.Canadian CHINs Continue to MultiplyHealth Network Ventures, Westchester, Ill., has signed its second communityhealth information network contract in Canada.  The company will work withBell Sygma, a subsidiary of Bell Canada, to build CHINs in Ontario.  The firstproject involves providers in the St.  Catharines region.  Earlier, HealthNetwork Ventures entered an agreement with AGT Ltd.  to develop networks inAlberta and the Northwest Territories.Hewlett-Packard Enters Networking ArenaHewlett-Packard Co., Palo Alto, Calif., is entering the enterprisewidenetworking market by expanding the inpatient functionality of its clinicalsoftware and licensing outpatient clinical software from MedicaLogic Inc.,Beaverton, Ore.  Hewlett-Packard has added medical-surgical applications toits HP CareVue software and will license MedicaLogic's Logician software.  Itwill market a package of clinical automation services to integrated deliverysystems.Companies Announce Third Quarter ResultsShared Medical Systems Corp., Malvern, Pa., saw its revenues increase 22% to$169.2 million for the quarter, compared with the same period a year earlier.Net income was nearly $10 million, up 12%.HBO & Co., Atlanta, posted $138 million in revenue for the quarter, up 51%.Net income was $9.3 million, up 23%.Cerner Corp.  Kansas City, Mo., reported $41.7 million in revenues for thequarter ended Sept.  30, up 2% from the same period a year earlier.  Netincome totaled $5.8 million, down 31%.Health Risk Management Inc., Minneapolis, posted quarterly revenues of $13.4million, up 15%.  Net income was $529,000 for the period, compared with a lossof $125,000 in the same period a year earlier.Phamis Inc., Seattle, saw its revenues increase 25% to $10.4 million for thequarter.  Net income increased 36% to $1.1 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Earning the Public TrustTo integrated health care delivery systems, computer-based patient recordsmean better care and lower costs.  To many consumers, however, an electronicrecord signals less privacy, more risk and the arrival of Big Brother.  Onelarge delivery system decided a formal information security policy would be aneffective way to bridge the gap between these perceptions.PeaceHealth, Bellevue, Wash., is implementing a security and confidentialitypolicy as part of its implementation of an enterprisewide health informationnetwork and computer-based patient records.The system has a wide area network to link its corporate office, 40 physicianoffice sites, corporate data center, and five hospitals in Washington, Oregonand Alaska.  Early this year, starting with St.  Joseph Hospital inBellingham, Wash., PeaceHealth will begin developing electronic records usingLastword software from Phamis Inc., Seattle.  By early summer, records frompatients throughout the system will be stored in a central data repository andbe accessible through the WAN."My job is to see our clinical records system meets the needs of physicians,nurses, patients and the community, and it can't do that unless we payattention to security and confidentiality," says John Haughom, M.D., chiefmedical officer and the architect of PeaceHealth's security policy.The public is concerned that computer-based patient records are morevulnerable to breaches of privacy than paper records.  Also, there is fearthat as large integrated delivery systems implement electronic records,sensitive, private health information will be readily available to morepeople.In addition, Haughom's research on media coverage of electronic records showedthat some providers implementing computer systems without adequate securitymeasures were suffering from inadvertent as well as malicious misuse ofpatient data.In-depth studyWorried that PeaceHealth was unprepared for dealing with the challenge ofkeeping electronic records private, Haughom began an in-depth study ofsecurity issues in April 1994.  By January 1995, he convinced Peace-Health'sboard to budget $100,000 to develop a security policy.  He gave the board abusiness plan defining a new corporate security director position and callingfor the creation of a corporate security panel with human resource, physician,nursing and community representatives.The group eventually developed a security policy that Haughom circulated amongPeaceHealth's five regional hospitals to gain their support.  The corporateboard approved the security policy in June 1995, beginning what Haughomexpects will be a four- to five-year implementation phase.PeaceHealth's seven-page "Policy on Confidentiality, Privacy and Security ofInformation" covers the access, administration, maintenance, destruction andstorage of information.  For each, it states PeaceHealth "shall developconsistent policies and procedures...that will protect the rights of patients,employees, providers and other third parties to privacy and confidentialityand ensure appropriate and legitimate use of information."This information, the policy states, includes data available via electronicand paper records, faxes and even conversations.  Security breaches includestealing another person's password or security code or giving an unauthorizeduser a valid password; a "lack of discretion" with or unauthorized disclosureof any PeaceHealth information; and unauthorized access, modification ordestruction of information or databases.Sanctions include firing or suspending employees, revoking medical staffprivileges and losing the right to gain access to PeaceHealth information.PeaceHealth's password system is designed to give clinicians restricted accessto defined sets of information.  "It's based on a 'need to know' philosophy,"says Haughom.  "People's access privileges are pretty strict."While the policy indicates PeaceHealth will take steps to restrict access todata, it also offers system staff the same privacy protection offered topatients.  The policy also lists separate "rights and obligations" forpatients and providers.  Key provisions of these include giving patients alist naming every person who accesses their medical record during their stayat PeaceHealth.  Meanwhile, providers have the right to "clear and completepresentation of information."Setting limitsBalancing a caregiver's needs for clear and complete data with the patient'sright to privacy is a challenge that PeaceHealth asked its providers toaddress by listing what patient data they absolutely required.  The response,Haughom says, was that most clinicians and other staff members wanted wideaccess to data."In some cases, the job description didn't even come close to justifying whatthey thought they needed," he says.  The staff members were not asking fordata out of idle curiosity, Haughom says, but were simply used to havingcertain information available whether they used it or not.  With furtherexamination, the providers often conceded they didn't really need certaininformation.Sorting out what data is truly needed compared to what providers feel morecomfortable having falls largely to Margaret M.  Chuman, PeaceHealth'sinformation security director.  Chuman, a registered nurse with a master'sdegree in health care administration, formerly was a CEO of a PeaceHealthhospital, so she has the credibility and authority necessary to negotiate withproviders and staff about their information needs, Haughom says.She also has powerful computer tools for ensuring PeaceHealth staff arefollowing proper access procedures.  The hospital computer system tracks everyscreen accessed and keystroke entered each day, a total of more than half amillion transactions.  Needing to monitor a more manageable number, Chuman andHaughom identified the most sensitive screens in the records system.  Eachtime one of these is accessed, the system will download a record of thattransaction in a security sub-database.Searches of that database will enable Chuman to trace everyone who viewed oraltered a particular record.  She can run spot audits to research a particularcomplaint or audit an entire department's use of records, with or withoutnotification.PeaceHealth is avoiding an Orwellian aura by emphasizing that these measuresprotect all employees as well as patients.  For example, Chuman saysPeaceHealth physicians have incorporated security measures into their medicalbylaws.  A review committee will examine infractions by physicians and issuesanctions.  If the physicians fail to appropriately discipline one of theirown, the delivery system will take over the review process.Another committee that Chuman heads reviews all PeaceHealth securityinfractions.  In the first few months the security policy has been in force,sever-al employees already have been terminated for privacy violations, Chumansays.While computer and networking technology are triggering the public's securityand confidentiality concerns, PeaceHealth's security policy emphasizes thatpeople and their attitudes, not technology, are the keys to keeping patientdata private."Security is not a computer issue," says Marsha George, vice president forinformation services and CIO at PeaceHealth.  "A security policy must startwith what we talk about, what we write down, what we fax.  Much moreconfidentiality is violated in the elevator or in the cafeteria than it is bycomputer."Continuing educationTo encourage thinking along these lines, PeaceHealth plans continuingeducation for everyone with information access privileges.  After finishing aninitial education course, staff members were asked to sign a statementindicating they accepted responsibility for protecting and properly usingdata.  Those who fail to sign a statement are prohibited from entering orretrieving records data.PeaceHealth also is educating the community about its electronic recordseffort and its confidentiality program through an information kit sent toSeattle-area media, and Chuman will be available to meet with consumer groupsin the area.Spell it outWhile praising PeaceHealth for having a security policy, Adele A.  Waller, thepartner heading the health information and technology practice in the Chicagolaw firm of Gardner, Carton & Douglas, suggests institutions developingsimilar programs spell out exactly what information is covered and preciselyhow it will be handled.  She's also leary of assigning general "rights," suchas patients' right to review their medical records, without qualifying andlimiting them."You might want to state that these are principles that will govern what we dowith information, rather than framing them as rights," Waller says.  "Thenotion of a right usually means the right to sue."Chuman says she's working with several task forces to outline procedures forhandling specific information.Additional security challenges for PeaceHealth network will come as physiciansaccess patient data from their home computers later this year.  To ensure itaccepts only bona fide data queries, the host system may use an automaticcallback feature to verify the request came from an authorized terminal,Haughom says.  And until Internet security measures improve, the PeaceHealthwon't offer access to it.Although its security policy is less than a year old, Haughom says he's seenresults already, with people changing behavior and challenging theircolleagues to do the same.  "Ninety-five percent of the people in health carewant to be good at their job," he says, "and they just need to be remindedthat the Hippocratic oath says part of being good at their job is protectingthe patient's confidentiality."Sharon Watson is a Chicago-based writer specializing in health care issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996"What Role Will Speech Recognition Play in Health Care?"Talk of building computer-based patient records always comes down to afundamental problem-how to get information into a computer.  Data entry is thefoundation of electronic records.  Without it, health care organizationscannot hope to build the records systems they say are needed to achieveefficiencies and improve the quality of patient care.Therefore, it's critical that ways be found to encourage clinicians, who maybe hesitant to give up the familiar pen and paper chart, to record data in acomputer system.Believing, whether rightly or wrongly, that clinicians cannot or will nottype, computer hardware and software companies have developed a number oftechnologies intended to win clinician acceptance and generate electronicrecords of patient care.One by one, such technologies as handwriting recognition, speech recognition,touch screens and voice capture have come on the market, only to receive alukewarm response from clinicians, who have discovered that those technologieseither have limited applicability or fail to live up to their promise.  As aresult, none has won universal acceptance among clinicians.Yet, for many health care organizations, speech recognition still sounds likethe answer to the problem of entering data in computer-based patient records.This emerging technology, which has captured the imagination of many in thehealth care industry, automatically converts human speech to digital data thatcan be collected, manipulated and exchanged electronically.Speech recognition systems enable physicians, nurses and other caregivers toenter information in patients' charts simply by talking to a computer,eliminating the need for dictation devices, keyboards, light pens, mouses andother means of data entry.Early in developmentBut the technology is in its infancy.  Some users and skeptics say thesoftware struggles with the recognition of accents, dialects and speechpatterns.  Thus, many health care organizations say, the technology won't be aviable option for many applications for at least several more years.But proponents say the technology is viable today, and the next generation ofthe software will be even more beneficial for health care providers.Speech recognition produces readable, professional-looking reports, but thetechnology is difficult to use, says Barbara Reynolds, M.D., qualityimprovement director in the emergency department at Mercy Hospital and MedicalCenter in Chicago.The speech recognition system installed in Mercy Hospital's emergencydepartment stumbles over many words, requiring clinicians either to repeatwords until they are understood or enter them using a keyboard, she says.  Asa result, reports that could be written by hand in one or two minutessometimes take 30 minutes to complete using the speech recognition system.Impatient and frustrated, three-fourths of the physicians in Mercy Hospital'semergency department have stopped using the system.  "I am one of the bestusers here," Reynolds says, "but there are times when I am ready to throw itacross the room."Recent progressMercy Hospital's experience with speech recognition does not represent thecurrent state of the technology, argues William Meisel, a consultant inEncino, Calif., who's studied the technology's development for 20 years.Much has changed in the two years since Mercy Hospital installed the VoiceEMsystem made by Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., Waltham, Mass., Meiselsays.  Today's speech recognition systems, including the latest version ofVoiceEM, understand far more words and often provide short-cuts, such asmacros that are able to construct an entire sentence of digital text from oneor two spoken words.Thus, Meisel argues that today's technology is a viable option for many healthcare organizations.  And some provider organizations already are firmbelievers."I wouldn't even consider writing a chart by hand again," says Raul Rodriguez,M.D., senior attending physician at Potomac Hospital in Woodbridge, Va., whouses Kurzweil's VoiceMED system.The newest speech recognition systems are much easier to use than earlierversions, says Hossein Firooznia, M.D., who evaluated speech recognitionsystems for use in the radiology department of New York University MedicalCenter in New York.The medical center selected the DragonDictate system made by Dragon SystemsInc., Newton, Mass.  "With only a minimal familiarity with computers, I canmodify text or create macros," Firooznia says.  "There is no big problem withmy accent or if I pronounce a word differently than someone else.  It rapidlyadjusts to my particular way of speaking English words, and the systemcontinually improves its word recognition efficiency the more it is used."Several companies are working on a new generation of software.  PhilipsDictation Systems, for example, soon will introduce the firstlarge-vocabulary, continuous speech recognition software, and at least twoother companies, Berdy Medical Systems and ACS InfoSystems, say they soon willhave next-generation products.Still, it may prove difficult to convince health care organizations, wary ofinformation technology solutions that are seemingly too good to be true, thatspeech recognition is getting to the point of being viable for manyapplications.Mercy Hospital, which had high hopes for the technology, will be among thetough sells.  After spending more than $200,000 on a speech recognition systemthat's little used, the institution can't afford to gamble again on thetechnology, Reynolds says.Speech recognition generated great excitement when it hit the market in thelate 1980s.  It appeared to be the ultimate approach to data entry, givingclinicians the ability to record their findings electronically without liftinga finger.But some clinicians soon discovered that the technology had some shortcomings,including a small vocabulary and a big cost.  The technology's ability tounderstand fewer than 200 words limited its usefulness, and a cost of morethan $15,000 per workstation made it unaffordable for most health careorganizations.Within a few years, however, Kurzweil and then Dragon introduced speechrecognition products with 1,000-word vocabularies.  Those products began tofind homes in hospitals' radiology and emergency departments, even though thetechnology could do little more than fill in one-word blanks on an electronicchart.Today, speech recognition software has a vocabulary of as many as 60,000words, giving it much greater capability.  In addition, the cost of thetechnology has tumbled to several hundred dollars per workstation.  "Overall,it's much cheaper than a transcriptionist," Meisel says.Yet, the technology has had difficulty making inroads in health care.  Even inradiology and emergency departments, where speech recognition is used most,fewer than 10% of physicians use the technology, Meisel says.Standing in the way of widespread use of speech recognition in health care arefive hurdles that have confronted the technology from the beginning:1.  An inability to recognize normal speech patterns.  2.  An inability toadapt to the voice of more than one person.  3.  An inadequate vocabulary.  4.An inability to distinguish among words that sound alike.  5.  A shortage ofcomputing power.The biggest shortcoming of speech recognition is its inability to comprehendnormal speech patterns, called continuous speech.  The technology requires itsusers to speak in a staccato-like manner, called discrete speech, pausing atleast one-tenth of a second between each clearly spoken word.That frustrates busy clinicians who expect speech recognition to reduce-notincrease-the amount of time it takes them to complete charts.  For cliniciansalready wary of any changes in how they are accustomed to doing their work,this provides a reason to avoid the technology, which is what happened atMercy Hospital.Some vendors have responded by seeking a middle ground between discrete andcontinuous speech recognition.  They have tweaked their existing systems,enabling speech recognition software to construct an entire sentence or even aparagraph from just a few spoken words.  That speeds the data entry process,making it less frustrating for clinicians.  However, pauses are onlyminimized, not eliminated.Wait-and-seeHealth care organizations, recognizing a major shortcoming in speechrecognition, are waiting for the development of continuous speech recognitionsystems, which will enable clinicians to dictate normally instead of haltinglyas they must do now, says Joe Weber, vice president of marketing and sales forSudbury Systems Inc., a Sudbury, Mass.-based manufacturer of transcriptionproducts for health care applications.Sudbury, which is interested in incorporating speech recognition in itstranscription products, is not yet satisfied with the state of the technologybecause of its inability to recognize continuous speech.Although speech recognition has come a long way and continues to evolve, Weberand some others who have closely monitored its development believe it stillwill be several years before a practical continuous speech recognition systemis available.Continuous speech recognition is "Star Wars" technology, says Dana Gaines,product manager for InterVoice Inc., a Dallas-based company that designs,manufactures and sells automated call processing and interactive informationsolutions.  "It's the ultimate but not really feasible today because of theproblem of limited vocabulary or the number of words understood by thecomputer."Even if vocabulary size were not a problem, he says, the technology stillwould be handicapped by its inability to recognize the voice of more than oneperson.Most of the speech recognition systems available today are speaker-dependent,meaning they are able to recognize only one speaker's voice.  However, if thespeaker's voice becomes altered in any way, for example because of a sorethroat, the system won't recognize the voice and won't record information.The speaker then must stop and take the time to reacclimate his or her voiceto the computer.  A system that stops functioning every time the speaker'svoice alters in any way becomes more frustrating than efficient, Gaines says.Speaker-independent systems, which are designed to respond to any voice, wouldbe more user-friendly.  However, few systems available today are advancedenough to provide that capability, he says.Meanwhile, concern lingers over the number of words understood by speechrecognition systems.While health care organizations say the current vocabulary size may beadequate for radiology or emergency departments, it cannot satisfy the needsof clinicians in all settings because each department has its own jargon.But Meisel dismisses concern about vocabulary size.  "Most systems can nowrecognize as many as 60,000 words, which is more than adequate," he argues.The technology is still bedeviled as well by homonyms, words that sound alikebut have different meanings and spellings.  To counter this, vendors aredeveloping editing functions that rely on rules for grammar and sentencestructure to determine which word is syntactically correct.Dependent on speedLike the dictation technology from which it evolved, the performance of speechrecognition systems depends on the speed with which a computer can processcommands.  Speech recognition, while simple in concept, is complex in itsmakeup and requires a computer to handle millions of instructions per secondfor it to function properly.While computers have become more powerful with each generation ofmicroprocessors, early machines lacked the enormous amounts of processingpower that speech recognition requires.  As a result, speech recognitionsystems operated sluggishly."Not long ago, to make the computations needed, you had to have huge,multimillion-dollar computers working overnight," says Mark Liberman, directorof the Linguistic Data Consortium, a 90-member speech recognition researchcooperative based at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.  Now, hesays, ordinary computers can make the calculations to process sound and pullup close matches from memory in real time.While great advances are being made in speech recognition, health careorganizations needn't wait for the commercial release of new products, Meiselsays.While speech recognition does have some limitations, they are not severeenough to warrant dismissal of the idea of using the technology in a number ofapplications, he says.  "There are some minor problems integrating with wordprocessors, for example.  Otherwise, the technology works and with a greatdeal of accuracy, too."Speech recognition has an accuracy rate of about 90%, better than a rate ofabout 75% for human transcriptionists, Meisel says.  When errors do occur,they can be corrected via keyboard or a spell-checking function.Much of the skepticism about the technology in health care stems fromdisappointment resulting from providers' unrealistic expectations at the timethe technology was introduced, he says."The big hurdle is the first week or two of use," Meisel says.  "When youfirst start, it seems that you always have to enter new words.  In addition,most systems now let you put in macros, which, in some cases, can createentire reports from just a few spoken words or phrases.  Speech recognitionpresents hurdles at the beginning only because those things aren't there."Speech recognition performs well for clinicians who are patient and willing tolearn how to use it, Meisel says.  "People say that, once they get used to it,it's no big deal adjusting their speech patterns for the computer.  They saythe benefits, such as readable and complete reports that improve the qualityof health care, far outweigh any inconvenience."Daniel Fought, D.O., an emergency department physician at Parkview Hospital inToledo, Ohio, endured a month of frustration to learn how to use a Kurzweilspeech recognition system.  Dozens of formats made it difficult, but Fought'sglad he persisted.Charts that once took two or three minutes to complete by hand can now befinished in about 30 seconds, and the end product is more complete, he says.More complete charts mean health care organizations have better documentationof patient care they delivered and, thus, are better equipped to defendagainst lawsuits alleging malpractice.Howard White, M.D., an emergency department physician at St.  ElizabethHospital Medical Center in Youngs-town, Ohio, has mixed feelings about speechrecognition.  "I consider it a necessary evil," he says.The Kurzweil system installed at St.  Elizabeth Hospital is difficult tomaster and slower than writing by hand, but it produces better documentationof patient care than does the paper-based recordkeeping system it replaced,White says.Like Fought, he believes better documentation of care discourages malpracticeclaims.  White says no claims have been filed by any of the more than 200,000patients treated in the emergency department since St.  Elizabeth installedthe Kurzweil system.Despite the long learning curve, speech recognition is coming into its own,Meisel says.Although no studies have been conducted, he believes the overall market forspeech recognition will be measured in thousands of units in 1994, tens ofthousands of units in 1995 and hundreds of thousands of units in 1996.  "Everyyear, thousands more people are using it," Meisel says."As the days go by, there has been more and more talk about it," says AndrewLederer, director of consulting and marketing for The Kennedy Group, a RedwoodCity, Calif.-based consulting firm specializing in health care informationtechnology.  "Speech recognition is one of the technologies that could takethe use of computers to another level."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The market leader sticks with today's technologyKurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., the first company to offer speechrecognition systems to the health care industry, continues to enhance the basesystem it introduced in 1986.Although some of its newest competitors are developing next-generationproducts, Kurzweil intends, at least for now, to stick with what it knowswell.While other companies pursue development of continuous speech recognitionsystems capable of recognizing normal speech patterns, Kurzweil is staking itsnear-term future on continued development of its VoiceMED product line.Installed in 1,100 health care settings, VoiceMED is the most widely usedspeech recognition software in the country.  The discrete speech recognitionsystem, which costs about $8,000 per user, is available in seven versions:emergency medicine, emergency medicine triage, invasive cardiology,orthopedics, pathology, primary care and radiology.Kurzweil intends to develop additional versions of VoiceMED for otherspecialties and continue to work on a new user interface scheduled for releaselater this year, says Jonathan Bower, director of product management.The Waltham, Mass.-based company has no plans to venture into continuousspeech recognition, Bower says."We'll stick with discrete speech," he says.  "It's proven and has a very highaccuracy rate.  We'll introduce continuous speech only when the technology ismature, which we don't see happening for at least a couple of years.  In themeantime, we'll keep improving."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The next generation of software"Providing the ability to speak naturally to computers will remove the lastobstacle."Three newcomers to the field of speech recognition software for health careare working on a new generation of the technology.Philips Dictation Systems is preparing to introduce continuous speechrecognition software.  In addition, at least two other companies-Berdy MedicalSystems and ACS InfoSystems-say they are working on similar new technology.Philips, a San Francisco-based subsidiary of Philips Electronics, is betatesting SpeechMagic, which has a 60,000-word vocabulary.  The company expectsto introduce the software commercially within six months.Until now, speech recognition has been based on template matching, which workslike this:  Words to be recognized by a computer are dictated and stored as an"acoustical" image in the computer's data base.  When a particular word isspoken, the computer searches the data base for a match.Template matching works well as long as the number of words to be recognizedis limited and a person speaks in a consistent manner and pauses betweenwords.  Philips contends it has overcome those limitations by basing itsproduct on the recognition of phonemes, the smallest acoustical component of alanguage.  Phonemes go beyond the letters of the alphabet; the letter "a," forexample, takes on different forms, as in the words "car" and "make."Phoneme recognition is the key to success in speech recognition, says Hans VanDer Linde, marketing manager for Philips.  To be effective, he says, a speechrecognition system must have a large vocabulary tailored to the needs of aspecific group of users; it must be able to understand the context in whichthose words are used; and it must have a database in which a specificspeaker's phoneme pronunciations are stored.SpeechMagic enables physicians and other caregivers to enter information incomputer-based patient records at a rate of 200 to 250 words per minute, saysJohn Payton, president of CMHC Systems Inc., a Dublin, Ohio-based company thatis developing a psychiatric vocabulary for SpeechMagic.Grant fuels researchLike Phillips, Berdy Medical Systems believes that continuous speechrecognition is the technology of the future.  It plans to incorporate thetechnology in its SmartClinic computer-based patient records software forphysician group practices.In early October, the Rochelle Park, N.J.-based company received a $1.98million grant from the Department of Commerce's Advanced Technology Program tointegrate its computer-based patient records software with speech recognitionsoftware developed by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.With speech recognition as a front end, Berdy's computer-based patient recordssoftware will enable clinicians to enter data simply by speaking in a natural,conversational manner.The system, now in prototype, will have not only a large medical vocabularybut also the ability to understand words in context, says Rick Holtmeier,Berdy's president and COO.  And unlike current speech recognition technology,it does not require voice training, slow speech or pauses between words, hesays."Providing caregivers the ability to speak naturally to their computers willremove the last obstacle in acceptance of the computer-based patient record,"Holtmeier says.  "Although physicians recognize the need for and thetime-saving benefits of automation, many are unwilling to take the time toenter patient information."The new Berdy system will not be fully developed and commercially availablefor three years.  However, Holtmeier says speech recognition for someapplications, such as physical examinations, may be available within 18months.ACS InfoSystems, best known for its development and installation of networkingsoftware incorporating artificial intelligence at St.  Alphonsus RegionalMedical Center in Boise, Idaho, now is applying artificial intelligence tospeech recognition.The result is speech recognition software that understands differences in theway people speak, says Mark Hays, president of ACS InfoSystems, a smallsoftware development company in Boise.Speaker-independent"It's speaker-independent, which means that anyone can use it without anyspeech training whatsoever," he says.  "It also eliminates problems withnormal changes in voice quality that occur, for instance, when a user has asore throat."The software, HInet Voice Control, also gives speech capability to a computer,enabling it to respond orally to a clinician's request for more informationabout a patient."It interacts with the user more like a person than a computer," Hays says."This allows a physician in the emergency room to focus on the patient-not thecomputer screen-and simply talk with the computer while assessing thepatient."The HInet Voice Control, which still is under development, will undergo betatests at an emergency room physicians' group and four hospitals early thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996A Healthy Year For Electronic Claims GrowthElectronic claims processing is coming of age.  Nearly half of the more than3.6 billion claims providers submitted during 1995 were transmittedelectronically.  Providers submitted an estimated 47% of all claimselectronically last year, compared to 41.5% in 1994.The estimates are part of a complete look at health care electronic datainterchange and networking issues in Faulkner & Gray's Health Data Directory,1996 Edition.One major factor behind the increase in electronic claims is the continuedsteady growth in the number of Medicare and Medicaid claims that providerstransmit electronically.  In addition, insurance companies are becoming moreadept at accepting electronic claims.Last year, the pace of consolidation among electronic claims processingcompanies picked up.  More than a dozen claims clearinghouses either boughtsmaller competitors, practice management software companies or EDI gatewaysoftware vendors to enhance their client base and product lines.Clearinghouses that weren't buying competitors were aligning themselves withcompanies that had desired technologies or services.  One company-NationalElectronic Information Corp.  of Secaucus, N.J.-pulled off a triple play bybuying a company, aligning with another, then getting acquired by Envoy Corp.,Nashville, in the year's biggest deal (see related story, page 10).Number crunchingThe 1996 directory's statistics for electronic claims mainly reflectcomputer-to-computer electronic data interchange, but some organizations alsoinclude shipping a magnetic tape or disk in calculating their electronicclaims totals.Better ways of counting pharmacy and Medicaid claims account for largeincreases in those annual claims totals compared with previous years'directory statistics.  Last January, Scott-Levin Associates, a Newtown,Pa.-based health care research and consulting company, began collecting dailyprescription activity from 34,000 pharmacies, more than half of the nation'stotal.  In addition, the Health Care Financing Administration last year begana comprehensive survey of Medicaid fiscal agents to support more accurateestimates of annual claims volume.The higher numbers this year for Medicaid and pharmacy claims, along with thehigh rate of electronic submission for these claims, accounts for revised,higher statistics for electronic submission of claims in previous years,compared to statistics in previous editions of the directory.In large part, provider reluctance is no longer the major reason that themajority of claims submitted each year are still on paper.  "The problem isnot on the provider side, it's on the payer side," says Michael Eckstein,president of EDI for Health Care, a Bryn Mawr, Pa.-based consulting company.Most providers are at least technologically ready to use electronic datainterchange.  For instance, dental offices used to be considered a backwaterof automation.  Now, 62% of dental offices have computers and 70% of thoseoffices have modems or communications software that enable communication withoutside entities, according to a recent American Dental Association survey.The percentage of claims that physicians submitted electronically grew from anestimated 18% in 1994 to 27% last year.  Electronic dental claims increasedfrom 9% to 11%.  The increases reflect more computers in provider offices aswell as the increased ability of payers to accept electronic claims.But electronic claims submission levels are not increasing in every providersector.  In two segments, hospitals and pharmacies, the rate of electronicsubmission has hit a plateau of 80%.  "The remaining paper claims are destinedfor small payers, HMOs and PPOs that aren't connected to clearinghouses," saysNicholas Rosenstein, CEO of Conceptual Systems Corp., a Cleveland-basedprocessor of hospital and physician claims recently acquired by National DataCorp., Atlanta.While electronic claims submission has become routine for many providers,there's still much work to be done.  For example, many smaller commercialpayers and managed care plans still cannot accept electronic claims.And even some of the nation's largest payers are still making only slowprogress at getting electronic claims in the door.Of 13 surveyed payers accepting more than 500,000 claims per month, only sevenreceived more than 20% of their claims electronically.  The seven are AetnaLife Insurance Co., Cigna Healthcare, The MetraHealth Cos., Mutual of OmahaInsurance Co., Provident Life Insurance Co., The Prudential Insurance Co.  ofAmerica and United Healthcare Corp.  That compares with only one majorcarrier-United Healthcare-that received more than 20% of its claimselectronically in 1994."Larger insurance companies are hampered by legacy systems patched togetherwith concrete and created by people no longer with the company," Ecksteinsays.  "And the overwhelming number of managed care plans have yet toimplement any electronic encounter or referral systems."Some payers say that they increased electronic claims submissions this year byworking more closely with providers and by establishing links with moreclearinghouses.For instance, Aetna identified providers who had been submitting claimselectronically to the insurance company, only to revert to submitting paperclaims.  The carrier created teams to meet with providers through seminars oroffice visits.  "We find out if they've had problems with electronicsubmission and correct them," says Patricia Gray, Aetna's EDI administrator.Furthermore, Aetna finally started doing what many other major carriers havebeen doing for a couple of years-link to clearinghouses and other networks inaddition to NEIC.  Aetna established connections with EDI USA, U.S.  HDI andthe Texas Health Information Network, operated by Blue Cross and Blue Shieldof Texas.Clearinghouse volumeIn 1995, the nation's 25 largest claims clearinghouses handled an estimated335.3 million claims per month, an increase of 23.4% over 1994 monthly volume.Electronic Data Systems, Plano, Texas, remains the nation's largest processorwith monthly volumes in excess of 70 million claims, up 17% from the previousyear.  EDS transmits 80% of these claims to payers electronically.  But justas in 1994, runner-up National Data Corp.  grew faster than EDS last year,increasing its total claims volume by 66% to 59 million claims per month, allof them electronic."Most of our growth has come from within our existing customer base," saysBruce Roberson, vice president of health care information network services forNational Data.  "But we've also gotten aggressive in taking business away fromour competitors."Other clearinghouses reporting large claims volume increases include UnisysCorp., whose claims volume grew 89%; Equifax Healthcare EDI Services, with 65%growth; National Electronic Information Corp., 56% growth; and PCS HealthSystems, 53%.Stung by lost Medicaid fiscal agent contracts-especially in Virginia-FirstHealth Services saw its monthly claims volume drop 66% in 1995.  Likewise, alost Medicaid contract in Florida resulted in a 61% volume reduction forConsultec Inc.The clearinghouse consolidation of 1995 was the result, in part, of earlierwork by companies to reposition themselves in the health care EDI industry."It was the year that people began implementing strategies developed in 1994,"says Richard Caliri, CEO of NEIC.No longer do companies just look inward to develop new automation services forthe health care industry.  The new mantra is:  If you don't have it, buy it."It's a lot easier to buy relationships rather than build them," says JosephBigley, president of Real:Time Investment, a consulting company in Alpharetta,Ga.Bigley should know.  His clearinghouse, Cooperative Healthcare Networks, wasbought by Equifax Inc.  in 1994 as the information services company's firstentrance into the health care EDI field.Another reason for consolidation was the continuing decrease in the pricesthat clearinghouses charge to transmit electronic claims.A recent Faulkner & Gray survey of clearinghouses shows that the average priceper claim plummeted from 43 cents in 1994 to 34 cents in 1995.  "As the pricedrops, the industry has to consolidate to get volumes through the switches,"Bigley says.Prices declineSome clearinghouses are dropping prices to remain competitive in tightmarkets.  "To stay in business, I had to lower my prices," says BeatriceDvorak, CEO of Medical Data Insurance Processing, Sioux Falls, S.D.But other processors are cutting prices in an effort to raise transactionvolume quickly, thus making a clearinghouse a viable candidate foracquisition.  "Volume is everything in the marketplace," says FrankGiannantonio, president of Frank Giannantonio & Associates, a Piscataway,N.J.-based clearinghouse.  "Some clearinghouses are saying, 'Let me get mynumbers up so someone will buy me.'"The buying frenzy started early in the year, with National Data Corp.  buyingLearned-Mahn, a Boise, Idaho-based supplier of transactions processingsoftware.  Then in May, National Data bought Claim*Net, the claimsclearinghouse of Indianapolis-based Physicians Practice Management.With that buy, National Data began implementing its strategy of integratingthe software and clearinghouse services of its new companies with its existingpharmacy and dental claims processing services to provide one-stop shopping ofinformation services for integrated delivery systems and community healthinformation networks.That strategy was further cemented in November when National Data announced itwould buy Conceptual Systems Corp.  With the acquisition, National Data willgain hospital claims clearinghouse capability (see story, page 10)."What we are looking for is established connectivity in markets beyond ourcore pharmacy business," says Richard Cohan, senior vice president of healthcare at National Data.Driven by the increased information needs of integrated delivery systems asthey go after managed care contracts, National Data was by no means alone inbuying its way to increased functionality.MedE America, formed by the acquisition of three clearinghouses in 1994, addedtwo more in 1995-General Computer Corp.  and Latpon Health Systems.  Now armedwith electronic data interchange software for claims processing and systemsintegration for hospitals, pharmacies and physicians, MedE America isaggressively marketing its expanded services to existing clients.Seeking to become a leading provider of disease management services,pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co.  followed up on its 1994 acquisition ofpharmacy processing powerhouse PCS Health Systems with the purchase ofIntegrated Medical Systems, a Golden, Colo.-based supplier of networkingservices for the exchange of clinical and financial information.Unisys Corp., a leading Medicaid fiscal agent, launched a diversificationstrategy when it purchased Claims Express, EDI software from ComprehensiveTechnologies.  The acquisition gave Unisys a valuable commodity it didn'thave:  software to send claims to private insurance companies.A snail's paceAs the year drew to a close, the health care industry began to investigate whyproviders and payers have made so little progress in implementing standardformats for electronic transactions.Although the American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N subcommitteeintroduced its first standard transaction sets four years ago, the formats arenot widely used.For example, only 2% of the Medicare claims that providers submitelectronically are in the X12 837 format.  And Blue Cross and Blue Shield ofFlorida reports that 5.5% of 3.6 million electronic claims submittedelectronically in October were in the X12 837 format.Some say that although there is nothing technically wrong with the X12 837transaction set, it evolved from previously developed retail EDI transactionsets and didn't take into account the complexity of health care transactions."From a logical sequencing perspective, the 837 works well," says CatherinePeper, director of health care information management for Blue Cross and BlueShield of Florida.  "However, mechanically when you try to use it, it becomesa nightmare."But ANSI X12N members are skeptical that there's a significant problem withthe 837 format."People are saying it's too complex, but nobody's coming to us with specificinformation that would lead us to believe the 837 is deficient in any way,"says Bruce Horn, manager of electronic commerce for The Associated Group, anIndianapolis-based payer, and co-chair of the X12N health care task group."To the extent that we can, we are going to address those issues.  Ifsomething needs fixing, then we will fix it."  nJoseph Goedert is editor of Health Data Network News, a Faulkner & Graynewsletter.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Facing the Outpatient Coding ChallengeAs more health care is delivered in outpatient rather than inpatient settings,outpatient costs are skyrocketing.  This has prompted several payers,including the federal government, to test a new method of paying providers forthe use of outpatient facilities.As this complex new payment mechanism, known as ambulatory patient groups, orAPGs, is implemented, providers and payers are turning to coding softwaredevelopers for help in billing and paying for outpatient services.The Health Care Financing Administration commissioned the development of APGsas the potential basis of a federal prospective payment system for outpatientcare, similar in design to diagnosis-related groups, or DRGs, a treatmentclassification system that's the basis of Medicare's inpatient payment system.Under APGs, Medicare would reimburse hospitals and other outpatient facilityowners a fixed rate determined in advance for facility expenses, such asoutpatient surgery center use.  These payments would be based on resource useas determined by the APGs' grouping mechanism.  Today, most payers reimburseproviders for outpatient facility costs based on charges or a percentage ofcharges.Because APGs group together outpatient services and procedures forreimbursement of facility expenses, they generally result in lower paymentsthan if payers reimbursed providers based on facility charges for everyindividual service or procedure.  As a result, APGs, like DRGs before them,will force providers to carefully examine care delivery to ensure they aredelivering only those services that are clinically necessary.HCFA is testing APGs in the Iowa Medicaid program, hoping to eventuallyimplement the payment system to cover all Medicare outpatient services.  HCFAwill allow individual states to decide if they want to use APGs for Medicaidoutpatient services.Moving forwardThe government has yet to finish testing the outpatient system or assignnational reimbursement levels for the 290 APGs.  But a handful of privateinsurance companies have decided not to wait for HCFA to act and are movingforward to implement APGs for outpatient facility payments to control costs.Using consultants and their own reimbursement experience to devisereimbursement rates for the outpatient groups, these payers are automating theAPGs grouping process in an effort to curb rising outpatient care costs andencourage greater efficiency in outpatient care delivery."Providers are shifting services from inpatient settings to outpatientsettings, and outpatient costs are going nuts," says Ben Zelman, director ofutilization management at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio, which isimplementing APGs.  "To remain competitive, we need to know expected resourceutilization and have a clinical understanding of outpatient care, whichrepresents about half of health care costs."Last July, the Ohio plan began using APGs to reimburse outpatient facilitiesin a few regions of the state.  The plan wants to expand use of APGs to otherareas this year.  The Blues plan used consulting firms to help create weightsand rates, which determine levels of reimbursement for groups of services,based on its past outpatient reimbursements and negotiations with Ohioproviders.To facilitate the grouping of medical codes under APGs to determinereimbursement, the Blues plan has added to its claims adjudication informationsystem the APG Grouper, Version 1.0, an automated code grouper from 3M HealthInformation Systems, Murray, Utah."A provider sends us an electronic claim, which is sent through our claimsadjudication system and the grouper," Zelman says.  "The process of APGgrouping is automated and an integrated part of our health informationsystem."Management toolAs payers use APGs to set payment rates and providers refine care delivery tokeep costs in check, providers and payers will learn to better predictoutpatient payments and expenditures, says Nancy Hirschl, director ofambulatory coding and reimbursement enhancement services at Case Mix AnalysisInc.  The North Grafton, Mass.-based consulting firm assists hospitals withcoding and reimbursement issues."APGs shift risk to providers; they are a management tool to monitor physicianpractice patterns and hospital costs and expenses," Hirschl says.  "Payers arefinding in APGs an easily manageable tool to reimburse hospitals foroutpatient care.  And because payers know how successful DRGs have been incontaining inpatient costs, they are eager to embrace a similar system tocontain outpatient costs."APGs are necessary because of the shift in health care from inpatient tooutpatient services, says Josh Pollatsek, vice president of finance at SOLONConsulting Group Ltd.  The Silver Spring, Md.-based consulting firmspecializes in the design and implementation of prospective payment systems."APGs show payers and providers where they may or may not be having problems,where they are losing money or where they can be making more money," Pollatseksays.  "When relying on APGs for reimbursement, providers can filter outunnecessary services, based on APG standards, to increase their efficiency inoutpatient care."GroupersTo make more efficient use of the complex grouping methodology, payers andproviders are acquiring automated groupers, software that automaticallyclassifies medical codes under appropriate APGs."APGs require a tremendous flow of data into coding staff members' computers.And with outpatient care, coders are dealing with enormous volume compared toinpatient cases," says Steve Harris, president of IRP Systems Inc., aWilmington, Mass.-based company that specializes in coding and reimbursementsoftware for hospitals and payers.  "To successfully use APGs, providers andpayers need to have efficient, integrated information systems.  Otherwise,coders will not be able to go through patient charts and find all necessarycodes for optimal reimbursement."In 1988, HCFA commissioned 3M Health Information Systems to develop anoutpatient classification system in response to the increase in outpatientcare and the lack of a comprehensive outpatient cost containment system.  Theresult was APGs, which use a combination of International Classification ofDiseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) and CurrentProcedural Terminology, Version 4 (CPT-4) codes to group outpatient facilitycosts for reimbursement.APGs are a patient classification system designed to explain the amount andtype of resources used in an outpatient visit, explains Donn G.  Duncan, M.D.,APG project clinical consultant for HCFA and 3M Health Information Systems,co-developers of APGs."Patient visits that fall under one of the 290 APGs have similar clinicalcharacteristics and similar resource use and cost," Duncan says.  "Developmentof APGs focused on the full range of outpatient settings-including same-daysurgery units, emergency rooms and clinics-and the full range of patients, notjust the Medicare population.  APGs also were designed to include onlyfacility costs, not professional costs, which are handled separately by CPT-4codes."Data elements used to define APGs included information on the UB-92 and theMedicare claim forms, which include ICD-9-CM diagnosis and CPT-4 procedurecodes, he adds.One major difference between APGs and DRGs is that APGs depend on bothICD-9-CM and CPT-4 codes to group outpatient services, while DRGs use onlyICD-9-CM codes for inpatient services.  Further, where coding staff classifyan inpatient admission by only one DRG, they can classify one outpatient visitby several APGs."Coders seek the reason for admission found in a medical record to arrive at aDRG number," Duncan says.  "To figure out which APGs are relevant, coders lookat visit necessity by three categories-a significant procedure or therapy, amedical visit, or an ancillary test or procedure."A testbedAs HCFA's testbed for implementing APGs, the Iowa Medicaid program is thecrystal ball for many who want to view the future of APG automation.  In July1994, when the test began, many Iowa hospitals were uncertain how to handlethe automation of APGs.With HCFA's APG effort in full bloom in Iowa-and private efforts sprouting inCalifornia, Maine, Nebraska, Ohio, Utah and other states-many health careorganizations now are looking to a limited selection of specialized codingsoftware to improve their handling of APGs.Coding software can help coders better understand the APG system, says Harrisof IRP Systems, which distributed its APG Calculator system at no cost to allIowa hospitals before the start of the APG Medicaid test.  Coding staff usethe IRP system to automatically determine APGs for claims.Staff at Mercy Hospital in Council Bluff, Iowa, use IRP's APG Calculator todetermine APGs for Medicaid claims, a task they are mandated to perform underthe HCFA test.  With a Medicaid patient population of nearly 25% and a need tohasten the APG learning curve, automation has been an important element of APGimplementation for staff at Mercy Hospital."All we have to do is enter the principal ICD-9-CM code or the various CPT-4codes, along with a patient's gender and age, and the grouper examines thedata and shows the various APGs for which the hospital will be reimbursed,"says Jim Harwood, Mercy's supervisor of medical records.Although it took some time to understand the new classification system, MercyHospital staff members have realized both financial and clinical advantages."Through the APGs fixed-reimbursement system, the hospital is better able tofocus on outpatient costs as well as develop clinical protocols," Harwoodsays.APGs lump resources used during an outpatient service or procedure into agroup.  Thus, providers can use APGs as one indicator of which services andprocedures should be included in outpatient clinical treatment protocols.Mercy Hospital is in very early stages of developing clinical protocols, whichrecommend diagnostic and treatment approaches for treating patients withcertain medical problems.  But APGs already have helped staff see where suchprotocols could improve care and the bottom line."Everyone that comes into our emergency room does not need a chest X-ray orlaboratory work," Mercy's Harwood says.  "APGs make our providers think morein terms of necessity.  APGs make caregivers and administrators more aware ofcosts.  APGs make people acutely aware of the fact that health care haschanged."Private-sector testJust as HCFA is testing APGs in Iowa's Medicaid program, Blue Cross and BlueShield of Utah is testing APGs as a strategic way to control payments."We wanted to move to a prospective payment system where, through negotiationswith providers, we could control the levels of reimbursement for outpatientcare," says Mark Watson, director of hospital reimbursement at the Utah Bluesplan.  "We found that the APG system was the only comprehensive prospectivepayment system with an established grouper for the outpatient health careenvironment."The Utah Blues plan has been working on APG implementation for about twoyears.  The payer plans to begin testing APGs in April at two hospitals.Staff at the Utah Blues plan know that automation will be a key to successfuluse of APGs.  The payer is recalibrating its internal claims informationsystems so that it can handle the new grouping methodology."We have not traditionally collected all the CPT-4 codes and other datanecessary for APGs; we have been using revenue and ICD-9-CM codes foroutpatient care," Watson says.  "We are enhancing the backbone of our claimsprocessing system to accept the CPT-4 codes to facilitate the grouping ofclaims data for APGs."For the actual grouping, the Blues plan will use the automated grouper from 3MHealth Information Systems.  The plan has hired a consulting firm to helpcreate the payment weights and rates needed for reimbursement.More work is needed at the federal level before APGs can become a universallymandated classification system for Medicare.  While the grouping methodologyis in its second version, HCFA still must devise formalized payment weightsand rates."The weights and rates used in the Iowa Medicaid program are based on olderdata; we have to develop Medicare-based weights and rates on the new data fromour tests," says Mark Wynn, a member of the special analysis staff for theassociate administrator for policy and team leader for development ofprospective payment systems for outpatient services at HCFA."And to finalizethe policymaking, APGs will have to go through further evaluation to gaugetheir impact on various types of providers," Wynn adds.  "Many payers arewaiting for Medicare to implement APGs; that is the main reason why APGs arenot yet widely accepted."However, some observers believe that the private market will lead the way onAPGs, whether HCFA completes work on the system or not."Like us, a lot of health care organizations around the country are startingto work with APGs," says Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio's Zelman.  "Rightnow the private market is leading the government because the assumption isthat APGs will provide a competitive edge in managing reimbursement andquality in a health care delivery system."Payers and providers will have to deal with spiraling outpatient care costsone way or another, Zelman says, and automated APGs represent the bestoutpatient cost containment resource available.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Putting the Pieces Togetherthe objectives underlying disease management appear to be essential componentsof the new health care delivery business strategy in the next few years.Managed care is increasing its stranglehold as a reimbursement approach,forcing providers and payers to develop ways to limit their financial risk inproviding individuals' health care.  That's creating stronger incentives forpreventing illnesses from occurring, intervening early and appropriately, andhandling chronic illnesses in the least expensive and most clinicallyeffective way.HMOs have long claimed that those objectives were central to their philosophy.But until now, most HMOs have been able to succeed financially by merelymanaging health care costs, not actual care delivery.  Now, as margins tightenand pressure from purchasers grows, providers and payers are finding they haveno choice but to seek ways to avoid costly health care interventions and toimprove individuals' health.Fortunately, providers' and payers' urgency to start disease managementprograms is coming at a time when information technology tools are availableto provide the information and the organization needed to develop andeffectively implement such strategies.Information a keyWhile there's much debate about exactly what this discipline should be calledand how it should be used in health care, there's little argument that as riskbecomes a centerpiece in efforts to limit health care spending, diseasemanagement will flourish, and information tools will be absolutely essentialin dealing with risk-based reimbursement strategies."The whole industry of managed health care is evolving to a level of higherquality, and that means managing outcomes, which is another term for diseasemanagement," says John C.  Marlow, M.D., vice president of health careprograms for Capp Care, a Newport Beach, Calif.-based managed care companythat operates preferred provider organizations.  "Parallel to the developmentof disease management, information technology has evolved, and we're seeingthe beginning of enabling or empowering technologies that help providers makedecisions to navigate through the health care system.  That will have a bigimpact on disease management."Those still-developing tools, including outcomes assessment technology,computer-based patient records, central data repositories and healthinformation networks, will enable disease management to have more of an effecton health care by building a strong foundation of data on which to baseclinical guidelines.  But, like those enabling technologies, diseasemanagement is embryonic in its development, and skeptics now are wondering ifit's a marketing invention that will fade as quickly as it's burst on thescene.Key issues in successful disease management programs include picking diseasesthat can be managed effectively, doing high-quality research, navigating thepolitics of getting physicians and other providers to use computers for datacollection, and standardizing clinical data from disparate sources so it canbe compared and analyzed.Finding a nicheDisease management is an extension of several trends in directing health caredelivery-utilization manage-ment, case management, outcomes assessment,patient education and clinical protocols and pathways.  Proponents say diseasemanagement seeks to harmonize those disciplines to arrive at the best ofmanaged care, using evidence-based ap-proaches that offer the best care atleast cost.In disease management programs, researchers develop a comprehensive plan forhandling patients who have a chronic specific illness or condition.  Providersuse best practices and patients use preventive measures.  These interventionscan occur in home, ambulatory or acute care settings.  The goal is to deliverthe most effective care in the least expensive setting.Information technology will facilitate the gathering of evidence for diseasemanagement research.  And computers' ability to analyze data and providedirection at the point of care will provide critical impetus to diseasemanagement.Lee Newcomer, M.D., chief medical officer of United HealthCare Corp., anEdina, Minn.-based managed care company, defines disease management as a setof interventions, determined prospectively, targeted at a large group ofpatients with particular diseases, with the intent of altering the course ofthe disease, preventing exacerbations and improving the patients' quality oflife.While most disease management programs are seeking those objectives, there isa wide range of approaches for achieving those ends, says Michael Miele,president of Capitated Disease Management Services, a Montclair, N.J.-basedcompany that provides disease management services.  "It can be anything, aslittle as an education program or as aggressive as planting case managers onsite in somebody's home."Some say the disease management buzzword doesn't really explain the work thatneeds to be done.  That's why they are terming their efforts care management,health management or outcomes management.In addition, the status of disease management as a buzzword is making manyview it as a hot business opportunity.  New entrants in the market range fromstartup companies seeking contracts to organize and direct care for a specificgroup of patients for providers or managed care organizations, to giantpharmaceutical companies hoping to leverage their research experience andenormous databases while they find a new and more important niche in healthcare delivery.Many payers and providers, such as hospitals and integrated delivery systems,are beginning to develop disease management programs on their own.  That'sbecause they're under more pressure to reduce costs.  Also, buyers of healthcare services are becoming more sophisticated, demanding that those bidding toprovide health care coverage have clinical protocols or disease managementinitiatives in place.Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as another step in the evolution ofmanaging health care costs.  Starting with efforts to manage costs in the late1970s, the health care system has moved to managing utilization through such1980s efforts as precertification requirements and utilization review and mostrecently to managing components of the process, such as behavioral health anddrug formularies, to deliver cost-effective care.Disease management, Marlow says, is the next step in health care management.It differs from previous efforts because it seeks to manage a patient'streatment across a continuum of care, not just in a hospital setting.In addition, disease management differs from case management because it's notjust implemented when a person enters an intensive inpatient setting in aneffort to limit costs and lengths of stay.  Instead, it's intended to be awide-ranging plan that keeps people out of the hospital and manages chronicconditions so that these individuals enjoy the best health possible and thusconsume the most appropriate and effective health care resources.  It'sbelieved that this will provide the best payoff in long-term cost savings.Risk as the impetusThe emergence of risk-shifting in providing health care, through such devicesas capitated managed care contracts, has shifted incentives.  If providers orpayers are paid a fixed amount per month per plan enrollee, regardless oftheir medical needs, the use of unnecessary services and resources comes outof their pockets.  Conversely, the better an enrollee's health is, the moreprofit can be made, and the more satisfied the enrollee is.It's no surprise, then, that those at most risk for covering health care costsare most keenly interested in disease management.As James B.  Couch, M.D., sees it, the push for evidence-based diseasemanagement is coming right from the top, from large companies that see healthcare costs as limiting their ability to compete worldwide.  It's also comingfrom government programs, which want to get the most effectiveness for theirhealth care dollar, says Couch, director in charge of disease managementconsulting for Coopers and Lybrand, a New York-based consulting firm."Global competition has driven companies to look at what they get for theirhealth benefit dollar.  They are going beyond managed care to finding the mostcost-effective way to identify and treat diseases within specific populationswith the intent of achieving measurable improvement in health status," hesays.  "Major purchasers are finally assessing health care suppliers like theydo any other supplier.  For many, health care is their most expensivesupplier.  When they manage the value and quality and cost-effectiveness ofhealth care, the net effect is a happier and more satisfied workforce and abetter bottom line."An example of large companies' interest in disease management is the ManagedHealth Care Association, a group of companies organized to promote and improvemanaged care.One of its initiatives is the Outcomes Management System Consortium, whichseeks to apply patient-centered outcomes assessment methods to monitor andimprove the quality of health care services, says Michael R.  Huber, executivedirector of the Health Outcomes Institute, a Bloomington, Minn.-basednot-for-profit organization that's coordinating research efforts for theconsortium."The consortium's work reflects the growing demand for marketplaceaccountability of health services," Huber says.  The focus is on the resultsof care, which can help consumers compare health plans.  The institute's firststudy, involving severe asthma patients, sought to study how plans managed thechronic disease and relate treatment to patients' outcomes.  "We're looking todevelop models for application of this data, either for providing comparisonsacross plans or feedback to providers," he says.Payers that are assuming risk for health care also are beginning to phase indisease management programs.  For example, one of the largest managed careorganizations, United HealthCare, is developing disease management programsfor asthma, diabetes, lower back pain and chronic heart failure, says KarenKeown, its senior director of medical management projects.  United HealthCare,which recently acquired New York-based MetraHealth and covers 27 millionthrough managed care programs, will begin gradually implementing the programsin March, she says.The diseases that United HealthCare is targeting in its new program are commoncandidates for disease management.  These diseases get a lot of attentionbecause they are known to be sources of high utilization, says Jaan Sidorov,M.D., director of the continuous health improvement program for GeisingerHealth Plan, a Danville, Pa.-based HMO.Studying diseases also can indicate whether a coordinated plan of managementcan help reduce costs and increase patient satisfaction.  That's a crucialquestion to ask, United HealthCare's Newcomer says.  He recalls that a taskforce for his company spent many weeks studying low birthweight and high-riskpregnancies as a potential condition for disease management, but wound updeciding that no amount of preventive interventions would significantly reducethe risk that women would have these pregnancies.Disease management also involves scientific research, and experts say aneffective program must compare the results of interventions-both for cost andoutcomes-against a control group so that the effectiveness of those effortscan be analyzed.Automation's promiseThat's why information technology will play a pivotal role in diseasemanagement.  Computerization capabilities fit hand-in-glove with the need tocapture and bring together clinical and financial information to conductcomplex research."Better information is indispensable," says Couch of Coopers and Lybrand."You need to identify the ultimate customer of the health care system andtheir wants and expectations, then design and implement a health care systemthat is intended to meet their needs.  You need to be able to track the actualclinical results of the health care delivery process, and track and trendthose results with financial results so you can constantly look at the processand continue to improve."Doing the necessary research for evidence-based disease management will beimpossible without the use of computers.  It's extremely difficult forresearchers to cull paper-based systems and monitor the outcomes of variationsin treatment.  In fact, current automation trends will have to continue ifresearchers are to have a chance of discovering the most clinically effectiveand least expensive treatment regimens for particular diseases."The automation of medical records and the automated collection of health datais going to be critical for any of this to work," Couch says.  "In our presentstate of affairs in medical records, it's almost hopeless to really be able tomanage disease.  We need to capturereal-time information from large populations of patients concerning pre- andpost-intervention health status to be able to demonstrate that systematicdisease management interventions have resulted in improvements in the healthstatus of populations."The benefits of automation will go beyond improved data collection.  Diseasemanagement experts say it's crucial to get guiding information back topractitioners so that they have it available at the point of care, whenthey're treating patients.  That involves automating treatment guidelines andassisting physicians with decision support systems.For example, Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound has operated a programcalled Clinical Roadmap.  It's paper-based for the physicians, although datais compiled on a mainframe computer, says Robin Johnson, manager of theprogram for the Seattle-based HMO.  But this month, Group Health will pilotthe program on its clinical workstations in physicians' offices for itsdiabetic population.Computer assistance"It will be a decision support system that will give providers informationthat helps them deliver the most appropriate care to their patients," shesays.  For example, a physician will be able to see how many diabetics he hastreated and, of those, how many have had eye or feet examinations to meet theHMO's clinical guidelines.  Such examinations can prevent more expensivetreatment if a patient's condition deteriorates before it's detected byclinicians.Physicians' use of information technology will be important, both inimplementing practice suggestions as well as gathering data to refine diseasemanagement approaches, says Dan Segedin, vice president of health systemsmanagement for PCS Health Systems.  The Scottsdale, Ariz.-based pharmacybenefits manager recently was acquired by Eli Lilly & Co., anIndianapolis-based pharmaceutical company, and is leading the parent company'sdisease management effort."The linkage to physicians is critical.  They remain the primary decisionmakerin health care, and on average, they're influencing how $1 million perphysician is being spent downstream," Segedin says.  "We need to have someconnection to physicians to get data from them to measure outcomes and to getdata back to them, which they now get in a piecemeal fashion, or clinicalguidelines over the network."It's not enough for such information systems to collect financial information,says Paul Tang, M.D., medical director of information systems at NorthwesternMemorial Hospital in Chicago.  "It's almost a no-brainer that we needinformation systems, but if we don't look at clinical practice through oursystems and just look at costs, then we're missing a big opportunity," hesays.  "If the overemphasis on financial issues comes at the risk of ignoringthe quality issues, then we risk not gathering the right data."Network buildingThe other challenge for applying information technology to disease managementinitiatives is to build health information networks to make informationreadily available at multiple sites, including physicians' offices and otherambulatory care settings, Tang says.  Clinical guidelines and preventivemeasures can most easily be implemented at outpatient settings to pre-emptexpensive inpatient treatment of serious conditions.Northwestern, which is building a $580 million facility expected to be readyin 1999, is designing a new enterprisewide information network that willinclude links to about 600 physician offices in the building, as well asancillary diagnostic and testing services, in an attempt to give physiciansneeded clinical and financial information drawn from one data repository."We're not addressing what physicians need to make these decisions, so we needto target physicians in ambulatory care settings," Tang says.  "We have toreorganize the data and design applications that help physicians use and viewdata the way they need to."Involving ambulatory care physicians is also part of the information systemsstrategy of Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, which is seeking toautomate its disease management program.  Automating best practice informationand patient documentation is important because Children's handles about200,000 outpatient visits annually throughout the metropolitan Chicago area.The hospital plans to begin testing a computer-based patient records system inone of its primary care clinics this spring.Disease management programs will become a way of life for most hospitals,predicts Julie Bonello, Children's CIO, and physicians will need to useinformation technology if they are to survive under managed care.  "I don'tknow if there will be a big complaint from them about practicing cookie cuttermedicine, because this will affect their pocketbook," Bonello says.  "They'llhave to know how to aggressively manage their patients.  They'll need a lot ofinformation to do that and a lot of tools."In addition to using tools such as electronic records to capture informationand data repositories to collect it, disease management will benefit from newhardware technologies that bring information and data collection nearer to thepoint of care.New toolsFor example, University of Texas M.D.  Anderson Cancer Center in Houston isusing its clinical repository, built over the last 50 years of specializedcare, to continually refine its critical pathways.  The cancer center isgiving its 28 case managers portable computers to aid in implementing its caremanagement program, says Charles Emery, the center's associate vice presidentand CIO.A similar approach is being developed by Capp Care, which is developing apen-based wireless computer that both captures clinical data and givesphysicians decision support at the bedside.  Capp Care, which has PPOcontracts with more than 104,000 physicians and 4,300 hospitals, hopes tocomplete work on the system by mid-year and to market it commercially.Marlow says such systems will offset costs with more efficiency, reductions incosts and elimination of mistakes, which can reduce malpractice exposure.  Thepayback period will shorten because technology costs are falling.But he cites a more sobering reason why providers need to move to automationto implement strategies such as disease management.  "Within three to fiveyears, providers that haven't taken strides to implement this type oftechnology will be at a significant disadvantage, and they may be out ofbusiness," he contends.  "If this helps reduce costs by two-thirds tothree-quarters, those using more archaic forms won't be able to compete."Still, some organizations aren't sure that the concepts underlying diseasemanagement will work and that money will be saved.  Some note that otherhealth care initiatives and technologies have been hyped as potential moneysavers but only resulted in increased utilization.Skepticism existsOne person who's hedging her bets is United HealthCare's Keown, who overseesdisease management.  She says the HMO company is "going into diseasemanagement incrementally."  United will test modules for asthma, diabetes, lowback pain and chronic heart failure starting in March."We clearly don't know what pieces of the program work, and we don't want towaste customers' money if we can't clearly show a value for the intervention,"she says.  She cites some efforts at direct case management as not beingconsistently successful in reducing health care expenditures.But Capp Care's Marlow sees disease management as part of a logicalprogression in health care that eventually will result in the development ofpayment methodologies that move beyond capitation.  Where capitation sets afinancial incentive to limit care in order to maximize profits, Marlowforesees a system that will give providers incentives to provide optimal care,promoting the use of disease management.Couch of Coopers and Lybrand believes providers will have to do more thanvoice support for information technology and disease management programs."I'm still seeing primarily lip service to making these investments amongmedical leaders," he says.  "They have to recognize that these types ofinvestments, if they are not made, will basically leave the management ofhealth care to those that have access to this information and data."If physicians are going to continue to have influence over clinicaldecisionmaking, they will have to lead in making investments into electronicmedical records and into integrated systems that allow this research," hecontinues.  "There's a tremendous amount of distrust that this kind ofinformation will be used against them.  If they don't have the courage to putthemselves out there and lead the medical information revolution, it will beinflicted on them by those that have the technology and the information."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Information technology essential to HMO's disease management strategyGroup Health Cooperative of Puget Sound is approaching disease management asan extension of its concept of population-based care, says Robin Johnson,manager of the Seattle-based HMO's Clinical Roadmap program.  And it plans touse information technology to help physicians better monitor patients'conditions and give them guidance in providing preventive and non-acute care.Providers can define populations in many different ways, she says, such asseniors or women of child-bearing age.  The Clinical Roadmap program is GroupHealth's effort to define a population by its clinical needs, and then toimprove its services in certain key areas:* Planning for care across the continuum rather than emphasizing sickness oracute care needs.  * Looking at what the patient wants and needs vs.  meetingthe organization's needs.  * Looking at health care delivery instead of justlooking at business performance.  * Paying attention to patients' quality oflife.The process of putting together a system of care for a clinical population hashelped Group Health predict and manage care by measuring important outcomesand then using the information to see what it should be doing differently,Johnson says."It's like a decision tree underlying the individual case," she adds.  "For adiabetic, for example, you can not only see when the last eye exam was, butthere's a linkage between that and the underlying guideline.  The informationwill be highlighted in some way to help the clinician know that the patient isout of compliance."Primary care physicians are the coordinating point for the system, she says,and Group Health plans to use its growing network of workstations inphysicians' offices in two ways.  First, physicians will be able to usepatient registries to determine which of their patients have specificconditions.  Secondly, by linking those patients to guidelines of care,physicians can see suggestions for what treatment is appropriate.The Clinical Roadmap program started in late 1992 to target diabetics andthose needing heart care, pregnancy care and tobacco cessation.  Since then,it's been expanded to include depression, breast care, immunizations, HIV/AIDSand asthma.Besides functioning as a decision support system for physicians, the computernetwork "will be a very important tool in aiding provider and patientdecisionmaking," Johnson says.  "It will help us evaluate outcomes and give usbetter ways to learn what works from the care we're delivering."The power of the information system is that it can really make planning aproactive component so the physician can focus on the care rather thanfiguring out who needs to provide the care."Anecdotal evidence suggests that Group Health patients who are involved in theprogram feel more empowered by the approach and are more satisfied becausephysicians are taking a proactive role in their health, not just treating themwhen they get sick, Johnson says.Group Health's disease management automation effort is part of a broader, $100million, five-year initiative to build an enterprisewide network to connectall care delivery sites.  It's using its own legacy results reportingsoftware, Sun Microsystems servers and networked personal computers, most ofwhich are made by Compaq Computer Corp.  (see story, July/August 1994 issue).Back to Headline List WT03-B02-2IA086-000615-B039-136http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015240 text/html 48293HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:50:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMTContent-length: 48106Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh30.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 20, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Funding Problems Delay Iowa CHMIS Date (862 words) Why WEDI And ANSI Are Working Together To Boost Standardization (832 words) How Telemedicine Is Improving Emergency Care In North Carolina (966 words) Maryland's Certification Program Remains On Track (252 words) With MedAccess, Employees Get More Plan Information The Cyberspace Way (650 words) Using The Internet To Find Community Physicians (255 words) To Thrive In Managed Care, Oregon Docs Take The Health Data Network Initiative (1134 words) The Pharmacy Fund Looks For Rapid Expansion Of Its Rapid RxEmit Program (596 words) Why VHA Is Dropping Its Supply-Side EDI Software (407 words) The ANSI Health Care Standards (144 words) WHIN Expands Its Wisconsin Network Reach (179 words) The Federal Privacy Bill Will Get A Close Look At WEDI's Annual Conference (171 words) New Database On The Net Gives Health Care Plan Performance Measures (114 words) PCS Veteran Moley Moves To Lead A Sister Company: Integrated Medical (153 words) CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996Funding Problems Delay Iowa CHMIS DateWith implementation costs higher than expected, a July deadline for startingIowa's state-sanctioned community health management information system likelywill be delayed at least one year.The Iowa CHMIS program-including a centralized state data repository andcertification of claims clearinghouses-could be headed back to the drawingboard after four vendor bids for building and operating the data repositorycame in at least $1.5 million over projections.On Dec.  15, the Iowa CHMIS governing board voted to recommend to statelegislators that the mandate to start the program this July be postponed forone year.  And administrative rules released for public comment in December toimplement a certification program for transaction processing networks are onhold.The repository and other activities of the program were to be funded by atransaction fee surcharge of about 3 cents on electronically transmittedclaims and other transactions.  But because the project costs are higher thananticipated, the surcharge would approach 18 cents plus membership fees,violating a tenet of the program that it provide overall savings.Four bids on the data repository ranged from $6 million to $7 million overfive years, which were $1.5 million to $2 million more than anticipated."When we started this process, we always recognized the volatility of thecost/benefit process," says Walter Tomenga, Iowa CHMIS chair and vicepresident of the Farm Bureau Insurance Companies.  "We knew we wouldn't beable to understand the total cost ramifications until we put a system togetherand put it out for bid.  We've not backed away from our commitment; we're nowlooking at different models."A 15-member task force began weekly meetings on Jan.  4 hoping to draft a newCHMIS program by March, but some question how much can be saved.  "The bottomline is the stakeholders are not willing to pay for one centralizedrepository," says Susan Voss, projects director for the Iowa Division ofInsurance, which has regulatory jurisdiction over the program.  "It's goodthat the board decided to take another look rather than rush intoimplementation only to find out it's not working."Local Links FirstOutside observers concur, saying local health information networks need to bewell established before statewide efforts can succeed.  "A statewideinitiative is premature at this point," says Pamela Hanlon, president ofCommunity Medical Network Society, Atlanta, an association for thoseinterested in networking issues.  "We are not seeing successful state networksat this time."Since lawmakers enacted legislation in 1994 to create the centralized datarepository and require that all providers and payers be linked to certifiedclearinghouses by this July, the electronic data interchange environment haschanged in Iowa.As a result of the looming state government mandate and national growth of EDIimplementation, providers and payers are well on the road to using a range ofelectronic transactions.  As a result, many of the goals of CHMIS already arebeing accomplished.  "Just the threat of all this has made a lot of groupsmove," Voss says.For instance, CHMIS organizers anticipated that such transactions aseligibility verification, preauthorization of treatment and electronic fundstransfers eventually would be significant income-generators for the program.But vendors already are widely marketing these and other EDI services in thestate."A lot of the original concepts embedded in CHMIS-we can look at the privatesector and see that they're doing that now," Tomenga says.In addition, larger payers and provider organizations already collect andanalyze all types of data and don't see a business need to increase datacollection or share it with the state, Voss adds."One of the frustrations that people have is when the government says, 'Giveus all of your data and then we'll decide later what to do with it,'" saysRichard Rubin, executive director of the Foundation for Health Care Quality, aSeattle-based national CHMIS resource center.  "The original CHMIS model hasnot proven to be viable."Another byproduct of the CHMIS program as the original July 1996 deadlineneared is new interest in a national clearinghouse accreditation program thatIowa adopted."We've had a number of companies apply in part because of Iowa," says LeeBarrett, executive director of the Electronic Health Network AccreditationCommission.  Those companies include Athena of North America, Louisville, Ky.;MDIP Inc., Sioux Falls, S.D.; and The ISYS Group, Des Moines, Iowa.Iowa was the first state to adopt the commission's standards, with Marylandexpecting to follow suit this year.Barrett hopes the trend will continue, regardless of the setback in Iowa.  "Itcertainly added credence to what we're trying to do to promote certificationacross the nation," he says.For now, nearly everything is on the table as Iowa CHMIS supporters craft anew program.  "We have two stakes in the ground that are not movable:  thecollection of data and standardized transactions," Tomenga says.Despite the funding setback, Iowa's CHMIS isn't dead, Hanlon says.  "They'regoing to pull something off that will be good for their constituency and thatthey can afford," she says.  "It just will look different."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996Why WEDI And ANSI Are Working Together To Boost StandardizationThe American National Standards Institute's ASC X12N insurance subcommitteeand the Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange are joining forces todevelop educational programs to increase the use of standardized electronichealth care claims and related transactions.Following an open forum in December at the X12N interim meeting to discussproblems with implementing the ANSI 837 claims transaction set, the twoorganizations are discussing ways to coordinate development of moreeducational programs.WEDI and X12N organized the forum in Kansas City, Mo., to determine whetherlow acceptance of the X12 837 standard format for claims is due to technicalflaws in the standard or other factors (see HDNN, Nov.  20, 1995).While the standard is maligned by many in the industry as being too complex,it is technically sound, providers and payers at the forum agreed.Attendees pointed to a lack of educational efforts as a major reason ASC X12standards are not widely used in health care."A lot of people don't know where to go for information," says Bruce Horn,manager of electronic commerce for The Associated Group, an Indianapolis-basedpayer, and co-chair of the X12N health care task group.  "We don't have theinfrastructure to help these people."Some say the meeting provided a "wake-up call" to WEDI."It is a golden opportunity for WEDI to make something happen, and hopefullythey got that message," says Gary Beatty, electronic commerce manager forEmployers Health Insurance Co., Green Bay, Wis.WEDI RespondsMessage received, replies Gene Carruth, vice president of Blue Cross and BlueShield of Arizona and WEDI treasurer.  "We can be a conduit to help geteducational materials out to grassroots organizations," he adds.But WEDI likely will not hold educational forums, says Gina Grage,reimbursement coordinator for Mayo Medical Center and co-chair of WEDI'seducational technical advisory group.Rather, WEDI will help local entities, such as medical associations or EDIresource centers, put on seminars by developing educational materials andcreating a speakers bureau.For instance, the WEDI advisory group is putting the finishing touches on aslide presentation on the basic issues of electronic commerce in the healthcare industry.WEDI's commitment to assisting local educational efforts is good news for someattendees of the special X12N forum, who worried that the two organizationswould settle for having special educational seminars at future X12N or WEDImeetings that providers and payers would have to travel hundreds of miles toattend."Whoever does the education will have to go out to the masses," says PaulMontgomery, EDI translation specialist at Blue Cross and Blue Shield ofKansas.  "The masses will not go out to EDI."Still, 185 people attended the special X12N/WEDI meeting in December on only30 days notice, a sign that there clearly is interest in the health carecommunity to standardize transactions, Horn says.Uniform ImplementationThose attending the meeting told X12N and WEDI leaders that increased use ofthe ANSI 837 is hampered by the lack of a uniform implementation guide.For instance, at least six industry groups, including WEDI, have writtenimplementation guides.But this problem should be resolved during 1996, as X12N is beginning to writestandardized, low-cost implementation guides for the 837 and other transactionsets.Some pioneers who have implemented the ANSI 837 caution that there are noshortcuts to the procedure.Because mainframe-based translation software can cost as much as $200,000,many organizations are trying to implement the standard by writing translationsoftware themselves-and doing it wrong.Following implementation guidelines properly and using commercially availabletranslation software can ease the implementation task, Beatty says.He advises organizations to start slowly with personal computer-basedtranslation software and enhance their systems as they gain knowledge abouttranslation and data mapping issues.  "Don't build your own-that will slowimplementation," he says.Today's PCs are powerful enough to handle transmitting many claims-relatedtransactions in large volumes.For instance, Employers Health Insurance Co.  recently sent eligibilityrosters of 1.8 million people to a major pharmaceutical company from one PCusing a $3,500 off-the-shelf translator.  The transfer took about 10 hours.The expected 25,000 daily eligibility transactions will take about 10 minutes.Organizations considering buying a translator need to do some homeworkbeforehand to gain a better understanding of translation technology and what'sneeded to fulfill business needs, says Daniel Kazzaz, president of Paper FreeSystems Inc., a translation software vendor in Fairfax, Va.Once a vendor is selected, the buyer should get the software on a trial basis,along with sample maps for transferring one claim format into another, headds.Kazzaz applauds enhanced educational programs to implement standardizedtransactions but warns that many people want quick answers.  "People meandifferent things by education," he says.  "What they really mean is they wantsomeone to tell them, 'These products work and these don't.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996How Telemedicine Is Improving Emergency Care In North CarolinaA handful of hospitals in North Carolina are testing telemedicineconsultations between emergency physicians at rural hospitals and academicmedical centers with a long-term goal of expanding the program statewide.In planning for more than a year, the pilot program began on October 1 asphysicians at 49-bed Chatham Hospital in Siler City began consulting withcounterparts at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine, ChapelHill.  That was followed later that month when Bowman Gray Medical Center,Winston-Salem, linked with Wilkes Regional Medical Center, North Wilkesboro.In November, teleconsultations began between the Duke University MedicalCenter, Durham, and the Southeastern Regional Medical Center, Lumberton.  EastCarolina University School of Medicine, Greenville, and Pungo DistrictHospital, Belhaven, began telemedicine consultations in December.  Projectorganizers also hope to create links between the U.S.  Naval Hospital,Jacksonville, and the East Carolina School of Medicine."We want to test the telemedicine equipment in an emergency room setting tosee if it can be used effectively to diagnose and treat diseases from adistance, and whether it will be a viable resource to rural hospitals," saysGayle Fitzgerald, project manager for the North Carolina Telemedicine Networkand a policy analyst with the Office of State Planning, the state agencyoverseeing the project.Camera ShyParticipants already have learned some lessons.  Chatham Hospital spent 45days familiarizing its staff with the equipment and helping them over theirfear of being filmed."Emergency room people aren't shy individuals but when you try to get them oncamera they get that way quick," Chatham CEO Ted Chapin says.Workstations-one telediagnostics and another teleradiology-are housed at bothUNC and Chatham.  The backbone of the network is the North CarolinaInformation Highway, a fiber-optic network developed by the state andtelephone companies.  The network uses high-speed asynchronous transfer modeswitching technology that simultaneously routes huge amounts of voice, dataand video communications.The telemedicine program-and the fiber-optic backbone-are part of a largereffort in North Carolina to develop a comprehensive health informationnetworking infrastructure statewide.The effort began in 1994 when Gov.  James Hunt created the North CarolinaHealth Care Information and Communications Alliance-comprising informationsystems companies, state universities, government agencies, hospitals andphysicians-to map out the state's health information networking strategy (seeAutomated Medical Payments News, Sept.  20, 1994).  Among other projects, thealliance is developing a statewide master patient index, which will undergoinitial testing this spring.The telemedicine project has cost about $2.6 million so far, including a$550,000 grant the network received in 1994 from the NationalTelecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the U.S.Department of Commerce.Funding ConcernsThe project is scheduled to end in April but North Carolina will ask NTIA fora six-month extension of time-but no additional funding-to collect more datato analyze the benefits of the program.  Participants experienced delays of upto six months in implementing the program because it took longer thananticipated to identify and acquire the necessary equipment, Fitzgerald says.While the project now focuses on emergency department applications at alimited number of sites, participants hope to expand the network and includescheduled consultations, but funding is a major concern.Because of the emergency nature of the telemedicine consultations during thetest, the network operates on dedicated telecommunication lines that are open24 hours a day."The expense of operating the fiber optics network is fairly great becausethere aren't that many sites connected to it, but that cost should dropdramatically as more sites are connected," says William Mattern, seniorassociate dean for academic affairs at the University of North Carolina Schoolof Medicine at Chapel Hill.The monthly line charges-at least $4,000 per participant-is shared by thestate and the hospitals.  In April, state funding expires and hospitals willbear the full cost, Fitzgerald says.Physicians using the network are doing so pro bono because very few insurancecompanies or health plans pay for telemedicine consultations.But with the Health Care Financing Administration paying for some telemedicineservices in a limited pilot program, Fitzgerald hopes payers eventually willprovide reimbursement if the federal program proves telemedicine iscost-effective.Meanwhile, the state is negotiating with regional telephone companies forreduced charges for the telemedicine program.  If the negotiations areunsuccessful, the scope of the program will be reduced, Fitzgerald says.Participating providers praise the telemedicine program.  "It puts us on thecutting edge for a small rural hospital, and physicians like the security ofhaving consultative expertise at their beck and call," Chapin says."The fact that physicians can talk to each other, look at images and hearsounds with the patient participating offers huge advantages in terms ofproviding care," Mattern adds.Issues that participants hope to address during the pilot programs include thecost-effectiveness of telemedicine, liability concerns and the willingness ofphysicians to use the teleconsulting service on a regular basis after thepilots are over.By using telemedicine, smaller hospitals can treat and admit more patients,rather than transferring patients to other hospitals.  "We're trying to savepatients money, and the payback for me would be an increase in the hospitalcensus," Chapin says.The University of North Carolina School of Medicine takes a long-term view ofthe program's potential benefits."The real payback will be when managed care becomes the predominant method ofcare in the state and medical care is capitated," Mattern says.  "In the longrun it will be less expensive to take care of patients without having themtravel to medical centers, and telemedicine looks like it can be an extremelyvaluable tool in allowing patients to remain at local sites."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996Maryland's Certification Program Remains On TrackWhile Iowa's effort to mandate state certification of clearinghouses is onhold, a less ambitious certification effort is rolling along in Maryland.Under rules being promulgated now, clearinghouses can seek statecertification, which includes meeting certain performance standards andcommitting to being an open network that accepts all claims, beginning July 1.Clearinghouses will gain state certification by being accredited by theElectronic Health Network Accreditation Commission, an industry-sponsorednational program.Maryland decided against mandating state certification because the state'sattorney general said a mandate could violate due process laws by deprivingbusinesses of the right to operate in the state without the benefit ofredress.But while the program is voluntary, there's an extra incentive that kicks in ayear later.  By July 1997, all payers operating in the state must designate atleast one certified clearinghouse from which they will accept claims."We don't see any other way for there to be guarantees of open networkswithout payers having at least one open door," says Benjamin Steffen, deputydirector of the Maryland Health Care Access and Cost Commission, the agencyresponsible for the certification program.  Market pressures likely will forcemost clearinghouses to eventually seek state certification, he adds.Maryland decided to adopt the Electronic Health Network AccreditationCommission's program after its confidentiality provisions were strengthened inDecember to address the state's concerns.  Now, accredited clearinghouses haveto spell out in contracts how end users will use data transmitted throughtheir networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996With MedAccess, Employees Get More Plan Information The Cyberspace WayOpen enrollment, an annual ritual for employees and employers, is about toleap into cyberspace.This month, MedAccess Corp., a privately-owned, start-up company based inLexington, Mass., is introducing a new service enabling employees to accessinformation about their health insurance plans on the Internet.The service, Health Fair Online, targets corporations employing at least 500people, says Jaime Taaffe, founder and CEO of MedAccess.An employer would pay MedAccess a fee to provide detailed, current informationon its health plan options to its employees on the MedAccess World Wide Webpage.  The company already has assembled a massive database of information onvirtually every managed care plan in the country, Taaffe says.In October, Health Fair Online was tested at GTE Laboratories, Waltham, Mass.Over a three-week open enrollment period during which the company offered thechoice of seven different health plans, about half of its 500 employeesaccessed plan information on-line via MedAccess.Available InformationThe information included marketing materials for the seven managed care plans,audio messages from the plans' senior executives, the background andavailability of physicians in those plans, the contracts between GTE and theplans and information from the Health Plan Employer Data Information Set, astandardized set of quality and performance measurements used to comparemanaged care plans.By calling up the Web site and then entering a social security number and apin number, employees could find out what their contribution and that of GTEwere to the health plan in the past year and compare those costs to the plansbeing offered for the coming year.  Employees also could run scenariospertaining to their personal and family health care circumstances to learnwhat plan may suit them best and its cost.Based on the pilot program and a survey of GTE employees, MedAccess concludedthat employees are willing to go on-line for health plan information, Taaffesays."The overwhelming majority said the information influenced their decision andpeople found it very convenient because we were able to provide moreinformation and it was easy to navigate," he adds.Responding to requests from GTE employees, MedAccess will add more informationon health-related areas such as life and disability insurance.The interactive service provides more information in a more efficient mannerthan other options, such as giving employees brochures, Taaffe says.  Thisresults in better informed employees and helps them choose the best plan fortheir needs rather than selecting a plan simply because it has the lowestcost, he adds.GTE Corp., the parent company of GTE Laboratories, is looking for programs togive its employees assistance in choosing the best quality plans because"quality is cheaper," says Dwight McNeill, health care information manager forGTE Corp.Health Fair Online is feasible and less expensive than the traditional wayscorporations have sought to inform employees about their health plan choices,he adds.  "I imagine the cost would be 25% of the cost of mailing and printingpaper."While GTE Laboratories was pleased with the performance of MedAccess, itsparent company hasn't decided if it will retain the service, McNeill says.GTE Laboratories agreed to test the service because its corporate office isnear MedAccess', and it was familiar with the firm and its personnel.GTE Corp.  employs about 100,000 people in the United States.  Before thecompany can decide whether to further utilize MedAccess, it must sell theconcept to the various divisions, McNeill says.  While he is impressed withMedAccess, McNeill says it could use more video, graphics and color.Taaffe declines to say whether MedAccess has signed any customers for its rollout.  The cost of the service will depend on the company's size and the scopeof its health care benefits.  The company has a demonstration Web site athttp://www.medaccess.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996Using The Internet To Find Community PhysiciansA new Internet service rolling out in March will enable members of managedcare plans to use personal computers to find affiliated physicians in theircommunity.GeoAccess Inc., Overland Park, Kan., developed the service, called ReferralOnline, which is free of charge for health plan members.  Insurance companiesand other payers will pick up the cost, which varies due to membership andother factors but averages about $12,000 a year.GeoAccess, formed in 1989, specializes in software and consulting servicesthat help its 300 payer clients measure health care access issues.For instance, managed care plans can use the software to compare the employeeaddresses of prospective employer clients with addresses of the plan'sregionally contracted providers, showing the degree of access to care thatemployees would have under the plan.  GeoAccess also markets software tocreate provider directories.In essence, Referral Online takes these existing services and reformats themfor health plan membership use on the Internet.To use Referral Online, a plan member dials up a Web site-either for thehealth plan or at GeoAccess-and enters his or her street address.  After themember selects a physician specialty from a subsequent menu, a listing of areacontracted physicians with address, telephone number and distance from themember's home is displayed.Health plans can make additional information available, such as office hoursand bilingual services.  In addition, Referral Online can search forindividual physicians by name.A Web site demonstration is available at http://www.geoaccess.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996To Thrive In Managed Care, Oregon Docs Take The Health Data NetworkInitiativeWhile several state medical associations have endorsed electronic claimsclearinghouses and obtained discounted rates as an incentive for members touse electronic data interchange, few, if any, have gone so far as to developan electronic network.Thus, the Oregon Medical Association is blazing a trail as it introduces astatewide health information network, which could evolve to look much like acommunity health information network.Tested in the Portland area during the latter half of 1995, the Oregon MedicalElectronic Network is a "custom health care network" tailored to the needs ofits users, and those needs will determine how the network will evolve, saysRobert Dernedde, the medical association's executive director.The medical association developed the network to help member physicianssuccessfully compete in the state's growing managed care business."It dawned on us that there was only one way we could help the medicalcommunity survive this demand and that was to automate the administrativeprocess," Dernedde says.Available TransactionsThe network now enables physicians to verify insurance eligibility withparticipating payers, refer patients to other physicians and communicate withother users via electronic mail.Other services scheduled for testing in 1996 include submitting claims toparticipating payers, submitting certain prescriptions to pharmacies,submitting laboratory orders and receiving results and submitting workers'compensation injury reports.The network doesn't include a centralized data repository, but expects toeventually assist physicians in creating computer-based patient records.  Howthat will be accomplished has yet to be determined, Dernedde says.But before the network reaches that stage, it will have to address such thornyissues as confidentiality and ownership of the information, he adds.This month, the network began connecting members of the Salem-based Mid-ValleyIndependent Physicians Association, whose 368 members practice at about 160sites in two eastern counties, to the network.Already connected are 146 physicians at 22 sites in the Portland area who werehand-picked to participate in the pilot because they had a variety ofdifferent information systems.Participating PayersThe eight payers that participated in the pilot are:  HMO of Oregon, themanaged care plan of Blue Cross of Oregon; Sisters of Providence Good HealthPlan; ODS Health Plan; Physicians Association of Clackamas County; PacificareInc.; Pacific Source; QualMed Inc.; and the Oregon Medical Assistance Program,the state Medicaid program.The state's two major workers compensation carriers-State Accident InsuranceFund and Liberty Northwest Insurance Corp.-have committed to use the networkand Dernedde expects to hook them up shortly.Mid-Valley has committed $1.2 million over the next 15 months to hook upaffiliated providers, with 20 sites expected to be on-line by February.The network also is negotiating with organizations representing about 850physicians in the Eugene, Springfield and Medford areas.Physician-DrivenPhysicians took the lead in developing the network to avoid political andcompetitive problems that have plagued community health information networkselsewhere."If payers or health systems take the lead, then other payers and healthsystems won't participate," Dernedde says.  "The physicians are the ones whoultimately have to provide the encounter data and they need to be able toaccess multiple health plans, hospitals, pharmacies and other providers."Precisely because of the need for connectivity to other providers, the medicalassociation's network is not limited to its member physicians.  "We're set upin a non-proprietary way so that all participants who have a legitimate needto use the highway can come to the table," Dernedde adds.  The network hopesthat as physicians in certain communities join the network, local hospitals,pharmacies and other providers will join as well.For now, the network is concentrating on signing up physicians throughindependent practice associations or similar groups.  It anticipates servingmost of the 7,000 physicians in the state within five years through deals withthe state's 30 IPAs.The state medical association chose Peregrin Medical Review, Beaverton, Ore.,in February 1994 to install and run a frame relay-based network to switchtransactions.Unlike other vendors, Peregrin understood the network's specific needs,Dernedde says.  "The others all had their preconceived notions and they wantedus to fit the round hole when we were square," he adds.The network uses systems integration software developed by Informedics Inc., aLake Oswego, Ore.-based physician practice management software company.  Thesoftware, HealthLink, easily integrates with many practice management systems,including Informedics' ClinicManager product.Lessons LearnedNow that the network is operational, the biggest obstacle- and lesson learnedfrom the pilot-is overcoming the fear of technology among physicians and theirstaffs.  "You really have to work with the people in each installation so thatthey can get comfortable with the system and will use it regularly," Derneddesays.The association hopes the network will enable physicians to communicate witheach other more efficiently and enable them to conduct outcomes researchgeographically, by specialty, "or by any other configuration the medicalcommunity might want to put together," Dernedde adds.For instance, Mid-Valley hopes that electronic connectivity will enhance itsexisting data collection and analysis programs.  "What we're really interestedin is having access to our raw data to do outcomes-based studies," says JanBuffa, Mid-Valley's CEO.Mid-Valley operates its own data repository, downloading information fromcertain health care payers on a quarterly basis.  But the Oregon network willgive it access to greater data on a more timely basis and enhance its datacollection capabilities, she adds.Mid-Valley, the IPA in Salem, expects its investment in the network to pay foritself within two years through reductions in administrative expenses andincreased staff productivity, says Michael Rohwer, a member of theorganization's board of directors and a general internist with the DoctorsClinic, in Salem.  The Oregon Clinic, a multi-specialty facility in Portlandthat participated in the pilot, already relies heavily on the network forchecking the insurance eligibility of patients, says Regina Tipton, thepractice's computer education coordinator."I don't know what the cost savings are, but if you take one individual who'smaking $8 an hour who calls up the insurance company and waits 45 minutes toget the answer, versus using the network and getting the information withintwo minutes; we absolutely will get a lot more done," she adds.The medical association expects to eventually profit from the network, butDernedde declines to say when profitability is expected or what theassociation's investment has been.Members of the medical association pay an average of $3,100 to $3,500 to jointhe network, plus a monthly software licensing fee of $50.The association, which has 5,263 members, including 4,300 practicingphysicians, charges non-members an additional $50 monthly surcharge.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996The Pharmacy Fund Looks For Rapid Expansion Of Its Rapid RxEmit ProgramHaving signed more than 300 pharmacies in 30 states to its Rapid RxEmitreceivables financing program in the past year, The Pharmacy Fund is preparingto double the number of participating pharmacies.Since December 1994, The Pharmacy Fund, a New York-based receivables financingcompany, has paid more than 1.1 million claims the next business day throughthe short-term receivables financing program.To fund the receivables financing effort, The Pharmacy Fund is using about $25million in investments from company officials and companies such as Mutual ofOmaha and Centre Financial Services Holdings Ltd.  But the fund has beenattempting since September to draw $80 million on a $500 million line ofcredit arranged by Smith Barney to expand the program to 335 other pharmaciesthat have committed to joining.This month the fund expects to close on the $80 million in new financing,ending months of frustrating legal maneuverings."We thought we could do this relatively simply," says Pharmacy Fund PresidentJeffrey Greene.  "The legal bill is twice what was expected.  We have hundredsof pharmacies signed up and we can't give them a start date until the lawyersare finished."How It WorksRapid RxEmit uses electronic data interchange to process claims and evaluatethe credit risk of prescription payers.  Pharmacies using Rapid RxEmit submitclaims through National Data Corp., Atlanta, to the respective payers.  Thepayers adjudicate the claims and transmit remittance advice back to thepharmacies through National Data.  But payers also transmit copies ofadjudicated claims to the Pharmacy Fund.The fund then uses evaluation software to check for duplicate or deniedclaims, or claims from unapproved payers.  Only one-half of one percent ofclaims are from payers that have payment histories so poor that the fund won'tbuy the claims, Greene says.The Pharmacy Fund pays approved claims the next business day, primarilythrough direct deposit to pharmacy bank accounts.  The fund charges a feeequal to 2% of each claim financed, and then assumes responsibility forgetting payment from payers.The program dramatically improves cash flow for pharmacies, which often wait30 to 90 days for payment and find the 2% fee money well spent.  "When you'rewaiting more than 30 days for payment, you're really financing theprescription program of these health plans," says Lou Giannotti, director ofpharmacies for Mayfair Super Markets, Elizabeth, N.J.  "The fund remedies thetask of chasing the receivables."About 80% of claims for Mayfair's 12 pharmacies are paid the next businessday.  Most of the remaining claims are for the New Jersey Medicaid program,which may join Rapid RxEmit later this year.The Pharmacy Fund's evaluation software includes credit and payment historiesof 2,800 prescription payers, ranging from major corporations such as GeneralMotors Co.  to two volunteer fire departments.To assess the credit risk of payers, the fund pulls reports frominvestment-grading companies such as Moody's Investor Service, Standard &Poor's Corp.  and Fitch Investor Service Inc.Other reports come from Dun & Bradstreet Inc.  and state insurance divisions.But the best source of information, Greene says, is The Pharmacy Fund's directexperience with getting paid by the insurers.One of the biggest challenges of Rapid RxEmit has been convincing payers topay The Pharmacy Fund rather than pharmacies.  While most payers agree, theprocess is cumbersome.  "Every pharmacy we turn on, we have to notify 20 to 25payers to change their files and that's all paper-driven," says Fred Tarter,chairman of the fund.  Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996Why VHA Is Dropping Its Supply-Side EDI SoftwareA major hospital purchasing coalition is abandoning its proprietary softwarefor hospitals to submit supply orders electronically because its limitedfunctionality doesn't address customer needs.  Instead, VHA Inc., Irving,Texas, is recommending that its member hospitals use the Quik Link materialsmanagement software from Abbott Park, Ill.-based Abbott Laboratories, or theEcho software from Choice Medical Inc., Louisville, Ky.Quik Link, which has 900 customers, accommodates purchase orders,acknowledgments and an electronic catalogue.  Echo offers its 300 customersthose same services, as well as electronic invoicing.  Both software productssupport standardized transactions developed by the American National StandardsInstitute ASC X12 subcommittee.VHA is abandoning its own software because its functions are limited topurchase orders and acknowledgments, and it doesn't accommodate customers'requirements for easier connections to multiple vendors, says GregoryLindstrom, manager of VHA Net Services.  "We won't have to continue to utilizeVHA resources to build and design software, and provide customer and technicalsupport," he adds.VHA expects to stop supporting the software by next January.Abbott, a major manufacturer and distributor of pharmaceutical products andother health care products, will supply Quik Link free to VHA hospitals.Choice Medical is offering a 5% discount off the $495 price of the Echosoftware.  The company also will offer discounts on annual support fees andadditional modules.For Abbott, which merely provides software as a service to customers, the VHAagreement will have little impact.  "We want to encourage our customers to useEDI technology to keep costs out of the supply chain," says Alan Greenthal,Abbott's senior systems analyst.But the agreement will have a big impact on Choice Medical, says RachelFoerster, principal and founder of Rachel Foerster and Associates, a BeachPark, Ill.-based EDI consulting firm.Choice Medical markets Echo to smaller hospitals, but has more advancedsoftware, called RSVP, for the complete materials management needs of largerhospitals.  Thus, the VHA deal gives the company a way to enter the largerhospital market."It has a very positive impact for Choice Medical because they have some veryeasy-to-use and affordable systems," Foerster says.  "Quik Link is limited infunctionality compared to Choice's Echo and it's not a full materialsmanagement inventory system like Choice's RSVP.""The VHA endorsement is almost as good as the Good Housekeeping seal ofapproval," says George Puckett, vice president of Choice Medical.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996The ANSI Health Care Standards148:  Transaction for reporting workers' compensation first reports of injury.Approved in August 1993.270/271:  Transactions for inquiry and response of insurance eligibilityinformation.  Approved in February 1993.275:  Transaction for patient information, such as claims attachments.Approved in June 1995.276/277:  Transactions for inquiry and response of a status of a submittedclaim.  Approved in October 1993.278:  Transaction for health care service review functions, such ascertification and referral information.  Approved in October 1994.834:  Transaction for submitting and updating health plan enrollmentinformation.  Approved in February 1992.835:  Transaction for remittance advice.  Approved in October 1991.837:  Transaction for claims submission.  Approved in October 1992.IHCEBI/IHCEBR:  Real-time, interactive standards for insurance eligibilityinquiry and response.  The first health care transaction written in theinternational EDIFACT syntax.  Approved in October 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996WHIN Expands Its Wisconsin Network ReachA large Wisconsin independent practice association is committing up to$500,000 to link its 300 primary care physicians to the Wisconsin HealthInformation Network.The 750-member Community Physicians Network in Sauk City will pay for allsoftware and training, and a "substantial subsidy" of hardware costs, toassist 100 clinics in joining the Wisconsin network, says Gary Busack,director of planning and development with Unity Health Plans.  Busack wasinterim executive director of Community Physicians Network when the agreementwas finalized in December."The network is a means of Community Physicians Network being able to providemore data to their members on how they are doing with their managed carecommitments," Busack says.  "This is what primary care needs if it is to besuccessful in the future."The clinics are in 30 southern Wisconsin counties, substantially expanding thegeographical reach of the network, which has concentrated on the Milwaukee andMadison metropolitan regions.The Wisconsin Health Information Network is owned by Ameritech Inc.  andAurora Health Care, a Milwaukee-based hospital system.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996The Federal Privacy Bill Will Get A Close Look At WEDI's Annual ConferenceThe Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange has added a special forum onfederal medical records confidentiality legislation to the agenda of its Jan.29-31 conference in Orlando, Fla.  The forum, from 9 a.m.  to noon on Jan.  29focuses on the Medical Records Confidentiality Act, introduced by Sen.  RobertBennett (R-Utah) last fall.The event is more an informational seminar than a debate on the bill's merits."It's a workshop for people who want to understand what the bill does and whatit doesn't do," says WEDI Executive Director Barbara Souder.Panel members include Paul Yost, legislative director for Sen.  Bennett;Kathleen Frawley, Washington director of the American Health InformationManagement Association; Marjorie Carey, assistant general counsel of theAmerican Hospital Association; Jeanne Shulte Scott, chair of the Associationfor Electronic Health Care Transactions; and Joel Gimpel, associate generalcounsel of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association.  The forum cost is$250, but it is free for WEDI conference registrants.  For more information,call 617-374-9170.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996New Database On The Net Gives Health Care Plan Performance MeasuresEmployers and other purchasers of managed care, as well as consumers, have newinformation at their fingertips to help assess the performance of individualhealth care plans.Last month, the National Committee for Quality Assurance rolled out a WorldWide Web site that includes a list of health plans that have obtained NCQAaccreditation and HEDIS report cards that show how the services of a managedcare plan compare to other plans.  Nearly half of the nation's HMOs have beenreviewed as part of NCQA's accreditation program.The web site also includes NCQA conference information and variousorganization publications.The Internet address for the web site is http://www.ncqa.org.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH DATA NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 20, 1996PCS Veteran Moley Moves To Lead A Sister Company:  Integrated MedicalIntegrated Medical Systems, the Golden, Colo.-based health information networkvendor owned by Eli Lilly & Co., has new leadership.Kevin Moley, senior vice president of PCS Health Systems, is the new presidentand CEO of Integrated Medical.  Moley succeeds Kevin Green, who resigned onJan.  10 to accept a similar position at an undisclosed company.Moley was a driving force in PCS' investment in Integrated Medical Systems in1994.  Eli Lilly bought both companies last year.Moley, who served as Deputy Secretary of the U.S.  Department of Health andHuman Services in the Bush Administration, was interim CEO of IntegratedMedical Systems during much of 1994.The company operates 45 health information networks linking hospitals toaffiliated physicians.  The leadership change won't result in philosophicalchanges, Moley says.But he expects to use new capital from Eli Lilly to expand the company'sclient base and services.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-3IA086-000615-B039-157http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015259 text/html 30709HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:51:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMTContent-length: 30522Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh10.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GRANTS ALERT TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE (NSF) (316 words) BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION (NSF) (229 words) BRIEF AIDS INTERVENTIONS (NIMH) (177 words) INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH ON EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE (NIDA) (163 words) DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE AND ABUSE IN RURAL AMERICA (NIDA/NIAAA/USDA) (351 words) MINORITY RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT (NIMH) (231 words) TRANSITION FROM CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY TO OVERT HEART FAILURE (NHLBI) (215 words) BEHAVIORAL PAIN RESEARCH (NIH) (162 words) STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI) (185 words) NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT) (269 words) SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: NEW YORK STATE (HUD) (221 words) GRANTS CALENDAR (88 words) NEWS BRIEFING TOOLS OF THE TRADE: THE FEDERAL REGISTER (667 words) AGRICULTURE SETS RULES FOR GRANT PROGRAMS (287 words) CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE (NSF)Scope:  The National Science Foundation is invitingproposals to plan and initiate collaborative projects tointegrate enabling electronic and information technologiesinto neuroscience research as part of the federal "Decade ofthe Brain" initiative.Deadline:  March 15.Funds:  Up to $100,000 per project for one or two years.NSF expects to make eight to 12 awards.Eligibility:  Domestic academic institutions and nonprofitorganizations with academically-oriented engineering andscience research programs.Proposals must include teams of two or more investigators,including at least one neuroscientist and one investigatorfrom a relevant discipline, such as applied mathematics,computer science, intelligent control/neuroengineering,interfaces, mathematical and statistical modeling, networkengineering, physics, scientific visualization, sensordesign, signal processing, simulation and systemsintegration/interoperability.Areas:  The initiative aims to bring together new teams ofinvestigators able to use common languages and scientificconcepts to attack problems with impact on more than onediscipline.  Projects include collaborations to addressproblems in designing, developing and implementingelectronic and information resources for functional studiesof the nervous system; and collaborations that applyparadigms from engineering, computer science or artificialneural network theory to assess the functionality ofneuroscience models and circuits.Projects may include new computational and statisticalapproaches to functional visualization; explorations oflearning capabilities of biological neurons and neuralnetworks; development of novel database structures andsearch strategies; and design of software tools that provideneuroscientists access to multimodal information.NSF expects these research programs to lead to novelsolutions for problems of neuroscience information storage,visualization, integration and communication or empiricallybased reverse engineering of the brain with emphasis ongeneric learning capabilities.  NSF encourages research onany organism that provides a good model system forneuroscience.Contact:  Carol Colby, Division of Integrative Biology andNeuroscience, Biological Sciences Directorate, NationalScience Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230,(703)306-1416.  Refer to NSF announcement 96-20.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION (NSF)Scope:  The National Science Foundation funds researchprojects aimed at understanding the structure and functionof biological macromolecules and the biochemicalcharacterization and regulation of cell metabolism andrelated processes.Deadline:  Jan. 10 and July 10.Funds:  Fiscal 1996 appropriations are pending in Congress.Typical awards are for three years and average about$80,000.Eligibility:  Higher education institutions and otherresearch institutions.Areas:  Metabolic biochemistry projects should research thecharacterization and regulation of biochemical pathways andrelated processes by which microbes and plant and animalcells transport, assimilate and derive energy fromsubstrata.Molecular biochemistry projects should include protein,nucleic acid, carbohydrate and lipid structure andinteractions; the mechanism and regulation of enzyme and RNAcatalysis; protein synthesis; bioenergetics andphotosynthesis; supramolecular structures; and biomolecularmaterials.  Molecular biophysics projects should researchthe structure, dynamics and interactions of biologicalmacromolecules by utilizing physical techniques in thethree-dimensional structure of macromolecules; assembly andarchitecture of supramolecular structures; energytransduction; structure and function of photosyntheticreaction centers and mechanisms of electron transfer inbiological systems.Contact:  For metabolic biochemistry, Robert Uffen, NationalScience Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230,(703)306-1443; e-mail, ruffen@nsf.gov.  For molecularbiochemistry, Brenda Flam, same address, same phone; e-mail,bflam@nsf.gov.  For molecular biophysics, H. StewartHendrickson, same address, same phone; e-mail,hhendric@nsf.gov; or Kamal Shukla, same address, (703)306-1444; e-mail, kshukla@nsf.gov.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRIEF AIDS INTERVENTIONS (NIMH)Scope:  The National Institute of Mental Health will fundresearch on brief prevention interventions for use by healthclinics and community organizations to prevent the spread ofHIV.Deadline:  May 1, Sept. 1 and Jan. 1.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-profit and nonprofit institutions.Areas:  NIMH seeks theoretically grounded researchapplications focusing on developing models of brief HIVprevention programs.  The agency leaves it to investigatorsto define "brief interventions" to encourage developing andtesting a range of short-term interventions that can be usedin traditional health and alternative non-healthcaresettings.  Special issues investigators must address includeconnecting with hard-to-reach populations that may not seekHIV prevention programs to change high-risk behavior; anddeveloping methods and techniques to motivate people toassess their risk for HIV and seek help in changingbehaviors.Contact:  Willo Pequegnat, Office on AIDS, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 10-75,Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-6100; fax, (301)443-9719; e-mail, wpequegn@aomh2.ssw.dhhs.gov.  Refer to PA 95-070.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH ON EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DRUG ABUSE (NIDA)Scope:  The National Institute on Drug Abuse is encouragingapplications for international research on similarities andvariations in drug abuse behaviors, factors influencing theinitiation, progression and cessation of drug abuse andsocial and health consequences of drug abuse, including HIV.Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-profit and nonprofit institutions.Areas:  This program initiative expands and advances thestudy of the interrelationship of the agent, host andenvironment to include environments across and withindifferent countries.  NIDA is looking for projects that willincrease understanding of the role of social, cultural,political and economic factors on drug abuse behaviors byexamining those factors in different national and regionalenvironments.Contact:  Moira O'Brien, Division of Epidemiology andPrevention Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600Fishers Lane, Room 9A-53, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-6637; e-mail, mobrien@aoada2.ssw.dhhs.gov.  Refer to PA 95-072.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE AND ABUSE IN RURAL AMERICA(NIDA/NIAAA/USDA)Scope:  The National Institute on Drug Abuse, the NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and theAgriculture Department are inviting applications to fosterresearch on drug and alcohol use and abuse behaviors inrural America.Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.Eligibility:  Public and private for-profit and nonprofitinstitutions.Areas:  Research should focus on drug and alcohol use andabuse behaviors in rural America, its consequences and thedelivery of appropriate prevention and treatment services.Areas include epidemiologic descriptions of patterns of drugand alcohol abuse, characteristics of those who fit patternsand of associated social, economic and environmentalfactors; documentation of the health, social, legal andeconomic consequences of drug and alcohol abuse;identification of processes associated with initiating drugand alcohol use and progression to abuse and dependence;specification of varying use and abuse patterns by cultural,ethnic, gender, age and occupational subgroups.Areas also include development and testing of innovativecommunity-based prevention and treatment strategies;development and testing of single-channel preventionstrategies, such as media-based and worksite approaches;evaluation of existing prevention/intervention/treatmentprograms for rural populations; assessments of the impact ofinterventions and outreach strategies; research on methodsfor disseminating innovative clinical practices andmanagement techniques; research on consumer choice; researchon integrating drug and alcohol abuse prevention approacheswith interventions for other problems, including violenceand HIV; studies on reaching preschool and elementarystudents; research on the operation and impact of financingmechanisms relating to substance abuse; ways to organizeservices in rural areas; and management of care in healthsystems in rural areas.Contact:  Peter Hartsock, Division of Epidemiology andPrevention Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 5600Fishers Lane, Room 9A-53, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-6720; fax, (301)443-2636; e-mail, ph45z@nih.gov.  GayleBoyd, Division of Clinical and Prevention Research, NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 6000 ExecutiveBlvd., Suite 505, Bethesda, MD 20892-7003, (301)443-8766;fax, (301)443-8774; e-mail, gboyd@willco.niaaa.nih.gov.Elizabeth Robertson, Agriculture Department, AgricultureResearch Service, Unit No. 83, Riverdale, MD 20737,(301)734-8596; e-mail, erobertson@assrr.ars45da.gov.  Referto PA 95-060.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MINORITY RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT (NIMH)Scope:  The National Institute of Mental Health is invitingapplications under a new infrastructure program to increasethe capacity of minority institutions and their faculty toconduct rigorous mental health-relevant research.Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct. 1.Funds:  Grants typically range from $100,000 to $500,000 andaverage $300,000 a year.  First-time applicants may requestsupport for three years, which may be renewable for fiveyears.Eligibility:  Primarily but not exclusively minorityinstitutions.  Institutions must serve a student bodycomprising 55 percent or more minority students; or haveserved a student body with a 30 percent minority populationfor at least three years.Areas:  Grants are to develop and/or expand existingcapacities for conducting behavioral and neuroscienceresearch in all fields related to mental health.  NIMH willprovide institutional research development support tostrengthen the institutional infrastructure and enhance thecapability of individual faculty members to undertake mentalhealth-related research; and individual investigatorresearch support for developing research scientists toconduct small grant research activities that can lead tosuccessful applications for funding under regular researchgrant mechanisms.  Applications must include developmentalcore activities and at least two fundable individualresearch projects.Contact:  Rodney Cocking, Office for Special Populations,National Institute of Mental Health, Parklawn Bldg., Room17C-14, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-3641; fax, (301)443-8552; e-mail, rc4@cu.nih.gov.  Refer toPAR 95-058.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRANSITION FROM CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY TO OVERT HEART FAILURE(NHLBI)Scope:  The National Heart, Lung and Blood Instituteencourages applications for basic research on the molecularand cellular mechanisms that lead to cardiac deteriorationand heart failure.Deadline:  Feb. 1, June 1 and Oct 1.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-profit and nonprofit institutions.Areas:  Examples of research interests include studies thatclarify the mechanisms underlying growth response of theoverloaded heart; identify the origins of peptide growthfactors and their role in ventricular wall remodeling in theadult; explain the mechanisms that enable angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to lower peripheral vascularresistance in heart failure patients and appear to reversehypertrophy of damaged myocardium; clarify the ways beta-blockers have beneficial effects on myocardial remodeling;investigate the pathophysiological consequences of immunecytokines in heart failure; examine the interactions betweencytokine action, neuroendocrine activation, and growthabnormalities in the failing heart; develop and usegenetically altered animals to explore the molecular andphysiological factors and processes responsible for heartfailure; and devise and test new therapies.Contact:  Isabella Liang, Division of Heart and VascularDiseases, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, TwoRockledge Center, Suite 9044, 6701 Rockledge Dr., Bethesda,MD 20892-7940, (301)435-0520, ext. 2; fax, (301)480-1335; e-mail, isabella_liang@nih.gov.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BEHAVIORAL PAIN RESEARCH (NIH)Scope:  The National Institute of Nursing Research and 10other National Institutes of Health funding componentsencourage applications for basic and clinical studies onpain from a variety of perspectives.Deadline:  Feb. 1., June 1 and Oct. 1.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-profit and nonprofit institutions.Areas:  The focus is on research at all levels, includingthe gene, molecule, cell and organ, with the goal ofdeveloping biobehavioral interventions to manage or preventpain.  Research topics include individual differences inpain response that may be due to factors such as geneticdifferences, endocrine activity, neural activity, immunefunction, psychological state, disability, age, gender andcultural background.  Research is also needed in areas suchas the neuroanatomical pathways and neurophysiologicalmechanisms in pain.Contact:  Mary Lucas Leveck, National Institute of NursingResearch, Natcher Bldg., Room 3AN-12, Bethesda, MD 20892-6300, (301)594-5963; e-mail, mleveck@ep.ninr.nih.gov.  Referto PA 95-056.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI)Scope:  The State Justice Institute is inviting proposalsfor state court-related improvement projects under finalfiscal 1996 grant program guidelines.  (Dec. 14 FederalRegister)Deadline:  Feb. 14 for full proposals.  SJI is not seekingconcept papers this year.Funds:  SJI estimates it will have $6 million to $9 million,but its fiscal 1996 appropriation still is pending inCongress.  SJI awards several types of grants, includingresearch and demonstration grants of up to $200,000 each.Eligibility:  State and local courts, nonprofitorganizations and higher education institutions.Areas:  Interests include projects to collect and analyzeinformation on the admissibility and quality of experttestimony on the experiences of battered women; developtraining to help battered women and their advocates to useexpert testimony on battered women's experiences; researchstate judicial decisions relating to child custodylitigation; develop training to improve handling of childcustody cases; and develop training dealing with criminaland civil aspects of interstate and international parentalchild abduction.Contact:  David Tevelin or Richard Van Duizend, StateJustice Institute, 1650 King St., Suite 600, Alexandria, VA22314, (703)684-6100.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT)Scope:  The Coast Guard is seeking applications to promoteboating safety at the national level.  (Dec. 28 FederalRegister)Deadline:  March 18.Funds:  $1.5 million for multiple awards.  Fiscal 1995awards ranged from $15,000 to $304,000.Eligibility:  National nongovernment nonprofit publicservice organiztions devoted to promoting national boatingsafety.Areas:  Areas of particular interest include development andimplementation of a national annual safe boating campaignthat targets boater market segments and specificrecreational boating safety topics; development andimplementation of a national recreational boating safetyoutreach and awareness conference for volunteers, state andlocal boating safety program organization leaders andindustry specialists to be held in the spring of 1997concurrent with a major recreational boating saftey aquaticsymposium; dissemination of a market multi-use waterwayguide to aid development of comprehensive boating managementplans; implementation of a second phase of a recreationalboating safety measures of effectiveness project; design anddevelopment of a recreational boating accident healthcarecost model; planning of public workshops addressingdevelopment of boat construction and safety standards andreporting of defects by manufacturers and others.Other areas are development of instructional materials andtraining courses for boating accident investigators;analysis and compilation of research on operatingefficiency, maneuverability characteristics and protectionfactors of propellers, propeller guards and pump jets;implementation of a program to encourage public involvementin developing voluntary boating standards; and initiation ofstate/federal/boating organization cooperative partnershipefforts to foster boating safety.Contact:  Betty Alley, Office of Navigation Safety andWaterway Services, U.S. Coast Guard (G-NAB-5/Room 1202),2100 Second St. SW, Washington, DC 20593-0001, (202)267-0954.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  NEW YORK STATE (HUD)Scope:  The Housing and Urban Development Department isinviting proposals for small community development projectsthat focus on creating or expanding jobs, meet housing needsor addressing local public facilities requirments, includinghealth needs.(Dec. 28 Federal Register)Deadline:  March 13.Funds:  $50 million for comprehensive multi-year projectsfor up to $5 million and three years; and $600,000 forsingle-purpose grants.  Previous recipients of two- orthree-year commitments at lower levels may submit new multi-year applications and "trade-up" to the higher three-yearamount.Eligibility:  Units of general local government in New Yorkstate, excluding metropolitan cities, urban counties, unitsof government participating in urban counties ormetropolitan cities and certain American Indian tribes.Areas:  Funded activities must meet a national objective,for example, meeting imminent threats to community healthand safety.  Comprehensive grants should fund projects thataddress a substantial portion of the identified communitydevelopment needs within a defined area or areas; involvetwo or more related and coordinated activities; and have abeneficial impact within a reasonable time period.  Single-purpose grants are designed to address and resolve aspecific community development need.Contact:  Stephen Rhodeside, State and Small Cities Div.,Office of Community Planning and Development, Housing andUrban Development Department, Room 7184, 451 Seventh St. SW,Washington, DC 20410, (202)708-1322.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRANTS CALENDARMONTH/GRANT PROGRAM/AGENCY          IN HGCW         CONTACTFEBRUARY 1Olfactory Neurogenesis (NIDCD/NIA)          09/25/95(301)402-3464Prescription Drug Use, Abuse and Diversion (NIDA/NIMH)08/28/95     (301)443-0107Research in Reproduction (NICHD)          11/20/95(301)496-6515Research Infrastructure in Minority Institutions (NCRR/ORMH)10/23/95     (301)435-0760Research on Atherosclerosis (NHLBI)          08/28/95(301)435-0550Research on U.S. Immigration (NICHD)          12/04/95(301)496-1174Research on Violence and Trauma (NIMH)          10/16/95(301)443-3728School-Based Prevention Research (NIDA)          08/28/95(301)443-1514FEBRUARY 6Healthcare Financing Research (HCFA)          11/20/95(410)786-6643Enhanced Research Instrumentation (DoE)          12/11/95FEBRUARY 8Markers of Uterine Receptivity for Blastocyst Implantation(NICHD)          09/25/95     (301)496-6515Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOOLS OF THE TRADE:  THE FEDERAL REGISTERThe Federal Register -- the federal government's 60-year-oldregulatory affairs reporter -- remains a key grantseekingtool, even in the electronic age.The Register last month announced free access to its ownsearchable electronic version.And despite increased use of the Internet by agencies toadvertise funding opportunities directly, the Register isthe forum of choice for certain health-related funders.In addition to running grant notices, the Register alsoupdates readers daily on critical rules, regulations andactions that shape grant competitions.By following official developments, grantseekers can stay ontop of changes that could affect their eligibility under agrant program or effect new procedures and requirements.In its electronic form, readers can have a custom-tailoredRegister.  Instead of slogging through pages of extraneoustext, readers can go straight to notices from agencies ofinterest."It's what they've always asked for," says RichardClaypoole, director of the Federal Register.And the electronic version has caught on, he says.  Evenbefore the Register went public,  subscribers logged 558,369document retrievals from 103,722 searches from November toDecember.In whatever form, grantseekers can use the Federal Registerto:*  Mine grant nuggets:  The Health Resources and ServicesAdministration, Centers for Disease Control and EnergyDepartment regularly use the Federal Register to announcegrant competitions.Browsers will find health-related Education Departmentnotices and health and life science notices from theAgriculture Department and the Environmental ProtectionAgency.*  Check on winners:  A few agencies, such as the Housingand Urban Development Department, use the Federal Registerto announce recent awards.  Announcements are occasional,but they can provide insights about program constituents andreveal subgrant and subcontracting possibilities.*  Respond to proposed program rules and funding priorities:Laws creating grant programs often require agencies topublish regulations before getting down to grantmaking.Grantseekers can influence program direction by commentingon the proposals appearing in the Federal Register.*  Keep up with grant-related policies:  The Registerprovides the full text on government-wide policies affectinggrants and contracts, such as Office of Management andBudget circulars related to university research costs.*In fact, revisions to OMB Circular A-21, which deals withuniversity costs, could hit the Register late this month.*  Learn about meetings:  Agencies publish announcements formeetings, ranging from preapplication workshops and advisorygroup sessions to policy-setting forums, including meetingson grantseekers' home turf.  Notices specify when and wheremeetings will be held and which parts will be open to thepublic.But the Federal Register also has its drawbacks -- for hardcopy and electronic users.  Agencies used to solicitinggrant applications via the Register sometimes bypass thepublication these days, finding it faster and easier to gowith electronic announcements.For example, EPA's 1996 grant competition, announced on theInternet last month, has yet to make it into the Register.Unless their announcements have regulatory impact, saysClaypoole, agencies are not required to publish applicationnotices in the Register.And whether users are hard copy or on-screen readers, theyroutinely must slog through pages of often confusinglegalese.  To make things easier, the Federal Registeroffice regularly holds workshops on how to use the system.The 1996 schedule includes workshops in and out ofWashington.Other efforts to make life easier include a new column onregulations taking effect that day a daily reminder ofimpending closing dates for comments on proposed rules. --Pam MooreContact:  The paper Federal Register is $375 a year from theSuperintendent of Documents, U.S. Government PrintingOffice, Washington, DC, (202)783-3238.Logging Into The Federal RegisterGPO Access, an online service of the Government PrintingOffice, provides searchable versions of the Federal Registerthrough the Internet.  Tap into this resource for free via:*  Telnet to swais.access.gpo.gov., login as guest;*  The World Wide Web athttp://www.access.gpo.gov/su_dics/aces/aaces001; or*  The World Wide Web athttp://thorplus.lib.purdue.edu/gpo/.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AGRICULTURE SETS RULES FOR GRANT PROGRAMSThe Agriculture Department last month caught up on year-endhousekeeping, issuing final rules for its $100 millionNational Competitive Research Grants program, which includeshealth-related grants categories.The rules add nothing new but finally codify forgrantseekers evolving administrative procedures that governgrant competitions.  Affected programs include:*  National Competitive Research Initiative Grants Program.In a Dec. 8 Federal Register notice, USDA issued final rulesspecifically defining the types of research funded under theprogram and explaining award mechanisms.The rules are effective immediately and should be consultedfor the fiscal 1996 competition, currently underway.*  Higher Education Challenge Grants.  A Dec. 19 FederalRegister notice proposed rules for the program, which closedits outlining matching grants requirements and underscoringprogram focus on strengthening institutional capacities forteaching food and agricultural sciences.Grants -- $4 million in fiscal 1996 -- to four-year collegesand universities fund projects to enhance curriculum,faculty, scientific instrumentation, instruction and studentrecruitment.  Proposed rules define eligibility, establishthe requirement for a match without setting the amount anddescribe eligible activities.  Comments on proposed rulesare due Jan. 18.*  1890 Capacity Building Grants.  A Dec. 20 FederalRegister notice proposed rules for soliciting, submittingand evaluating applications for teaching project grants andresearch grants to 16 historically black 1890 land-grantinstitutions and Tuskegee University.  Comments on proposedrules are due Jan. 19.Contact:  To comment on proposed rules, Jeffrey Gilmore,Office of Higher Education Programs, Cooperative StateResearch, Education and Extension Service, AgricultureDepartment, Ag Box 2251, Washington, DC 20250-2251,(202)720-1973; fax, (202)720-2030; e-mail,jgilmore@reeusda.gov.For the National Competitive Research Initiative, SallyRockey, same address, Ag Box 2240, Washington, DC 20250-2240, (202)401-1761.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-4IA086-000615-B039-183http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh51.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015345 text/html 116133HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:51:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:40 GMTContent-length: 115945Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh51.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DEMAND FOR SKIN RESURFACING KEYS TODAY'S SURGICAL LASER SALES (2104 words) BAXTER'S SPIN-OFF GAMBIT: A 1993 IDEA WHOSE TIME HAS COME (1129 words) LEAVES FALL, FUR FLIES AT BAXTER IN NOVEMBER (198 words) MOST VENDORS BULLISH, UNDAUNTED BY LATEST GPO MEGA-MERGER (562 words) ============= APPLIED VASCULAR GAINS FDA NOD FOR CORONARY STENT TRIALS (166 words) BAXTER ACQUIRES PSICOR, A PERFUSIONIST PROVIDER, FOR $80 MILLION (115 words) SMITH & NEPHEW RICHARDS TO OFFER DATABASE PROGRAM TO ORTHOPODS (111 words) PICKER, AT&T CAPITAL AGREE TO EQUIPMENT FINANCING PACT (133 words) COMDISCO SURVEY: IMAGING SALES SUFFER AGAIN IN 1995 (311 words) SMITH & NEPHEW TAKES BLUE PENCIL TO BEWILDERING BUSINESS UNIT NAME LINEUP (187 words) ETHICON ENDO ACQUIRES ULTRASONIC INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURER (160 words) IMPROVED DISEASE MANAGEMENT THE GOAL OF DORNIER/ACOUSTIC IMAGING COMBO (140 words) STERIS-AMSCO MERGER BRINGS TOGETHER CENTRALIZED AND DECENTRALIZED PROCESSORS (223 words) Standard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreement (103 words) Isolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two group (165 words) Midmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medical (73 words) Enterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreement (117 words) McKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health care (56 words) Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc., (137 words) Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contract (94 words) Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of its (38 words) BOEHRINGER MANNHEIM DIAGNOSTICS' FAST ASSAY DIAGNOSES HEART ATTACKS (530 words) IMPLANTABLE PUMP MARKS STRATO/INFUSAID'S RE- ENTRY INTO PAIN MANAGEMENT MARKET (438 words) I-FLOW PROMOTES SIMPLE, LOW COST BAND-IT SYRINGE DELIVERY SYSTEM (439 words) OUTCOMES STUDIES BECOMING A "MUST" FOR SUCCESSFUL DEVICE SALES (425 words) EXCITEMENT AND FLASH SEEMED MISSING FROM 1995 RSNA SHOW (989 words) Conmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions in (128 words) Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicine (45 words) United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that a (122 words) Innovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, and (63 words) Picker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear Medicine (45 words) Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial World (61 words) EDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned that (74 words) SangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) with (73 words) UroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-national (111 words) The American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in November (32 words) Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearing (90 words) Oliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stock (92 words) Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge, (75 words) Bracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters to (28 words) 3M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View (98 words) Healthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materials (65 words) Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators, (51 words) Heraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-based (49 words) United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced a (87 words) Image Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tact (42 words) WORTH READING . . . (216 words) OUTCOMES ANALYSIS CAN WIN OVER TOUGH AUDIENCES (957 words) OWENS, HENRY SCHEIN MARKETING TANDEM CREATES "VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION" (464 words) BAXTER'S NEW SUPPLY CHAIN PLAN WORRIES SOME VENDORS (250 words) KENTUCKY DISTRIBUTORS TO MERGE (210 words) SHOW BIZ . . . (257 words) TRADING PLACES . . . (410 words) PRODUCER PRICE INDEX INCHES 0.1% HIGHER IN NOVEMBER; MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY 0.3% (195 words) PURCHASING MANAGERS: MANUFACTURING SLOWS FOR FOURTH STRAIGHT MONTH (305 words) Wright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was elected (156 words) Baxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairman (152 words) Medline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of the (139 words) HIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations for (40 words) Behring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head of (45 words) Rusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of this (42 words) B&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named director (50 words) Varian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named national (71 words) Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel, (42 words) Owens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver division (28 words) CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEMAND FOR SKIN RESURFACING KEYS TODAY'SSURGICAL LASER SALESBy Curt WernerFor those companies canny enough to capitalize on the trend, fallingreimbursements and the search for private pay patients have provento be the salvation for manufacturers in the surgical laser segment.Baby Boomers closing in on their fifties have spawned the latestrage--laser skin resurfacing--and turned it into a mini-bonanza forsmart, technologically adept vendors. What's more, physicians inseveral specialties can perform the procedures, includingdermatologists, plastic surgeons, facial plastic surgeons andophthalmologists, which broadens the universe of purchasers for themachines and moves them from the hospital to the physician'soffice.But for vendors that have fallen behind in turning their products intomulti-use tools, the past few years have been a trying time.Like presidential polls, the surgical laser market is subject to fast-changing national mood swings. Just two years ago, lasers thatwere used to correct severe snoring problems were the hot tickets.But that market has faded.The key to success in sales of today's sophisticated, expensivelasers is finding a range of uses for them. Said one capitalequipment contracting executive for a major group purchasingorganization, "When you spend about $100,000 for a laser, youwant to make sure it doesn't end up sitting around gathering dust ina corner somewhere."Credit manufacturers and the medical community for finding scoresof applications for lasers. Medical miracles like excising canceroustissue and cells, coronary angioplasty, and a variety of laparoscopicsurgeries are part of the laser equation. But so is removingsomewhat more benign unwanted things like warts and wrinkles. Infact, it is precisely that "aesthetics market" that drives the surgicallaser segment today.And what powers that aesthetics market is the public itself.Providers and surgical laser manufacturers have literally teamed upin several cases to promote laser skin resurfacing. They havecapitalized on the yen for reversing the aging process by spreadingthe word about the possibilities of surgical lasers through countlessnewspaper and consumer magazine articles, network news showsand even infomercials.Financially speaking, probably the best part of this scenario forphysicians and vendors alike is the fact that men and women who goto their doctors for laser skin resurfacing are that most precious ofcommodities these managed care days: private pay patients. Fewinsurers will pay for elective skin resurfacing procedures. "Doctorsare looking for private pay patients, and aesthetics fits right in," saysKaren Amburgey, vice president of marketing for Sharplan Lasers,Inc., a manufacturer that is based in Allendale, N.J., listed on theAmerican Stock Exchange, but owned by an Israeli corporation,Laser Industries, Ltd., Tel Aviv.For Sharplan and its competitors, like Coherent, Inc., Palo Alto,Calif., Heraeus Surgical, Milpitas, Calif., and the dozens of upstartcompanies with revenues below the half million dollar mark, thestakes are big and the rewards may be great. According to a June1995 report published by Frost & Sullivan, Mountain View, Calif.,the worldwide surgical laser market topped $203 million in 1994.Factoring in a growth rate of 12.8% in 1995 and 14.1% to 15.4%through 1998, the market will swell to $429 million globally by theyear 2000. The U.S. dominates in laser revenues, holding morethan 55% of the market, the report said.Laser's "Swiss Army Knife"Surgical solid-state lasers and surgical gas lasers will continue togarner the largest share of the dollars by far. Some relatively newlaser technology is beginning to have an impact on the market,particularly on the solid-state side. Leading that technology race areholmium:yttrium aluminum garnet (or Ho:YAG) andneodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) lasers. Ruby lasers and potassiumtitanyl phosphate (KTP) devices are also in the solid-state market.The Ho:YAG laser is rising in importance in the orthopedics market.This type, known as the "Swiss Army Knife" of lasers, has been inuse for about six years, mostly in arthroscopy and diskectomy(though high-powered Ho:YAG devices have been on the scene forless than three years). Reflecting the trend for multi-useapplications, Ho:YAG lasers, which cost between $40,000 and$150,000 depending on power capabilities, are being utilized ingeneral surgery, urology, neurosurgery, lithotripsy, angioplasty anddentistry. Because of their ability to be used in blood and salineenvironments, Ho:YAGs are also being wheeled into the surgicalsuite for gynecological procedures.A March 1995 report from ECRI, Plymouth Meeting, Pa., therespected technological assessment company, cautioned hospitallaser purchasers about the high price tag, but added, "The ability ofa laser to be used in several specialties may help justify itsacquisition." ECRI recommended that hospitals that plan to acquireonly one laser bring in the CO2 laser (for its precise cutting abilityand low cost) or the Ho:YAG/Nd:YAG combination laser, whichcan be used for many types of procedures. Combination lasers, likethose produced by Coherent, Inc., sell for approximately $150,000.At the same time, ECRI said that the Ho:YAG laser is "poised forrapid and widespread use."Here's how a few of the players in the laser market are handling thesales, marketing and the major trends in the industry today:Sharplan's Strength In Snoring And AestheticsAlthough the laparoscopy market has been a "mainstay market" forSharplan since the mid-1970s, more recently the snoring andaesthetics markets have been the keys to its success. Through thefirst nine months of 1995, the company had $36.5 million in sales,up 26% from the same period in 1994. Sales of more than $50million (up 36%) are expected for 1995. According to Sharplan'sAmburgey, her company splits the aesthetics market evenly withCoherent (45% each), with the remainder going to smaller, low-endcompanies.The Silk Touch(TM) laser line is Sharplan's biggest seller. Likeother vendors' product lines, several versions are available.Products range from a compact 40-watt model to a high-powered100-watt device, varying in price from $70,000 to $130,000. TheSilk Touch is not intended to be limited to hospital use, and itspricing is aimed at the broader physician's office market. In itspresentation to physicians, Sharplan touts its laser as the "GoldStandard" for aesthetic CO2 laser surgery.According to Amburgey, selling to the office market is relativelysimple since the number of decision-makers is limited and physicianautonomy is strong. But even office-based physicians wantflexibility. For example, an ear, nose and throat doctor in a grouppractice setting may also work with physicians who perform skinresurfacing with the same machine. But in the hospital market, shetold HIT, managed care has made providers very price sensitive.And while Sharplan markets its product to hospitals, hospitals aremarketing the product to physicians. "Hospitals use lasers to enticephysicians to perform their procedures in the hospital rather than intheir offices in order to bring revenue into the hospital," Amburgeysaid.Sharplan uses medical journal advertising only as a supplement tobuild name recognition, as it is doing in the ophthalmic market.Instead, it places heavy emphasis on courses. This is where thecompany can educate doctors about the benefits of the variousprocedures, allow them to mingle with their peers, then make theirbuying decisions. Most physicians come to the courses alreadydecided, Amburgey said. Courses sponsored by Sharplan andothers are everywhere, just as they were with the snoringphenomenon.Sharplan makes sure that the public is exposed to hot, new laserprocedures such as work on leg veins, hair removal andphotorefractive keratectomy (the subject of next month's HealthIndustry Today Market Memo). This is where the company believesthe payoff is. To stimulate public interest, and to help its physiciancustomers sell their services, Sharplan provides a slick package ofmarketing aids that includes videos, brochures, slides and countercards complete with striking "before and after" shots. Amburgeyand her staff have been successful in keeping laser skin resurfacingin the public eye with articles placed in publications like Self(August 1995), Allure (June 1995) and Vogue (September 1995).The strategy seems to be working. "Skin resurfacing is peaking nowbut should go on for another six to 12 months before windingdown," Amburgey said. She estimates that about 150,000 patientshave already been treated with Sharplan lasers, which are used byabout 750 physicians in the U.S.Heraeus SurgicalLaserSonics(R) is Heraeus' laser division, and it has been inoperation for more than 20 years. Privately held Heraeus, whichwas founded in 1851 and is headquartered in Germany, also has anintegrated operating room division that offers products such assurgical lighting systems, surgical tables and video systems. Anarrangement with Minneapolis-based CVAC Corp. gives it access toa smoke evacuation system as well, and all of the above can be soldwith LaserSonics' products. The laser lines include a series of CO2and Nd:YAG lasers, along with accessories such as hand pieces andmicro-manipulators.LaserSonics' CO2 lasers, introduced in late 1994, are used bygynecologists, ENT physicians, and more recently, in dermatologyand plastic surgery away from the hospital setting. The company'sNd:YAG lasers are used by urologists, gastroenterologists, thoracicsurgeons and ENT docs.The Paragon(TM) CO2 laser was released in January 1995 andlaunched in April 1995, and since then, sales have "exceededexpectations," a company spokesperson said. The Paragon line ispopular for laser skin resurfacing and is used in both private practiceand hospital settings.In January 1995, Heraeus introduced the Hercules 5100 ("thesmallest, 100 watt Nd:YAG laser ever developed" and the "firstNd:YAG laser to combine high power in a convenient and portabledesign"). The device is on a 15"x20" base that allows it to fit intolarge and small surgical suites, plus it has standard powerrequirements to sidestep special electrical connections. It's also "fivetimes faster than any other Nd:YAG laser on the market," thecompany says, which allows surgeons to work faster and stillprovide effective coagulation and minimal tissue trauma duringsurgery.Heraeus has a 35-member direct sales force, with some devoted tolaser sales, some to the O.R. equipment, plus a few distributors tocover sales in outlying areas. They also have "clinical instructors"on the payroll--nurses that handle inservice and add credibility tolaser sales. Heraeus also has a 20-member field service departmentthat supports both O.R. and laser sales, something of an oddityamong laser vendors.For Heraeus, the titles of purchasing decision makers have notchanged much over the past few years. It's still a group decision dueto the high cost involved, and the group includes purchasing staff,O.R. supervisors/managers, biomedical and administration. "Thedocs still drive the decision by their product preferences," saidDoreen Smillie, marketing communications manager for Heraeus."We start with the physicians, and they will drive it for you, but youneed buy-in from the others."As it does for its competitors, multi-use sells. Says Smillie, "It'seasier to get an approval when two or three departments can use onemachine. That's where our strength is, along with merging our O.R.and laser equipment."Increasing the number of national accounts tops the Heraeus agendafor 1996. "As a company goal, we're trying to add more nationalaccounts in 1996," said Smillie. Heraeus has an agreement with St.Louis-based AmeriNet. Craig Lingel, the recently promoted vicepresident of sales, handles national accounts.Heraeus has positioned its laser prices below market leaderCoherent. "We're $20,000 to $30,000 cheaper than Coherent,"Smillie said. The company's 1996 prices: 50-watt $65,000; 70-watt$73,000; 100-watt $89,000. Heraeus' 70- and 100-watt models areused predominantly in hospitals. The 50-watt models are intendedfor private practice settings.To promote its laser products, Heraeus presents many workshops inspecialty settings such as gynecology, urology and ENT.Workshops are presented along with CME credits in an unbiasedinstitution.Heraeus also relies heavily on trade shows. Among them are theAssn. of Operating Room Nurses, American Academy ofDermatology, American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery,American College of Gynecology, American Academy ofGynecological Laparoscopy and the American Urology Assn.Heraeus abandoned the American College of Surgeons in 1993."We didn't get a lot out of it," Smillie told HIT.Heraeus doesn't place many journal ads "because decision makersvary and it's hard to find publications that hit both of our productlines." The only ad that did appear in 1995 was found in SurgicalProducts magazine, and there are no plans for more or less than thatin 1996. Direct mail efforts are made in conjunction with tradeshows.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996BAXTER'S SPIN-OFF GAMBIT: A 1993 IDEA WHOSE TIMEHAS COMEBy Curt WernerJim Tobin and Tony White shared an enjoyable laugh a few daysafter their Thanksgiving dinners when Baxter Internationalannounced plans to spin off its hospital supply business. The twoformer top-level Baxter executives, chief architects of exactly thesame spin-off plan that the company stubbornly repudiated twoyears ago, left Deerfield in December 1993 in the wake of a powerstruggle with chairman and CEO Vernon R. Loucks over the plan.Now, Tobin told Health Industry Today in an exclusive interviewthat he feels "vindicated" over the outcome. "I can't find anythingthat is different than what we did two years ago," he said. "It was agood plan then, and they wasted two years in not implementing it."Tobin and White's distribution spin-off plan has been on the shelfsince November 1993.During those two years, Baxter has floundered a bit, and its marketshare in the medical-surgical distribution business has been flat, aparticularly disheartening development for Baxter shareholders,since the company's main competitor, Owens & Minor, Inc.,Richmond, Va., has fought off some doldrums of its own andjumped its share to more than 21% in 1994 from about 8% in 1990.Today, Tobin serves as president and chief operating officer ofBiogen Inc., a Cambridge, Mass.-based biotech concern, whileWhite is an executive with Perkins-Elmer Corp., Norwalk, Conn.And unlike his former employer, Tobin's company is doing justfine. Biogen just received approval from an FDA advisorycommittee for Avonex, a naturally occurring beta interferon drugthat is used to slow the progression of multiple sclerosis. Biogenstock shot up about $11 in one mid-December week to about $64.Baxter's stock price languished in the low $20 range for months,before perking up of late to the low $40s as analysts hailed theultimate implementation of Tobin's bold strategy.Many say that Baxter's gambit has returned the company to its 1985American Hospital Supply pre-merger look. That was the year thetwo big corporations merged in a $3.8 billion blockbuster deal.Baxter had 1994 sales of approximately $9.32 billion. The spin-offwould split the company into two companies with sales of about $5billion each."Milking HS Into Mediocrity"Now that the spin-off has been set into motion and the genie is outof the bottle, Tobin believes that the new Baxter Hospital Supply(HS), by whatever name it chooses, must look at getting bigger."HS business, when the debt is split, is around book value. Itmakes sense [for an investment firm] to buy it from Baxter, installcost-oriented management, double the profits and take it public forbig bucks." He feels that investors could "use it, fix it and make itthe core of building a powerful medical supply company."Hospital Supply is a good, strong business even though marginswere thin two years ago and they're thin now (Editor's note:Published estimates are that Baxter's hospital supplies andmanagement side has a 5% to 6% profit margin, while the BaxterInternational technology side comes in at between 14% and 15%.).But the business is worse off than it was two years ago. The boardlooked at the performance over the past two years and decided tohead back to Plan A."The structures [of Baxter's manufacturing and distributiondivisions] are vastly different and need to be run differently. As longas the numbers are aggregated, you'll always under-invest in oneside or another. And running a business for cash is like going out ofbusiness slowly. They've been milking the HS business intomediocrity."Unlocking Baxter Distribution BooksEveryone has a theory about Baxter's big move, and the somewhatunexpected consensus from the vendor community seems to be thatBaxter's plan is good for the industry as a whole. Tom Sherry, vicepresident of sales and marketing for Owens & Minor, waspractically elated over the news. "It's great for Owens, and it's greatfor distribution. Now we will have an industry comparison. We'llbe able to show the cost of a sale, and we'll be able to show thatwe're the low-cost provider." Sherry predicts Baxter will intensifyits marketing efforts on behalf of its stockless/just-in-time ValueLinkDivision and its Procedure Based Delivery System (advancedcustom packs).Ted Almon, who heads another Baxter distribution competitor,Providence, R.I.-based Claflin Co., called the new Baxter "asouped-up American Hospital Supply" that could become a bettercompetitor in the distribution market. He envisions a strongerrelationship between Baxter and branded manufacturers in the wakeof the spin-off. However, Almon cautioned that not all the pieceswill necessarily fall neatly into place for the new Baxter. "If growingpains and start-up problems and a lack of strategic direction surface,the result could prove to be an advantage for Baxter's competition."Stronger words came from Pete DeBusk, president of DeRoyalIndustries, Inc., Powell, Tenn., who is convinced that shareholderpressure drove Baxter's decision. "It takes the old Baxter and itsblood substitute and greatly appreciates the value of its stock," hetold HIT. "Vernon Loucks is running the show, and he wants toenhance the company's stock value, realign the company and makethe industry happy. He can't lose."It's the first wise thing he [Loucks] has done in a long while."DeBusk believes that Baxter must "realign the distribution businessand run it mean and lean because it won't have the manufacturingside to carry it. Distribution has to stand on its own and fight.Baxter will take on a whole new look and realize it must look at themargins it must have in order to make it in today's market. It's gonefrom a consumer side to a supplier side economy because theservices required of customers today are expensive and distributorsare finding out they've under-priced their product tremendously."As soon as news of Baxter's split hit the national media, the rumormill began to churn out a few interesting possibilities. One was thata number of suitors were in line for Baxter's distribution arm.Names of heavyweight drug wholesalers surfaced, such as SanFrancisco-based McKesson Corp. and Orange, Calif.-based BergenBrunswig Corp. The Houston-based food giant, Sysco Corp., wasanother name in the mill, though Baxter's reportedly longrelationship with Sysco's arch-rival, Kraft Foods, could precludesuch a transaction.Post-spin-off rumors have also persisted that Baxter Internationalwas in talks aimed at acquiring the National Medical Care Inc.kidney-dialysis business operated by W.R. Grace & Co., anacquisition that would carry a steep price tag estimated at about $4.5billion. Three weeks after those rumors arose, however, little hasoccurred, and observers have privately questioned Baxter's desire toenter the provider field.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEAVES FALL, FUR FLIES AT BAXTER IN NOVEMBERAs usual, it was another extremely hectic month of November atBaxter International. The saga opens in November 1985 whenBaxter merged with American Hospital Supply. Then, the timelineskips to November 1992, when Baxter announced plans for its ill-fated $376 million acquisition of the medical-surgical distributorStuart Medical, Inc., Greensburg, Pa., a controversial deal that wasaborted just a few short months later in February 1993. Also inNovember 1992, Baxter spun off its Northbrook, Ill.-basedCaremark International Inc. unit, which it purchased for $586million in 1987.There's more. It was November 1993 when Baxter and San Diego-based American Healthcare Systems announced the signing of afive-year, $4 billion corporate agreement, then the largest of its kindin the industry. In November 1994, the industry was againsurprised when Baxter was named the fourth authorized distributionagent of Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc.In the most recent November, of course, Baxter said it would spinoff its hospital supply operations.Next November? Who knows? Mail (5350 So. Roslyn, Suite 400,Englewood, CO 80111), phone (303-290-8500) or fax (303-290-9025) reader predictions to Health Industry Today. We'll print thebest ideas next month.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MOST VENDORS BULLISH, UNDAUNTED BY LATEST GPOMEGA-MERGERMedical-surgical supply vendors in general reacted positively to thestunning news of the latest giant merger between group purchasingorganizations. In late November, Charlotte, N.C.-based SunHealthAlliance announced plans to join with two other newly mergedbuying groups--Premier Health Alliance, Westchester, Ill., andAmerican Healthcare Systems, San Diego--in a move thatconfounded widespread rumors that had SunHealth headed towardan alliance with Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc. At press time, thedeal was awaiting ratification by SunHealth's 152 shareholders.The big merger creates a huge, highly compliant, far-flung healthcare network that includes more than 240 owner systems that ownor operate 650 hospitals and other assorted facilities, in addition toanother 1,000 affiliate members in all 50 states representingapproximately 315,000 licensed beds. Estimates are that total annualpurchasing volume for the new network could top the $10 billionmark. SunHealth alone chipped in about $2 billion to that total.However, lurking in the shadows is a degree of uncertainty spurredby rumors of member defections from the new group due todisapproval of the merger terms or the addition of competinghospitals to the new network.Pete DeBusk, president of DeRoyal Industries, Inc., Powell, Tenn.,is convinced that the formation of the super-group will help hiscompany. DeRoyal had contracts with SunHealth and Premier, butnot with AmHS, so the new network will increase DeBusk'sopportunities significantly. However, he is just as convinced that thebig network's buying power won't be able to reduce prices as muchas some think it can. "Prices are on the bottom," he told HIT. "Wecan't operate at the margins we have now." In fact, DeBusk predicts"tremendous" price increases for 1996. "It's bad. Rises in rawmaterials prices have never been passed on, and manufacturers havebeen devastated."The industry must sit up and take notice that there will be furtherprice increases, especially for distribution, and it's to our benefit tosupport distributors. We shouldn't take a hostile approach to theneeds of the distribution business," he said.Another happy customer is Jon Mills, president of MedlineIndustries, Inc., Mundelein, Ill., whose company signed a two-year, $4 million-a-year contract with SunHealth last summer. LikeDeBusk, Mills praised the new combination. He believes the moveto Premier/AmHS will give his company an opportunity to increaseits sales. Mills, also like DeBusk, feels that the new network won'tdrive prices further downward. "Any GPO has great poweralready," he said. "Anybody would be honored to have theirbusiness, but most prices are as low as they can be right now."Not everything is rosy, however. The formation of the supergroupdoes leave some unanswered questions. Several observers feel thatvendors are going to have to sharpen their pencils even further thanbefore, and some are edgy over possible demands of the new group.A few may even walk away from their contracts, frustrated oversharp administrative fees, reporting requirements, contractimplementation demands and approaches to the supply contractsthemselves. Other vendors may be perplexed over their future andwary of possible leadership clashes within the new group.There's general agreement, however, that the rise of the new group(by whatever name it chooses) is a daring stroke. Said Kim Bearceof NCI, Rancho Santa Margarita, Calif., "Nothing sinceColumbia/HCA is as brave and as bold." Few could argue.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996APPLIED VASCULAR GAINS FDA NOD FOR CORONARYSTENT TRIALSApplied Vascular Engineering, Inc., Santa Rosa, Calif., will beginclinical trials for its coronary stent delivery system following theFDA's investigational device exemption (IDE) approval for its MicroStent(TM). The result is believed to be the first clinical trial to utilizethe Palmaz-Schatz stent from Johnson & Johnson InterventionalSystems, Warren, N.J., as the concurrent control. For now, theJ&J product is the only coronary stent approved for the reduction ofrestenosis in the U.S.Currently sold outside the U.S., the Micro Stent system is alsodesigned to prevent restenosis, the reclosing of arteries opened byan angioplasty procedure.The clinical trial is called SMART (Study of Micro Stent's Ability tolimit Restenosis Trial). SMART is believed to be the first device-approval study to incorporate the use of ticlopidine, which isemerging as the primary anticoagulation medication for stentpatients. The trial, which began in November, will involve up to 20U.S. medical centers with patient enrollment expected to lastapproximately six months.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996BAXTER ACQUIRES PSICOR, A PERFUSIONIST PROVIDER,FOR $80 MILLIONJust days before the announcement of its controversial split, BaxterHealthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., disclosed that it had acquiredSan Diego-based Psicor, a provider of cardiovascular perfusionservices to hospitals that perform open heart surgery. Theacquisition cost Baxter approximately $80 million.The purchase is designed to bolster Baxter's ability to offercustomers a set of products and services on a capitated basis. Psicoris said to have about 400 hospitals as its customers and reported1994 sales of about $82 million. The deal follows Baxter's purchaseearlier this year of Seta, Inc., another company that offersperfusionists--clinicians who operate heart-lung bypass machinesused during open heart procedures--to hospitals on a contract basis.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SMITH & NEPHEW RICHARDS TO OFFER DATABASEPROGRAM TO ORTHOPODSSmith & Nephew Richards, Memphis, Tenn., has signed a five-yearagreement with Summit Medical Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, thatwill provide database software products to orthopedic specialists.Under terms of the deal, Smith & Nephew Richards will marketSummit Medical-developed proprietary orthopedic clinical outcomesdatabase products in the U.S. Programs related to hip, knee andshoulder procedures will be offered, along with a health status andpatient satisfaction program. Smith & Nephew Richards makes theprograms available to physicians as a value-added service.Summit Medical will also maintain a national database of orthopedicoutcomes information for Smith & Nephew Richards that willenable specialists to compare their results against nationalbenchmarks.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996PICKER, AT&T CAPITAL AGREE TO EQUIPMENTFINANCING PACTPicker International, Cleveland, and AT&T Capital Corp.,Morristown, N.J., have become equal equity partners in a jointventure that will provide customer financing to hospitals, clinics andother users of Picker's medical imaging systems and relatedequipment. The 10-year agreement is expected to result in financingarrangements of as much as $400 million during the first five yearsalone.Picker Financial Group has amassed net leased assets of $85 millionin the three years since it was founded. That rapid growth led theGroup to seek a partner with international capabilities.The partnership will likely result in a wider array of true-lease andconditional-sale financial products, as well as more customerservices during the lease term. The annual worldwide leasing marketfor imaging equipment has been estimated at approximately $3billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996COMDISCO SURVEY: IMAGING SALES SUFFER AGAIN IN1995With all modalities reporting increases in average age, the year 1995marked a second straight sub-par year for diagnostic imagingequipment sales, according to the fifth annual study of acquisitiontrends by Comdisco, Inc., Rosemont, Ill. The survey polled morethan 3,600 hospitals. The bad news was worst for the magneticresonance imaging sector, where the average age of installed MRIsrose to 5.5 years in 1995 from 3.1 years as recently as 1992. A full70% of all MRIs are now more than three years old, compared withjust 35% in 1992.The study found that the oldest and most pervasive technology in themarket remains radiography/fluoroscopy (R&F). The average age ofequipment in that sector has now hit 10.1 years, up from 7.9 yearsin 1992. About two-thirds of current R&F systems are more thanseven years old, and one in five are more than 15 years old. Thesystems are installed in 95% of all U.S. hospitals.On the CT side, 75% of scanners are now more than three years old,up from 64% in 1994. Almost one-third (31%) of hospitalssurveyed have cardiac catheterization labs installed, significantlymore than the 20% that had cath labs in 1993. Eighty-four percent ofnuclear medicine devices in surveyed hospitals are now more thanthree years old.Comdisco Medical Equipment Group president Kenneth A.Halverson blames "market-driven reform" for the bad news. Part ofthat reform is centered on integrated delivery networks, theemergence of which has created redundancies in many modalities.He added, however, that "the tide may be turning," since hiscompany, which provides equipment leasing and other services,entered 1996 with a record backlog of orders. Comdisco hadanother record year in reconditioned diagnostic imaging equipmentin 1995, with shipments totaling $28 million, up 17% from 1994,when shipments jumped 68% from the previous year.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SMITH & NEPHEW TAKES BLUE PENCIL TOBEWILDERING BUSINESS UNIT NAME LINEUPAs part of a broader strategy calling for names of the group'sbusinesses to reflect the medical disciplines they serve, areorganization--including a name change--has been instituted byMemphis, Tenn.-based Smith & Nephew Richards. Under thechanges, which took effect Jan. 1, the company is now known asSmith & Nephew Orthopaedics. The new unit will be headed by thecompany's current president, Larry Papasan.There's more. Smith & Nephew Richards' medical specialtiesdivision based in Bartlett, Tenn., will become Smith & NephewENT (ear, nose and throat). James Duncan, president of the medicalspecialties division, will stay on as president of Smith & NephewENT.The orthopedic accessories and continuous passive motionrehabilitation exercise equipment product lines, currently part of themedical specialties division, are being reassigned to Smith &Nephew Orthopaedics and Smith & Nephew Rehabilitationrespectively. Early in 1995, the old Smith & Nephew Dyonicsbecame Smith & Nephew Endoscopy while Smith & NephewRoylan became Smith & Nephew Rehabilitation. Smith & NephewRichards will remain a principal brand name for both Smith &Nephew Orthopaedics and Smith & Nephew ENT products.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996ETHICON ENDO ACQUIRES ULTRASONIC INSTRUMENTMANUFACTUREREthicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, is the only company tooffer a full line of both videoscopic (minimally invasive surgery)and ultrasonic surgical instruments, following its acquisition ofUltraCision, Inc., Smithfield, R.I. UltraCision is a pioneer in thearea of ultrasonic technology and the developer and manufacturer ofthe Harmonic Scalpel(TM), a device that uses ultrasound power tomake surgical incisions with minimal tissue damage. Theacquisition, for undisclosed terms, will boost Ethicon Endo'sproduct offerings in the area of videoscopic surgery.The Harmonic Scalpel is used by surgeons in both videoscopic andopen surgical procedures including gall bladder removal,appendectomy, repair of hiatal hernia, hysterectomy and bladderneck suspension. The scalpel is connected to a generator thatconverts electrical energy to mechanical energy, causing its blade tovibrate at more than 55,000 hertz to cut tissue and seal blood vesselssimultaneously. Future applications for the device include cardiacand vascular surgery, plastic and reconstructive surgery,dermatology and arthroscopic surgery.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPROVED DISEASE MANAGEMENT THE GOAL OFDORNIER/ACOUSTIC IMAGING COMBOThe combination of two manufacturers has created a new single-source provider of dedicated ultrasound imaging and interventionaltherapy delivery systems. The new company, known as DornierMedical Systems, Inc. (DMSI), was formed in November through acombination of Acoustic Imaging Technologies Corp., Phoenix, andAtlanta-based Dornier Medical Systems, Inc. Acoustic Imaging hashad an eight-year relationship with Dornier Medical.The development is expected to permit the new company toaccelerate new product development, in particular what the companycalls "a new direction in disease management by integratingdiagnostic imaging and minimally invasive therapy."DMSI will continue to offer Acoustic Imaging's diagnosticultrasound imaging systems to the specialty, general radiology,mammography and obstetrical markets. The company has ledadvances in urologic imaging and interventional therapy systems andcontinues to provide lithotripters, lasers and urological tables tothose markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996STERIS-AMSCO MERGER BRINGS TOGETHERCENTRALIZED AND DECENTRALIZED PROCESSORSThe $660 million merger of Steris Corp., Mentor, Ohio, withPittsburgh-based AMSCO International will capitalize oncomplementary sales, operational, manufacturing, productdevelopment and expense control abilities to reach a shiftingcustomer base. Despite this, the merger surprised many, eventhough AMSCO had been involved in merger discussions with anundisclosed company only a few days prior to the Dec. 18announcement. Steris is involved in decentralized sterile processingand surgical support systems, while AMSCO handles centralizedsterile processing and similar support systems.The deal will merge the North American sales and serviceorganizations of the two concerns to provide increased accountpenetration and new product introduction capabilities. A direct salesand service force of more than 1,000 field representatives willemerge following completion of the merger. The new company willuse those capabilities to reach all major acute care provider markets:hospital, ambulatory and alternate site. It will also place a renewedemphasis on national accounts, group purchasing, governmental andother large-volume capital equipment sales, supplies and servicescontract business.According to Steris, the move was spurred by consolidation inownership of hospitals and alternate site providers, which is leadingto more use of centralized purchasing.Bill Sanford will stay on as top executive of the combined SterisCorp. Two AMSCO executives will join an expanded Steris boardof directors.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Standard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreementStandard Textile signed a new, five-year, sole-source agreementwith Irving, Texas-based VHA Inc. for textiles and apparel. TheCincinnati-based manufacturer has had contracts with VHA since1986 but had shared the apparel portion of the agreement withAngelica Uniform, St. Louis. It is anticipated that Standard Textilewill gain between $50 million and $70 million in annual salesthrough the VHA pact, which has provisions that call for directdiscounts for each product segment and discounts based onutilization levels and adoption of Standard Textile's linenmanagement program. According to figures released by VHA, 79%of the group's institutions purchase Standard Textile products.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Isolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two groupIsolyser Co., Norcross, Ga., reached agreement with two grouppurchasing organizations for its line of OREX(R) Degradables.Seattle-based Sisters of Providence and the UniversityHealthSystem Consortium (UHC), Oak Brook, Ill., signedcontracts in December. UHC has initially committed six of itsteaching hospitals to OREX evaluations. Two Sisters of Providencesites are St. Joseph's Hospital, Burbank, Calif., and St. Peter'sHospital, Olympia, Wash. Isolyser reports that so far 107 hospitalsin the U.S. have signed agreements to purchase OREXDegradables. The company also says it will step up plans to offerthe products in the European market, a move spurred by what it calls"substantial interest" on the part of several European countries,where medical waste incineration and landfilling have become majorproblems. Distribution discussions are under way, and initialproduct orders have been received, Isolyser says. Finally, Isolyserreports that its woven goods plant in Abbeville, S.C., becameoperational on Dec. 4 and is producing OREX woven towels foroperating room and industrial applications.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Midmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medicalMidmark Corp., Versailles, Ohio, was chosen to supply medicalexam equipment to Operation Blessing Flying Hospital, as part of apartnership between Midmark and Operation Blessing that began inDecember 1994. The hospital provides medical and surgical servicesand disaster relief to people in developing countries in an L1011-50jet. Midmark supplied several surgical tables, standard exam andpediatric exam tables; 13 stretchers; physician seating; biohazardouswaste receptacles and an Ultraclave automatic sterilizer.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Enterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreementEnterprise Systems, Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill., signed an agreementwith the West Jersey Health System, a 740-bed multihospitalintegrated delivery system based in Camden, N.J., that includesfour main components of ESI's integrated software. The $1.4million deal covers materials management, surgical services,financial management and resource management systems.Picker International, Cleveland, will have two existing technologies,the ViewPoint(TM) computer-assisted surgery system and theOutlook(TM) MRI system, integrated into clinical trials of acomputer-assisted minimally invasive surgery (CAMIS) system.The CAMIS system is the focus of a two-year, $9.35 million grantawarded to the Ohio Aerospace Institute by the National Aeronauticsand Space Administration. The ViewPoint system was developedjointly by Picker and The Cleveland Clinic.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996McKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health careMcKesson Drug Co.'s San Francisco-based home health caredivision has signed an exclusive, renewable distribution agreementwith Momentum Medical Corp., Salt Lake City, for Momentum'slines of home health care products. The contract includes theSuperCane(TM) assistive device. Momentum products like theSuperCane were on display at the McKesson booth at November'sMedTrade show in Atlanta.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc.,Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Sandy, Utah, and VHA Inc.,Irving, Texas, have reached agreement on a new purchasing contractthat will upgrade VHA's I.V. infusion management program. Thethree-year agreement, which covers I.V. start kits, catheters andsafety products, is valued at $39.1 million in 1995, with I.V.catheters accounting for approximately $26 million of that salesvolume. Under terms of a "guaranteed savings" provision in theagreement, Becton Dickinson offers users a net savings byconverting to Vialon Insyte Catheters, which are said to reducecatheter usage by nearly 5%, and moving away from Tefloncatheters. B-D will help hospitals defray conversion costs by paying3% of annual sales to an institution when it converts to I.V.catheters through Becton Dickinson. B-D will also manufacture itsI.V. start kits for VHA's private label VHA PLUS(R) program.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contractBard Urological, Covington, Ga., signed a five-year contractextension with VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, that covers urologicalspecialty items in addition to the acute care products that have beencovered under Bard-VHA contracts since 1988. The agreement,which took effect Jan. 1, is said to have the potential of $48 millionin annual sales for Bard, a figure that does not include possible salesto AmHS/Premier facilities. The specialty items covered in the newagreement are stents, baskets, balloons, urethrals, filiforms andurolase. VHA says that 81% of its facilities use Bard Urologicalproducts.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of itsBracco Diagnostics, Princeton, N.J., signed a renewal of itscontrast media agreement with the New Jersey Hospital Assn. thatwill be in effect through Aug. 31, 2000. The contract coverspurchases of both ionic and non-ionic contrast agents.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996BOEHRINGER MANNHEIM DIAGNOSTICS' FAST ASSAYDIAGNOSES HEART ATTACKSSales of a new rapid bedside assay that helps physicians diagnoseheart attacks are under way, and its manufacturer, BoehringerMannheim Diagnostics, expects that its speed and ease of use willtranslate into big sales for what it feels is a ground-breakingproduct. Indianapolis-based Boehringer received 510(k) clearance(after a six-month wait) to market the Cardiac T(TM) Rapid Assay inlate November.The assay is based on the company's proprietary market cardiactroponin T, which is found inside cardiac muscle and is released intothe blood only when cells are damaged.The Cardiac T is a self-contained, disposable unit approximatelyfour inches long, less than an inch wide and a quarter-inch thick.Drops of blood are placed in a well on the device and are quicklydrawn into a sandwich assay impregnated with two distinct types ofmonoclonal antibodies, which link to cardiac troponin T in thesample resulting in a visible color change. Results are obtained at thebedside without the use of a central lab.According to Lynda Koester, marketing manager for BoehringerMannheim Diagnostics, sales efforts are focusing on emergencymedicine physicians, cardiologists and laboratory personnel. Theproduct was rolled out to the cardiology market at the recent annualmeeting of the American Heart Assn. in Anaheim, Calif., startingwith a press conference and symposium. The company alsopresented the Cardiac T in October for a pre-market look at theAmerican College of Emergency Physicians meeting, where betterthan 700 leads were garnered from the approximately 2,300registrants. At that meeting, Boehringer Mannheim sent dosed rapidassays to attendees inviting them to stop by the booth. On the labside, Boehringer will display the new product at the American Assn.for Clinical Chemistry, the Clinical Laboratory Management Assn.and a number of local and regional sessions. The company utilizes aspeakers bureau for the presentations.The company has also arranged journal placements in two majoremergency medicine journals, Annals of Emergency Medicine andEmergency Medicine News, as well as Circulation and the Journalof Cardiology. Later this year, ads will run in the Journal ofAmerican Cardiology.Probably the biggest obstacle to Cardiac T sales is overcomingclinicians' traditional use of other markers and resistance to the newtechnology in what is estimated to be an $82 million market in 1996.To help do that, Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics concentrates onclinician education led by an evaluation program for its customers.More than 130 publications and peer review studies are currentlyavailable. Training in the use of Cardiac T is handled by acombination of videotape tutorials, sales rep time spent withcustomers and a policy and procedures manual.Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics utilizes a sales force made up of10 specialists and over 100 sales representatives for lab salesexclusively, in addition to approximately 250 reps on the pharmacyside. The Cardiac T carries a list price of $30 per test, though grouppurchasing organization contracts will discount that price. Thecompany is engaged in discussions with Oakland, Calif.-basedKaiser Permanente, and several hospitals in the Nashville, Tenn.-based Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. chain are currentlyparticipating in evaluations of the new product.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPLANTABLE PUMP MARKS STRATO/INFUSAID'S RE-ENTRY INTO PAIN MANAGEMENT MARKETAfter a five-year hiatus, Strato/Infusaid Inc., re-entered the painmanagement market in the fall when the FDA cleared its InfusaidModel 400 Single Catheter Constant Flow Implantable Pump. TheNorwood, Mass.-based subsidiary of Pfizer Inc., New York, willgo head-to-head with Medtronic, Inc., the Minneapolis-based giantthat until now has had the pain management pump market all toitself.Strato/Infusaid was active in the pain management market in the1980s, before leaving that market in 1990 while awaitingdevelopment and approval of its new device.To overcome loyalty to the Medtronic product lines, Strato/Infusaidis playing the cost card. The Model 400 is priced at $4,995, a figurethe company says is less expensive than current alternatives, bothinitially and over time. The company says that the total cost over sixmonths is $18,654, which "compares favorably" with that ofimplantable programmable pumps ($21,129), implanted catheters($31,144) and externalized systems ($38,190). After four years, aspatient survival lengthens, treatment costs for the Model 400 are$34,828, roughly two-thirds the cost of treatment with implantableprogrammable pumps ($49,621), one-fifth the cost of implantedcatheter treatments ($158,572) and one-eighth the cost of treatmentwith externalized systems ($273,852).These figures have not been lost on Strato/Infusaid's target market,which it defines as 80% anesthesiologists active in pain managementand 20% neurosurgeons. The company met with "extreme success"last fall during a six-stop national show tour, during which theresponse from physicians was positive for the less-expensive newproduct, a departure from the scene only 10 years ago when costwas virtually a non-issue. Another plus for the Model 400 is the factthat it needs no batteries. With its "inexhaustible" power supply, thedevice requires neither programming nor recharging, anotherattribute of interest to end-users.Along with the aggressive show schedule, Strato/Infusaid launcheda direct mail campaign to anesthesiologists and neurosurgeons,including the 2,800 members of the American Pain Society. Journalads are running in Neurosurgery and in Anesthesia and Analgesia.To sell the Model 400, Strato/Infusaid uses its 32-member directsales force plus eight nurses who perform critical inservicefunctions. Surgeons, oncologists and community physicians requiretraining on the device, as do clinicians responsible for refillingmedication (Infumorph, a preservative-free morphine), such ashome health care nurses.Anne Roussell, Strato/Infusaid's product manager for implantablepumps, has two objectives for the first 12 months following release.The first is to re-establish the company's name recognition, whilethe second is to capture 20% of the market. She says that the U.S.pump market for pain management is $30 million and growing atabout 15% a year.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996I-FLOW PROMOTES SIMPLE, LOW COST BAND-IT SYRINGEDELIVERY SYSTEMI-Flow Corp. is hoping that cost-conscious hospitals will take to alow-cost, low-tech syringe delivery system that makes use of acommon rubber band to help reduce customers' supply costs whendelivering I.V. medications. The small Irvine, Calif.-basedmanufacturer recently received FDA marketing clearance for theBand-It--after a two-year wait--and is currently seeking one or moredistribution partners to help sell its new product.The Band-It Syringe Delivery System, all of which is disposable,consists of a patented syringe driver and a flow control set. Thedriver provides the energy to deliver medication from a 10cc BectonDickinson syringe. The set controls the flow from the syringe viarestrictor-tubing technology. Currently, two infusion times areavailable: 10cc over 15 minutes and 10cc over 30 minutes.I-Flow says the product not only cuts I.V. supply costs but alsominimizes pharmacy fill-time and storage. To prove its point, thecompany has produced a specially priced evaluation package thatgives providers a chance to try the Band-It on patients. The package,which is aimed at nurses and pharmacists, emphasizes not onlyclinical advantages but provides a detailed cost analysis as well. Thecost analysis offers supply costs when using the Band-It setbetween two and 12 times. For two uses, the set costs a user $2.47per dose in supplies. But at a 12-time rate, the cost drops to 60 centsper dose. I-Flow says that little training time is needed for clinicians.I-Flow president and CEO Don Earhart says he is looking forpartners ranging from independent medical distributors to full-linedistributors, especially distributors that could bundle the Band-Itwith other products.Once those distributor/partners are found, journal advertising anddirect mail efforts will begin. So far, I-Flow has displayed theproduct at last month's 30th annual midyear clinical meeting of theAmerican Society of Health-System Pharmacists in Las Vegas. Thecompany plans to exhibit at a number of nursing shows later thisyear as well. Both hospitals and alternate care facilities are expectedto be end-users of the Band-It system.For I-Flow, only a $10 million company, even a modicum of Band-It sales success will have a major effect on its bottom line.According to figures Earhart quoted from industry I.V. leadersBaxter Healthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., and AbbottLaboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., approximately 300 millionantibiotic/anti-infective doses are delivered outside the hospital eachyear in the U.S. Although not every dose can fit into a 10cc syringe,Earhart believes that between 40% and 50% can. In addition, a 20ccversion of the Band-It system is expected to be marketed later thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996OUTCOMES STUDIES BECOMING A "MUST" FORSUCCESSFUL DEVICE SALESAs demand increases for proof of not only safety and efficacy, butthe economic impact of today's medical devices and pharmaceuticals(especially biotech drugs), manufacturers in great numbers areturning to outcomes studies to prove their points to customers. Thecost may be high--from $100,000 into the multimillions for acomplex, peer-reviewed study complete with the accompanyingpublicity effort to drive the information--but in many cases, sharpcompetition among vendors and cost-conscious, managed care-influenced providers can make a well-documented outcomes studythe difference between a sale and no sale.R. Thomas Swem, principal, management consulting, for Boston-based Deloitte & Touche LLP, is heavily involved in the productionof outcomes studies. He will deliver a keynote address in San Diegoduring a Feb. 28-March 1 meeting titled Outcomes Studies forMedical Devices presented by Global Business Research (1-800-868-7188).Swem says that the typical outcomes study on medical devices mayevaluate a new piece of equipment and its effect on a hospital'sdepartment, the effect of a new machine replacing multipleinstallations or potential FTE reductions associated with a newequipment acquisition. Studies on disposable vs. reusable issuesand prepackaged approaches to vs. a la carte procurement are alsocommon.A well-produced and promoted outcomes study "makes a coherent,well-supported case for an outcome that may be somewhatsurprising," he said. An example of such a study was an earlyevaluation of the benefits of laparoscopic vs. open surgery."Everyone seemed to have a sense that lap cholys were expensive,"Swem said. "But the benefits proved they overshadow the costs."Once an outcomes study has been completed, it must be marketed topotential customers, chiefly physicians. On one occasion, Deloitte &Touche mailed 300,000 copies of such a study to clinicians. Apopular approach today is to present the study on a video-quality,PC-based format. To a modern medical device sales force armedwith automation tools, this delivery is a great help in making a caseto physicians.Despite the best of intentions, manufacturers must overcome adegree of skepticism in making their outcomes studies credible. Thisis done by countering skepticism with hard data--and reams of it.Swem reports that a toll-free telephone number was set up for onestudy to take calls concerning the study. Another time, he inviteddoubters to peruse documentation of blinded papers. A well-prepared outcomes study generates a huge volume of painstakinglyassembled, complicated reports, often including medical records.Such a study may involve investigative reports from 15 or 20different institutions.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996EXCITEMENT AND FLASH SEEMED MISSING FROM 1995RSNA SHOWAlthough a number of last year's works-in-progress are nowavailable for purchase, there was general agreement that the 1995trade show at the Radiological Society of North America meeting inChicago produced few, if any, surprises. Even the "tech junkies"who wandered the vast floor space at Chicago's McCormick Placeto get their fill of new developments reported a lack of eye-openers.One even went so far as to call the 1995 RSNA "a boring show."Slow sales--rather than a lack of innovation or imagination--over thepast few years have assumed a rightful role as the culprit for themissing excitement. There were few, if any, major productintroductions in the big ticket MR and CT segments. Enhancementssubstituted for introductions.Total attendance (60,161, including 23,883 non-exhibitors) was up6.9% over 1994, when 56,262 viewed the displays on the373,000sf show floor. By most accounts, vendors pulled back to amore conservative approach to their presentations, cut the number ofpersonnel staffing the exhibits and threw fewer and less lavishparties. Gone too were at least some of the multi-story "cities"masquerading as booths, which some said signals an approachingclose to the RSNA as the "Disneyland of health care shows."More administrators than before were on hand. There was also "anew blending of focus on the radiology department head as the chiefinformation officer of digital imaging," said Mary Ann Kelly,director of radiology and facilities for Los Angeles-based PurchaseConnection. She sees a tie-in of all imaging modalities intoinformation systems "from the viewbox, into the system and ontothe screen."CR Gains ExposureAs it was with the 1994 show, smaller and faster were the dominantthemes for 1995. Open-architecture, low-end MRI systems were inabundant supply for $750,000 or less through many vendors. MRIsales are still down, by between 25% and 40% some say. But open-architecture could save this segment as the horsepower race draws toan end.There were a few hot properties, of course. Computed radiography(CR) was such an item, with several pieces offered at a "reasonable"price for the first time. "Until the past year or two, the cost of CRoutweighed the benefits and the capabilities of the systems weren'tfully usable," said one attendee. One CR piece stood out: the directradiography prototype developed by DuPont Medical Products,Newark, Del., that displayed how X-ray transmissions could beconverted into electronic data and presented via a satellite linkbetween the show floor and Chicago's Loyola University, providinginstant pictures on a monitor.The competition has begun to heat up as several other manufacturershave joined the CR chase, most notably major players like FujiMedical Systems, Stamford, Conn.; GE Medical Systems,Milwaukee; Picker International, Cleveland, and Siemens MedicalSystems, Inc., Iselin, N.J. Agfa Technical Imaging, RidgefieldPark, N.J., and the Health Sciences Division of Eastman KodakCo., Rochester, N.Y., are also in the fray. At the meeting, Kodakand Siemens announced an agreement covering sales and service ofthe Kodak Digital Science(TM) CR system 400. Predictions are thatthe deluge of vendors will work to drive CR prices down.The vendors' marketing approaches to CR vary, of course.Siemens, for example, offers CR as an overall system along with itsPicture Archiving Communication Systems (PACS), while Fuji sellsits version of a horizontal CR table as a standalone item for generalradiography.More players are entering the dry laser camera market. Untilrecently, most felt that the Medical Imaging Systems division ofPolaroid Corp., Cambridge, Mass., had the largest share of themarket to itself with its Helios line. Its new large format Helios1417 system, which began shipments in 1995, is aimed at the highend of the market with a list price of about $100,000. Polaroid'ssmaller format Helios 810 was introduced in 1993. Now, Agfa hasa prototype on the way, and 3M, St. Paul, Minn., is offering itsversion with the 3M Dry View Laser Imaging Systems. 3M, in fact,announced that it intends to launch its imaging systems and datastorage business as part of an independent, publicly ownedcompany in mid-1996.Laser Mammography DebutsSeveral attendees were impressed with one of the few truly newtechnologies on display: laser mammography. One startup company,Imaging Diagnostic Systems, Sunrise, Fla., made a splash with itsCTLM (CT Laser Mammography) that utilizes light generated by ahigh-speed laser to view the breast. Sales are probably a couple ofyears away, however, as clinical trials have yet to begin for the newtechnology.Siemens Enters U.S. Ultrasound MarketThe entry by Siemens into a relatively mature U.S. ultrasoundmarket at a time when most observers feel there are already toomany ultrasound vendors scrambling for market share was asurprise. Siemens introduced the Sonoline ultrasound system familyat RSNA to go with its CT and MR systems as the company roundsout its offerings to hospitals. Siemens will face stiff competitionfrom GE Medical Systems in the ultrasound market in this country.Remanufactured Equipment Posts GainsWith cost-conscious hospitals tightening their belts even more andintegrated systems eliminating equipment redundancies, imagingequipment remanufacturers keep picking up steam. Companies likeComdisco, Inc., Rosemont, Ill., Refurbco, Grand Rapids, Mich.,and Picker's PTS (Picker Technical Services) Division appear to befinding more acceptance than ever.Price is becoming more critical too, particularly as the responsibilityfor big ticket purchasing decisions radiologists share withadministrators who are beginning to regard imaging equipment ascommodities. Hospitals are just now beginning to consider life cyclecosts over five-year periods when making purchasing decisions.Editor's note: Special thanks to Dave Natale, director of technicalassessment for SunHealth Alliance, Charlotte, N.C.; John Sutton,contract manager for AmeriNet, St. Louis; and Derwood Dunbar,Jr., president and CEO of MAGNET, Harrisburg, Pa., for theirhelp in preparing this report.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Conmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions inConmed Corp., Utica, N.Y., will acquire New Dimensions inMedicine, Inc. (NDM), Mellville, N.Y., for approximately $32million in cash. The deal is expected to close either this month orearly in 1996 and does not include NDM's international wound carebusiness. New Dimensions in Medicine is a developer andmanufacturer of electrocardiograph monitoring devices,electrosurgical products and hydrogel wound dressings. Annualsales of those products covered in the Conmed deal are estimated at$28 million. NDM's electrocardiograph and electrosurgical productswill complement Conmed's line, while the wound care businessrepresents a new offering by Conmed. Prior to signing theagreement with Conmed, NDM had been in discussions with TycoInternational, Exeter, N.H. The company is expected to sell itsinternational wound care business at a later date.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicineMallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, opened nuclear medicinepharmacies in Miami, Fla., and in Columbus, Ohio, to supplydiagnostic imaging and therapy products to hospitals and nuclearmedicine clinics. The facilities became part of Mallinckrodt'snationwide network of 36 diagnostic imaging services nuclearmedicine pharmacies.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that aUnited States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., reported that aFrench surgical team has successfully completed the first minimallyinvasive coronary bypass operation performed in France using thecompany's instruments. Surgeons there developed the technique atU.S. Surgical's training and research center in Elancourt, outsideParis. More instruments for the technique are under development.The procedure took only 3.5 hours and was performed withoutstopping the 50-year-old patient's heart, a common practice incoronary bypass surgery. In July, surgeons completed the firstaortic bypass procedure ever performed through minimally invasiveincisions at California's San Ramon Regional Medical Center. Afew days later at the UCLA Center for Health Sciences in LosAngeles, a similar procedure was performed using the totallyminimally invasive approach.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Innovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, andInnovative Technologies Group, Cheshire, England, andMinneapolis-based 3M have reached agreement on a contract thatestablishes 3M as a global marketer of a new alginate wound caredressing. The deal makes 3M responsible for internationalmarketing, sales and service activities. Marketing for the newdressing, which is approved for use on moderate to heavilyexudating partial-to full-thickness wounds, will begin early in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Picker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear MedicinePicker International, Cleveland, relocated its Nuclear MedicineDivision to the company's world headquarters building in theCleveland suburb of Highland Heights, Ohio. The move to the85,000sf facility doubles the manufacturing and engineering spacefor the division, which was formerly located in Bedford Heights,Ohio.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Invacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial WorldInvacare Corp., Elyria, Ohio, was named by Financial Worldmagazine as one of the top 50 "best and brightest" mid-capcompanies in America, defined as operations that have been publicfor at least six years and having a market capitalization of between$300 million and $3 billion. Invacare had sales of $411 million forits fiscal year ended Dec. 31, 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996EDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned thatEDAP Technomed International, a French manufacturer, learned thata device it hopes to sell in the U.S. has passed muster from an FDAadvisory panel. The device, known as Prostatron, is the first in anew class of products that can shrink enlarged prostates withoutsurgery by using microwaves. Although it is not as effective assurgery, use of the device requires no hospital stay and has few sideeffects, the panel was told.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) withSangStat Medical Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed a 510(k) withthe FDA for market approval of its Celsior(TM), a product designedto preserve the heart prior to cardiac transplantation and to promotegraft function in the initial 48 hours post-cardiac transplant surgery.In October 1993, SangStat acquired exclusive rights to develop andmarket Celsior in the U.S. and Canada from Pasteur MerieuxSerums et Vaccins, Lyon, France, a subsidiary of Rhone Poulenc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996UroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-nationalUroMed Corp., Needham, Mass., signed a five-year multi-nationaldistribution agreement with Astra Tech, a member of theScandinavian-based Astra Group, for its Reliance(TM) UrinaryControl Insert. The contract gives Astra Tech exclusive rights todistribute the Reliance Insert in the Scandinavian countries ofSweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland, as well as the Netherlandsand the United Kingdom. Including a $16 million advancecommitment from Astra Tech, the deal is estimated to be worth asmuch as $31 million over its term. Launch of the Reliance Insert inthe selected nations will take place throughout 1996. Worldwidelaunch of the device began in the fall in Germany through a separatedistribution agreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996The American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in NovemberThe American Occupational Therapy Assn. (AOTA) in Novemberbegan publishing OT Practice, a new monthly magazine that coversthe profession and the association. The magazine is designed in a64-page, four-color format.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996 Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearing Vollrath Group, Inc., Memphis, Tenn., says it is nearingcompletion of a five-year, $10 million capital improvementsprogram at its 150,000sf Gallaway, Tenn., production facilitylocated about 35 miles northeast of Memphis. The program featuredthe recent installation of a $2 million, state-of-the-art urinalmanufacturing cell. When fully operational, the new manufacturingcell is expected to reinforce Vollrath's position as a large supplier ofurinals as well as other assorted patient care utensils, includingbedpans. The new cell is capable of producing more than 3,000disposable polyethylene urinals per hour.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Oliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stockOliver Products Co., Grand Rapids, Mich., a supplier of roll stockand blister lids for medical packaging in the U.S., has reachedagreement to purchase the pre-formed medical pouch product linefrom Denver-based OnGard Systems, Inc. Oliver's plan is to movethe pouch production to Grand Rapids and incorporate the line intoits current medical product packaging line.Separately, Oliver named Flexible Medical Packaging Ltd.,Lancaster, England, as its exclusive converter/distributor for theUnited Kingdom and all of Ireland in a deal that Oliver hopes willexpand its marketing reach internationally.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge,Dade International, Deerfield, Ill., and Intracel Corp., Cambridge,Mass., completed the sale to Intracel of Dade's wholly ownedBartels subsidiary. The Bartels subsidiary, based in Issaquah,Wash., markets a line of viral-testing and related products under theBartels name. Dade will now focus on its "core strategic strengths"in hemostasis, microbiology, controls, chemistry and cardiacdiagnosis. Intracel is a major supplier of genetically engineered viralproteins and antibodies. Terms of the deal were not available.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Bracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters toBracco Diagnostics Inc. has relocated its corporate headquarters toPrinceton, N.J. The diagnostic imaging agent manufacturercompany formerly occupied space in the Bristol-Myers Squibbbuilding in Plainsboro, N.J.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 19963M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View3M, St. Paul, Minn., connected the first commercial 3M Dry View8700 Laser Imager in the U.S. when it installed the unit at the MayoClinic in Jacksonville, Fla. The institution's department ofdiagnostic radiology will use the 8700 laser imager to support itsnew electronic imaging practice. The installation marks thebeginning of 3M's commercial roll-out of the new laser imagingtechnology. The 8700 prints medical images on the preferred14"x17" format and accommodates virtually all imaging modalities.The systems range in price from $55,000 to $85,000. Placement ofunits in Japan and Europe will soon follow.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Healthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materialsHealthcare Materials Services (HMS), a pharmacy and materialsservices outsourcing concern, and a division of Houston-basedOwen Healthcare, Inc., and Kowalski-Dickow Associates, Inc.,Milwaukee, have formed a strategic alliance designed to promotematerials management-related services to health care clients. The twocompanies have been working together since 1994, with Kowalski-Dickow using HMS' Supplyline, a proprietary hospital productpricing database, for several of its clients.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators,Cantel Industries, Inc., Clifton, N.J., will acquire MediVators,Inc., Cannon Falls, Minn., through a stock swap agreement.MediVators designs, manufactures and markets endoscopedisinfection equipment and supplies medical waste disposalsystems. Through its Canadian subsidiary, Carsen Group Inc.,Cantel markets and distributes a variety of instruments, includingflexible and rigid endoscopes.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Heraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-basedHeraeus Surgical, Inc., Milpitas, Calif., and Minneapolis-basedCVAC, Inc. have agreed on an exclusive licensing arrangement inwhich Heraeus Surgical will exclusively manufacture, use and sellCVAC's Centralized Airborne Evacuation System worldwide. Thesystem works to improve overall air quality and safety in theoperating room during surgical procedures.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced aUnited States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., introduced aminimally invasive breast biopsy system at the recent meeting of theAmerican College of Surgeons in New Orleans. The system, knownas the Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrument (ABBI(TM)) system, issaid to be more accurate in identifying the tumor site, which meansless pain, disfigurement and scarring for the patient. USSC alsosays that the ABBI system can reduce costs by as much as $2,000per procedure. The company is hoping for April clearance for ABBIfrom the FDA.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Image Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tactImage Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Sunrise, Fla., took an unusual tactwhen it unveiled its new CTLM ultra-fast laser mammographydevice. Company CEO Richard Grable appeared on a Donahueshow segment that aired on Nov. 20 to discuss the CTLM, which heinvented.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996WORTH READING . . .A brief review of some articles of interest to Health Industry Todayreaders for January:+ Hospital Materials Management analyzes the blockbuster Baxtersplit from the perspective of hospital purchasers, focusing on itsimpact on service, possible switches to other medical-surgicalsuppliers and future price hikes for both products and services.HMM's January price survey tracks current prices for needles andsyringes. SunHealth's merger with Premier/AmHS will also beexamined from the buying group angle.+ Health Care Strategic Management covers the attitudes amonghospital planners and administrators toward outsourcing. There'salso an article on The Revolt Against the One-Day Stay and itsconsequences for today's hospital.+ Profiles in Healthcare Marketing reviews a survey titled "PatientCare: Bridging the Gap with Hispanic Consumers," believed to bethe first comprehensive study of Hispanic attitudes, usage patternsand needs concerning health care providers and facilities. Onesurprise finding: Hispanics surveyed say they were more uneasyabout young physicians' disheveled dress than their fluency inSpanish.+ Financial Advertising Review explains how integrated deliverysystems use marketing campaigns to help overcome consumers'indifference and managed care organizations' skepticism to theirstructure.Please address inquiries concerning the above newsletters to TheBusiness Word, Inc., publishers of Health Industry Today, 303-290-8500, or FAX 303-290-9025.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996OUTCOMES ANALYSIS CAN WIN OVER TOUGHAUDIENCESBy Michael T. KellyThe medical device industry isn't usually thought of as a high-fashion business. It's a long way from orthopedic implants andintra-aortic balloons to Bill Blass and Calvin Klein. Even so, themedical device industry has its own "fashions"--trends that gathermomentum and buzzwords that hang in the air. And the trend of themoment is "outcomes."There's good reason for this, of course. The rise of outcomesanalysis is the product of two interwoven revolutions under way inthe health care industry. The first is the emphasis on cost andperformance. The second comes from advances in informationtechnology. As we become more adept at digital manipulation, ourunderstanding of the health care landscape becomes sharper andmore sophisticated. And it is here that cost and performanceconcerns intersect with data-gathering ability. The development ofinformation-based health care delivery allows opportunities to bepinpointed with greater precision than ever before. To think in termsof outcomes--of the cost and success rate of a complete course oftherapy rather than the price of its individual components--is anatural extension of this point of view.So it is that the health care vendor today finds himself or herself in atransitional environment that requires skillful navigation. For whilethere may be agreement in theory regarding the benefits of anoutcomes approach, as with so many things the actual practice lagsbehind. "It's very easy for a purchasing agent to look at a 10%discount and grasp immediately what he is getting," JosephLaptewicz, president and CEO of Empi, a manufacturer ofneurological and urological devices, told me recently. "Selling himon a new therapy that represents up-front expense but a 30% to 40%reduction in total therapeutic cost is more difficult."That there should be resistance in the face of such a payoff is afrustrating predicament, but not without its reasons. A large part ofthe problem is rooted in the fact that it is much more difficult to sell anew therapy than a new product. It involves not just making spaceon the stockroom shelves, but changes in the treatment protocol--the"operating manual" that lies at the heart of the customer's business.Prescribing a pain management device means more than incurringthe $500 cost of the product--it means asking physicians to adopt amore time-and labor-intensive approach than writing the traditionalprescription for narcotic medication. Calling for such a fundamentalshift is a tall order--and one that requires winning over people at alllevels within the network, from M.D.s and R.N.s to planadministrators and medical directors--each of whom has a naturalloyalty to "tried and true" methods. "It's easiest not to change,"explains Laptewicz. "And at times it seems like there are a thousandpeople who can say no, and no one who can say yes."The key to convincing such a tough audience lies in taking their"show me" attitude and turning it to your advantage. Empi solvedthat problem by developing a limited outcomes trial that providerscan conduct at one of their sites. "It's easier to convince an HMO totry our incontinence devices at one of their locations than to changeover the entire network at once," says Laptewicz. "After theproviders see cost and performance data on a group of 30 of theirown patients over a six-month period, they are much more receptiveto our message."Indeed, while the emphasis on outcomes may be the result of newthinking, today's vendor will do well to be guided by the old andreliable standard of customer needs. For if hospitals are beginning tojudge by outcomes, so too are they being judged--by payers andpatients. Customer education also plays a key role, as sophisticationon this issue will vary greatly from account to account. There is nouniform measurement for outcomes, after all, and as the health careindustry gropes toward standards for various indications, there is anopportunity for the device maker to contribute its expertise to thedialogue. "An institution may want to claim that it can wean patientsoff ventilators within a certain period of time. We need to give themsupport to help them make that claim," says Jim Hickey, presidentand CEO of Aequitron Medical, whose products include sleep apneaequipment and infant monitors. Doing so means designing devicesthat provide the raw information that makes such a statementpossible. For while there will always be debate on how to define anoutcome, you can't even begin the discussion unless you have thedata. Thus, customers are placing a greater premium on remotemonitoring and recording functions. Hickey lists two things hewants his sales force to be able to offer: a positive outcome at acompetitive cost, and the data to support those cost and performanceclaims. As medical software houses develop increasingly complexclinical decision support systems, the value of such data will onlyincrease.Ultimately, the focus on outcomes is part of a larger matrix offactors controlling health care purchasing, including patientcompliance, cost and quality of life. But as Aequitron's Jim Hickeypoints out, these are just a modified version of the factors that wealready use when buying something for ourselves. "If you arethinking about buying a car, for example, you ask four things:'How much will I use it? How much does it cost? How well does itwork? and How much will it improve my quality of life?' It'sbecoming the same with buying a medical device."Michael T. Kelly, a former vice president at St. Paul, Minn.-basedSt. Jude Medical, is a managing director of Russell ReynoldsAssociates, a global executive recruiting firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996OWENS, HENRY SCHEIN MARKETING TANDEM CREATES"VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION"Owens & Minor, Inc., and physicians' office supplier HenrySchein, Inc., Melville, N.Y., have signed a multi-year jointmarketing agreement designed to broaden the product offerings ofboth companies. The "virtual organization" formed by the pact,known as Net/GAIN(TM), will give Richmond, Va.-based Owensaccess to the physicians' office market for the first time and helpHenry Schein gain entry to new business through integrated deliverysystems across the country. To compensate Owens & Minor for itsefforts in bringing in new business, Henry Schein will pay anunspecified fee to Owens based on a percentage of sales.The arrangement is scheduled to be launched this month. HenrySchein executives will address the Owens & Minor sales force onthe Net/GAIN project at the end of the month at a national salesmeeting.Owens will inject its sales and marketing expertise, in particular itsproficiency in the areas of rebates and chargebacks, into the virtualorganization. Henry Schein brings access to its more than 200,000physician customers, many of them in the dental segment, whichwill allow the Net/GAIN organization to offer a range of services tointegrated delivery systems. Through the venture, Net/GAIN willoffer a "one-stop shop" to physicians, including pharmaceuticals,office supplies and diagnostic products. The combination will alsoboost the purchasing power of both companies.Henry Schein will handle the logistics for Net/GAIN customers--taking orders and completing shipments--and be responsible fordirect marketing and enrollment of individual practitioners in theprogram. The company has about 200 sales reps, all of whom workover the telephone, along with 50 direct field reps, with plans todouble that to 100 over time.The 60-year-old company, which went public in early November,operates distribution centers in Port Washington, N.Y., Indianapolisand Reno, Nev., plus five more overseas. The company says that37% of its customers receive one-day shipping service, while 88%receive their shipments in two days, all through common carriers.Due to the small nature of the vast majority of Henry Scheinshipments to doctors (mostly under $200 each), the company hasfew back orders and boasts a 99%-plus fill rate.That remarkable fill rate is reached through use of a supplyformulary approach that has worked to reduce both the number ofvendors with which it works and the number of SKUs it offers. Forexample, Owens & Minor carries approximately 320,000 SKUswhile Henry Schein lists only about 90,000.In early December, Net/GAIN signed up its first customer. Theprogram will provide medical-surgical supplies, laboratory,imaging, diagnostic, health and beauty aids and office products tophysicians affiliated with the Montgomery General Hospital System,Olney, Md. The agreement includes service to 229-bed MontgomeryGeneral Hospital. Other pilot Net/GAIN programs are in place aswell.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996BAXTER'S NEW SUPPLY CHAIN PLAN WORRIES SOMEVENDORSA program instituted by Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, Ill.,designed to cut its costs and raise service levels for its hospitalcustomers has become a worry for a few medical-surgical supplymanufacturers. In September, Baxter's rationalized supply chainprogram began to place slower moving items into the company'snew national drop-ship center in Chicago in a strategy that affectsboth Baxter-made and non-Baxter-made supplies. The companysays that about 5% of its lines have been relocated to that Chicagocenter.The new stocking system is based on the number of times a line itemproduct is picked. Items that are picked more than 300 times a yearwill remain stocked locally at one of the company's distributioncenters. Items that are picked between 80 and 300 times have beenmoved to the Chicago drop-ship center. Items that are picked fewerthan 80 times will be drop-shipped from the manufacturer,according to Baxter's plan, which is aimed at improving efficiencyand reducing dead inventory.Despite all this, at least one vendor told Health Industry Today thatas a partner with Baxter, it feels that Baxter should maintain its localstocking of all items. "We want our products stocked locally ifthey're going to be a distributor for us," said the supplier, whoasked to remain anonymous. The vendor said he feels Baxter's newsystem will serve to slow the distribution chain. On the other hand,Baxter is convinced that its plan will improve fill rates, fill times andpredictability.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996KENTUCKY DISTRIBUTORS TO MERGEAn upcoming merger of two Kentucky-based medical-surgicalsupply distributors was done, at least in part, to counter the trend ofacquisitions of med-surg distributors by publicly owned nationalcompanies. Independent suppliers Ransdell Surgical, Inc.,Louisville, Ky., and Grogan's Healthcare Supply Inc., Lexington,Ky., announced plans to merge last month and said that avoidingsuch an acquisition and maintaining local control was a "specificobjective" of their plans. The merger is expected to be completedsometime in mid-1996.The companies hope that such local control will protect jobs andkeep tax revenue at the local level.The unnamed merged company will hold a dominant position ineach of the markets it serves, with more than 15,000 customersthroughout Kentucky and southern Indiana. Ransdell focuses on thehospital market, especially in Louisville, Lexington, westernKentucky and southern Indiana. Grogan's concentrates onexpansion into new product areas in non-hospital segments,particularly in central and eastern Kentucky. The new company willcarry approximately 20,000 products from more than 1,500manufacturers. It sells, rents and services these items for hospitals,sub-acute nursing facilities, surgery centers, clinics and otheralternate site providers.Ransdell also has two sister companies: Choice Medical, Inc., andMedical Business Associates, which provides technologies andmanagement information to providers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SHOW BIZ . . .One From The HeartHIT couldn't make the recent American Heart Assn. annual meeting,but a report from New York analysts C.J. Lawrence Inc. summedup the proceedings. "One adjective that comes to mind to describethe exhibit floor is . . . jammed," wrote C.J.'s Jill Topkis Weiss."Although a wave of consolidation has been sweeping through themedical device industry, the number of vendors populating theexhibit floor appears to have increased. The explanation for thispeculiarity may lie in heightened responsiveness from our nearestand dearest friend, the FDA. We believe that the recent wealth ofnew product approvals is responsible for the crop of new vendors atthis year's event." What was hot: continued focus on minimallyinvasive products, potential therapies for atrial fibrillation and stentstudies galore.VirtualityVarian Associates has come up with a way to put all of its customersand potential customers right down in the front row to see its latestproducts. The Palo Alto, Calif.-based manufacturer set up a"virtual" trade show "booth" that allows customers to see itsproducts from their desktops. The company believes that the virtualbooth, located inside of Varian Oncology Systems' Web Site (whichcan be accessed at Varian's URL, http://www.varian.com.) is mosthelpful for customers who cannot attend trade shows.Role PlayingNCI will host a conference in Phoenix, Feb. 4-6, entitled"Orchestrating New Roles: Group Strategies for the Health CareEvolution." Senior executives from major GPOs and chains willlead the discussions.Call 714-589-6500.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996TRADING PLACES . . .In response to reader requests, Health Industry Today provides thislisting of key health care trade shows. To add one, contact CurtWerner at 303-290-8928, Ext. 138, or FAX 303-290-9025.Dates Meeting Location Exhibitor types Single booth cost Est.Attend. ContactFebruary5-8 Med. Design & Manufacturing West Conference Anaheim,Calif. m-s, or, lab, h/s $2,600 10,000 310-392-55098-13 American Assn. for Advancement of Science Baltimore h/s1,350 5,200 202-326-64509-12 Dermatology Nurses Assn. Wash., D.C. Rx, m-s 1,050 1,000609-256-230010-15 American Academy of Dermatology Wash., D.C. Rx, m-s,or, ce 1,700 5,000 708-330-109022-26 American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Atlanta m-s, ce,or 2,100 12,500 708-823-7186March4-7 Soc. of Cardiovascular & Interventional Radiology Seattle ce2,500 1,000 703-691-18055-7 Assn. of Operating Room Nurses Dallas Rx, m-s, or, ce 2,0007,200 303-755-630410-12 American Pharmaceutical Assn. Nashville, Tenn. Rx, hc, h/s2,500 5,500 202-429-754713-16 Society of Amer. Gastrointestinal Endo. SurgeonsPhiladelphia m-s, or 1,700 1,200 310-314-240414-17 American Burn Assn. Nashville, Tenn. Rx, m-s, ce 1,6002,500 708-824-570016-18 American Society on Aging Anaheim, Calif. Rx, m-s 8003,500 415-974-960027-29 Federation of American Health Systems Wash., D.C. Rx, m-s, h/s, or, ce 3,600 1,900 800-880-3247April12-14 Arthroscopy Assn. of North America Wash., D.C. m-s, or2,000 1,200 708-292-226215-16 American Society for Laser Medicine & Surgery Orlando,Fla. laser supplies 1,265 1,100 715-845-928321-23 The Healthcare Forum San Francisco h/s, co, pub 1,8952,000 415-356-432221-23 American Assn. for Cancer Research Wash., D.C. Rx, lab,pub, h/s 1,450 7,000 609-848-100022-23 American Society of Clinical Pathologists Boston lab, h/s,pub 1,000 3,500 312-738-133622-24 American Society of Post Anesthesia Nurses Phoenix Rx, m-s 1,150 1,700 609-848-100025-27 National Kidney Foundation Anaheim, Calif. Rx, m-s, h/s,pub 1,700 2,600 816-221-955926-5/3 Occupational Health Nurses San Antonio, Tex. Rx, m-s, h/s,pub 1,500 5,000 609-848-100028-30 American Assn. for Thoracic Surgery San Diego Rx, m-s, or1,600 2,500 508-526-833029-5/1 American Assn. of Neurological Surgeons Minneapolis Rx,m-s, lab 1,800 6,200 708-692-950029-5/1 American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists DenverRx, pub, lab 1,600 10,000 202-638-5577Exhibitor Legend: pharmaceutical (Rx); medical-surgical supplies(m-s); laboratory (lab); hardware/software (h/s); packaging (pkg);home care (hc); managed care providers (mc); operating room (or);capital equipment (ce); consultants (co); publishers (pub)Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996PRODUCER PRICE INDEX INCHES 0.1% HIGHER INNOVEMBER; MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY0.3%Analysis:The finished goods component of the Producer Price Index inchedhigher by 0.1% in November, putting it at 128.6. This index, whichtracks wholesale level prices, stands at its highest point since 1982,and is 2.0% higher than its November 1994 level.Only two of the 16 selected categories tracked in this month's PPIreport registered price increases, led by surgical instruments,including suture needles, prices of which rose by 0.6%. Fivecategories decreased, led by catheter prices, which dropped by2.5%. Eight categories went unchanged for the month.November's unadjusted urban Consumer Price Index (for allconsumer items) slipped 0.1% to 153.6. Over the past 12 months,this index is up 2.6%.Medical Care Commodities rose 0.3% to 206.3 in November. Overthe past 12 months, this index is up 1.8%.For most data, 100 equals the price level in 1982. For ophthalmicgoods and surgical implants, the base year is 1983. Drugs are basedin 1984. The medical X-ray index base is 1990. Figures are notseasonally adjusted.(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)Source: U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1995Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996PURCHASING MANAGERS: MANUFACTURING SLOWSFOR FOURTH STRAIGHT MONTHIn November, for the fourth consecutive month, economic activityslowed in the manufacturing sector, and at a slightly faster rate ofdecline than in October, according to the most recent report from theNational Assn. of Purchasing Management. While this washappening, the overall economy continued to grow, but at a slowerrate of growth than in the previous month.The NAPM Purchasing Managers' Index decreased a bit inNovember to 46.5%, compared with 46.8% in October. The NAPMProduction Index dropped to 45.8%, the lowest reading since June1995 (44.8%). Both New Orders and Backlog of Orders indexeshave reversed direction each month for the past five months. TheNew Orders Index for November rose to 50.1%, while the Backlogof Orders Index increased to 41.5%.The Supplier Deliveries Index for November recorded its fourthstraight month of faster delivery times, with a reading of 45.8%, thespeediest delivery indication since April 1991 (45.0%). TheInventories Index increased to 43.2%, possibly indicating thatinventory reduction activity may have passed its peak. Half of thepurchasers polled said their own materials and supplies levels wereabout right, but 44% said the levels were too high. Of the 20manufacturing industries tracked, just four reported Novemberimprovement, compared with eight improving in October overSeptember.Purchasing Managers' Index (over 50% indicates that manufacturingeconomy is generally expanding)November '95: 46.5%October '95: 46.8%November '94: 59.9%Production Index (over 50%, over time, is generally consistent withgrowth)November '95: 45.8%October '95: 48.2%November '94: 66.7%Inventories Index (over 42%, over time, is generally consistent withgrowth)November '95: 43.2%October '95: 40.7%November '94: 47.2%Price Index (over 47%, over time, is consistent with price increases)November '95: 44.5%October '95: 46.7%November '94: 77.9%Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Wright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was electedWright Medical Technology, Inc.: Richard D. Nikolaev was electedpresident and CEO of this Arlington, Tenn.-based manufacturer oforthopedic products and instrumentation. Nikolaev has had morethan 30 years of experience in the orthopedic business, first as asenior executive at DePuy, Inc., Warsaw, Ind., then as president ofProtek, Inc., now a subsidiary of the Swiss firm Sulzer Medica, andmost recently as president of Minneapolis-based Orthomet, Inc.,which was acquired by Wright in December 1994. Herbert W.Korthoff will stay on as chairman of Wright Medical, though he willstep back from day-to-day company management duties to focus onlong-term objectives following Nikolaev's appointment.Wright Medical also promoted Terry Finley to general manager ofCanadian and European Operations. Finley has more than 20 yearsin the orthopedic industry, with experience in finance and in salesand marketing. He was most recently general manager of theHowmedica Canada Division of Pfizer Hospital Products, Ltd.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Baxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairmanBaxter International: William B. Graham retired as senior chairmanand resigned from the board of directors of this Deerfield, Ill.-basedmedical supply corporation. Lester B. Knight and Harry M. JansenKraemer Jr. were named to the board. Graham, 84, joined Baxter in1945 as vice president and manager and was named to the board ofdirectors that same year.Baxter also appointed Marvin L. Miller president and CEO of BaxterHealthcare Corp.'s Princeton, N.J.-based Nextran unit, whichhandles the development and commercialization of organ transplanttechnologies and services. Most recently, Miller served as vicepresident of biotechnology licensing for American Cyanamid Co.,Wayne, N.J. Prior to that, he was vice president of Johnson &Johnson International, New Brunswick, N.J.Finally, Baxter promoted Manuel A. Baez to executive vicepresident, where he will continue to be responsible for expandingworldwide markets for the company and globalizing Baxter'shospital products manufacturing operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Medline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of theMedline Industries, Inc.: Susan Hall was named president of theMedcrest(R) Cubicle/Drapery Division of this Mundelein, Ill.-basedmanufacturer and distributor of health care supplies and textileproducts. The Medcrest division provides health care institutionswith stock and custom decorative textiles, coordinated bed linen andupholstery, and wall and floor coverings. Hall joined Medline in1994 as director of marketing communications. She previouslyworked for ConAgra, Rand McNally and New York-based Bristol-Myers Squibb.Medtronic, Inc.: Robert H. Kayser was promoted to vice president,pacing, Europe, for this Minneapolis-based medical technologymanufacturer. He will be responsible for the overall leadership ofpacemaker marketing in Europe and for assisting Medtronic'sorganizations in Europe in meeting marketing and financial goals ofthe pacing business. This month, Kayser began his new duties at thenew headquarters of Medtronic Europe near Lausanne, Switzerland.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996HIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations forHIDA: Cara C. Bachenheimer, director of government relations forthe Health Industry Distributors Assn., was named executivedirector of HIDA's Home Health Care and Long-Term Care MarketGroups. She succeeds Craig Jeffries, who has joined HealthspanServices Inc., Kingsport, Tenn.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Behring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head ofBehring Diagnostics: Rudi Steinmann was appointed head ofworldwide sales and marketing for global operations by thisFrankfurt, Germany-based immunodiagnostics company. He joinsBehring after spending the past 17 years at Abbott Laboratories,Abbott Park, Ill., most recently as general manager of AbbottDiagnostics Germany.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Rusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of thisRusch International: Frank Sodha was promoted to president of thisDuluth, Ga.-based manufacturer of urological and anesthesiamedical devices, where he will be responsible for all globaloperations. Sodha, who joined the company three years ago,previously was responsible for global manufacturing.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996B&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named directorB&G Equipment Co.: John Jefferson Dykstra was named directorfor the cleaning and maintenance division of this Plumsteadville,Pa.-based manufacturer of sprayers and spraying equipment forpesticides and other chemicals. Dykstra will head up all sales andmarketing functions to the industrial, commercial and retail markets,including health care facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Varian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named nationalVarian Associates, Inc.: David A. Berkowitz was named nationalaccounts manager for this Palo Alto, Calif.-based medicalaccelerator manufacturer. He previously served as vice president ofthe health systems group at ECRI, Plymouth Meeting, Pa.Varian also promoted Scott J. Mestman to director of nationalaccounts. He joined the company in 1981 as a biomedical engineerand served in a variety of positions, most recently as southwestdistrict sales manager.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel,Imagyn Medical, Inc.: Chris Bova joined this Laguna Niguel,Calif.-based manufacturer of minimally invasive devices forwomen's infertility and gynecological surgery as vice president ofsales. Most recently, Bova served as director of sales, accessdivision, for Sims Deltec, St. Paul, Minn.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 1996Owens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver divisionOwens & Minor, Inc.: Larry Sapp was promoted to Denver divisionvice president for this Richmond, Va.-based medical-surgical supplydistributor. He succeeds Virgil Alonzo, who resigned that position.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-5IA086-000615-B039-204http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh56.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015404 text/html 65320HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:39 GMTContent-length: 65133Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh56.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UNIV. OF PA DOCTORS SETTLE WITH GOVT. ON FALSE CLAIMS (515 words) 8TH CIR. MODIFIES STANCE ON INSURERS' OBLIGATION TO ASSURE PAYMENT (482 words) SC MAN ASKS 4TH CIR. TO REVIEW STATE HEALTH POOL'S HIV EXCLUSION (594 words) SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW PA'S CONDITIONS ON MEDICAID-FUNDED ABORTIONS (815 words) U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF INJUNCTION ON NE'S COVERAGE LIMITS (773 words) MAINE MEDICAID PROGRAM AGREES TO LOOSEN NUTRITION SUPPLEMENT REQUIREMENTS (331 words) 9TH CIRCUIT REFUSES REHEARING ON ABORTION RECUSAL ISSUE (713 words) PETITION SEEKS ANSWER ON STANDARD FOR CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES (775 words) 6TH CIR. FINDS EXCESS INSURER LIABLE FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES (438 words) 4TH CIR.: INSURER MUST REVIEW DENIAL OF 'OUTSIDE SERVICE AREA' COVERAGE (359 words) NEW ENGLAND INSURER TARGETED FOR UNLAWFUL DISCOUNTS (560 words) AR BLUE CROSS ACCUSED OF CHEATING POLICYHOLDERS OUT OF DISCOUNTS (563 words) U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF HMO VICARIOUS LIABILITY CLAIM (404 words) PETITIONER SAYS ERISA AUTHORIZES INJUNCTIONS OF STATE COURT ACTIONS (1096 words) 6TH CIRCUIT: CARDIAC SURGEON FAILED TO SHOW CONCERTED ACTION (337 words) DISCOVERY CONTINUES IN PRIVACY SUIT AGAINST INDIANA HOSPITAL (390 words) CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996UNIV. OF PA DOCTORS SETTLE WITH GOVT. ON FALSE CLAIMS     Without admitting wrongdoing, the approximately 600 doctorsof the University of Pennsylvania's medical faculty agreed to pay$30 million to deflect further government action for falseMedicare claims revealed by auditors.  United States v.University of Pennsylvania Health System (ED PA).     According to published reports, audits of the ClinicalPractices of the University of Pennsylvania (CPUP), whichcomprises Penn's faculty, revealed approximately $10 million infalse billing to Medicare from 1989 to mid-1994.  The falseclaims were reported to be of two types: (1) "upcoding" " whereMedicare was billed for more expensive procedures or examinationsthan those actually performed; and (2) billing by faculty doctorsfor procedures actually performed by resident doctors intraining.  This latter category represents "double dipping,"since Medicare already pays for teaching costs in its directreimbursement to hospitals.     The settlement, entered into by the parties Dec. 12,requires CPUP to pay the government $30,013,490 in reimbursementfor the false claims, with the remaining $20-odd millionconstituting a monetary penalty.  In return, the governmentreleases CPUP from civil liability and potential exclusion fromparticipation in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.     CPUP is not released from liability under the InternalRevenue Code nor from criminal prosecution by the settlement.  Infact, the settlement specifies that CPUP may not label thesettlement as punitive for the purpose of invoking a doublejeopardy defense to any criminal charges.  The settlement alsodoes not preclude the government from pursuing civil actionsagainst individual doctors.     The settlement binds CPUP to continue the implementation ofa compliance program.  According to the compliance programsummary, "CPUP is committed to providing the highest qualitymedical care to all patients in full compliance with billingrequirements."  The compliance program includes: (1) thecentralization of billing functions beginning with centralizedinpatient chart abstraction; (2) annual external audits andcontinuous internal audits through the creation of a new Officeof Billing Compliance; (3) the continuation of the mandatoryeducation and training of physicians and billing personnel begunin mid-1994; and (4) the establishment of two telephone linesdedicated to billing information and reporting.     However, the settlement may not be the last word on CPUP'sbilling practices.  According to Doug Smith, a spokesman forPennsylvania Blue Shield, Medicare's fiscal intermediary inPennsylvania and New Jersey, Blue Shield has begun its ownintensive investigation of CPUP.  Smith said that itsinvestigation arose out of its normal provider utilizationreviews simultaneous with the government's investigation.  Heindicated that Blue Shield and the federal government have beenworking together on the matter following receipt of a letter froman anonymous tipster describing CPUP's fraudulent billingpractices.     There is no timeframe for the completion of theinvestigation, says Smith, but he said Blue Shield will bethorough in an effort to recoup any monies overbilled.  Accordingto published reports, Blue Shield sells "Medigap" insurance underits "Security 65" plan to 800,000 Pennsylvanians over age 65.Smith says that Blue Shield investigators will look at claimsfiled under that plan as well as those under its regular and HMOplans.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19968TH CIR. MODIFIES STANCE ON INSURERS' OBLIGATION TO ASSUREPAYMENT     Health care insurers are not necessarily excused fromproviding assurances of payment to plan participants under theAmericans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a panel of the EighthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals held recently.  Henderson et al. v.Bodine Aluminum et al., No. 95-2469 (8th Cir.).     The panel's amended opinion follows its earlier grant of apreliminary injunction barring Bodine Aluminum, Inc. fromrefusing to cover the high-dosage chemotherapy treatment (HDCT)needed by breast cancer sufferer Karen E. Henderson, the wife ofa Bodine employee and beneficiary to its health care plan.  Thepanel found the exclusion on HDCT for breast cancer contained inBodine's plan to be discriminatory because the HDCT was notexcluded for other cancers for which it is an accepted treatment.     In its original Sept. 27 decision, the panel held, "We agreewith the appellees Healthy Alliance Life Insurance Company andAlliance Blue Cross and Blue Shield that because they do notemploy Henderson's husband but merely provide insurance servicesto Bodine Aluminum, Inc. and its health benefits program, theyare not responsible for giving the assurance of payment that [theplaintiffs] seek.  The...appellees are not covered under theADA."               However, the panel, in amending its opinion on Oct. 31,backed off a clear conclusion on the insurers' responsibilities.The amended opinion reads, "Appellees...argue that because theydo not employ Henderson's husband but merely provide insuranceservices to Bodine Aluminum, Inc. and its health benefitsprogram, they are not responsible for giving the assurance ofpayment that [the plaintiff] seeks.  We express no opinion onthis issue, leaving it instead to be decided in the firstinstance by the district court."     The panel went on to note that its findings of fact andconclusions of law in granting a preliminary injunction to theplaintiff were not binding on the district court "so that none ofthe substantive issues discussed in this opinion are foreclosedfrom being litigated on remand."     When contacted by the Health Law , Henderson's attorney,Sheldon Weinhaus of Weinhaus and Dobson in St. Louis, said hemoved for an amended opinion because he was "upset with theexculpation of Blue Cross."     "Insurers act far more than simply issuing an insurancepolicy," said Weinhaus.  Weinhaus noted for example that insurersoften reserve the power to act as plan sponsors and changebenefit levels, making them de facto employers.     Since Henderson's participation in the HDCT trials wasrandomized, and she ultimately received only an "intensive"regimen of chemotherapy that Blue Cross would have paid for,Weinhaus advised that the district court asked the parties toaddress why the action should not be dismissed as moot.  Weinhaussaid that the matter of damages remains at issue.  Also remainingat issue is the question of what happens should the intensivechemotherapy prove inadequate and Henderson needs the HDCTtreatment, said Weinhaus.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SC MAN ASKS 4TH CIR. TO REVIEW STATE HEALTH POOL'S HIV EXCLUSION     A Columbia, SC, man with AIDS on Dec. 4 asked the FourthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals to review a federal judge's recentruling that the South Carolina Health Insurance Pool (SCHIP) doesnot violate the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) by refusingcoverage for persons with HIV and AIDS.  Givens v. South CarolinaHealth Insurance Pool et al., No. 95-2791 (4th Cir.).     On July 14, U.S. District Judge Dennis Shedd said plaintiffSamuel P. Givens Jr. could not challenge the SCHIP's restrictionunder the ADA because ADA Section 501(c) bars the act from beingconstrued to prohibit "underwriting..., classifying..., andadministering...risks that are based on or not inconsistent withState law."  The judge, who did not reach the Pool's claim thatit is not an ADA-covered entity, said the statutory decision toexclude people with HIV and AIDS "is essentially an underwritingdecision," and that "HIV and AIDS are legitimate riskclassifications for underwriting purposes."     In his appeal, Givens, who was substituted for now-deceasedoriginal plaintiff John Doe in 1994, says the ruling is wrongbecause HIV/AIDS is the only disease singled out by SCHIP.  Headds that the ruling was entered despite the state's failure tosubmit supporting actuarial data that persons with HIV/AIDS aremore costly to care for than those with cancer, heart disease orother ailments.  He observes the irony that while he was deniedadmittance, the Pool was created in 1989 by the South CarolinaGeneral Assembly expressly to provide coverage "to all residentsof South Carolina denied insurance due to a preexisting healthcondition."     "Since it began operating, the Pool has followed thestatutory mandate to exclude people with HIV/AIDS from coveragefor medical care of any condition," said Givens' Fourth Circuitpetition.  "The Pool has no knowledge of any research undertakenby the South Carolina General Assembly to estimate how many SouthCarolina residents have HIV/AIDS and would qualify for Poolcoverage and the impact their inclusion on the Pool would have."The petition said SCHIP has yet to conduct such research itself.     "It is not surprising that the Pool offered no evidence tojustify the exclusion of people with HIV/AIDS alone because thereis no evidence that could ever support the exclusion," Givensargued.  "Study after study has shown that the costs of treatingHIV/AIDS are comparable to, and oftentimes less than, the costsof treating other medical conditions.  While not a substitute forsound actuarial data, these studies are instructive anddemonstrate that there is no basis for excluding only people withHIV/AIDS from the Pool."     Givens estimated that although the lifetime costs oftreating HIV/AIDS averages in the "$60-80,000 range" and is notcovered by SCHIP, all other diseases are covered, including endstage renal disease, "estimated at $175,000," multiple sclerosis,"$207,000," and cancers, which he said "generally cost $114,000for a lifetime of treatment."  He offered no comparison of therates of frequency between HIV/AIDS and the other ailments.     He concluded by reiterating that the Pool is a coveredentity of the ADA by virtue of the ADA's self-stated applicationto "public entit[ies]" including "any department, agency, ...orother instrumentality of a state," 42 U.S.C. Section 12115(1)(B).     Givens is represented by Peter Tepley of Turnipseed &Associates, and Doak Wolfe, both of Columbia, SC; and by MarcElovitz, Matthew Coles and Ruth Harlow of the American CivilLiberties Union Foundation in New York City.  SCHIP isrepresented by Douglas McKay Jr. and Ruskin C. Foster of McKay,McKay, Henry & Foster, also in Columbia.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SUP. CT. ASKED TO REVIEW PA'S CONDITIONS ON MEDICAID-FUNDEDABORTIONS     The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by petition for writ ofcertiorari filed Nov. 22, seeks Supreme Court review of a ThirdCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals decision invalidatingPennsylvania's reporting and physician certification requirementsfor Medicaid-funded abortions.  Knoll et al. v. ElizabethBlackwell Health Center for Women et al., No. 95-820 (U.S.).     The circuit panel had adjudged that the requirements werepreempted by the 1994 version of the Hyde Amendment, a rider toappropriations legislation that has governed in various formsMedicaid coverage of abortions since 1976.     The petitioners assert that the Third Circuit panel "upsetthe balance of federal-state relations in a way which justifiesthe Court's review" by "extend[ing] an unwarranted deference tothe decisions of a sub-cabinet level official" and by "allow[ing]those decisions to override an otherwise valid state statute."     Citing the U.S. Supreme Court's opinion in Gregory v.Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452 (1991), the petitioners maintain that ifCongress intended to alter the constitutional balance between thefederal government and the states, it must do so clearly andunequivocally.  The petitioners note that the panel agreed thatthe Hyde Amendment is silent with respect to the reportingrequirements at issue, but that the majority looked to"bureaucratic fiat" to discern congressional intent.     The petitioners also argue that the Third Circuit panel'sdecision raised the ancillary issues of the deference due "anagency position first asserted in litigation," and whether theSecretary of Health and Human Services has any rulemakingauthority under the Hyde Amendment.     In their Dec. 19 brief in opposition, the respondents arguethat the Third Circuit panel correctly affirmed the striking downof Pennsylvania's reporting and certification requirements asconflicting with its "obligation under federal law to fund allabortions for which funding is not proscribed by Congress."  Thisruling is consistent with those of six other circuits and ofnumerous district courts that have not been appealed or for whichappellate rulings have not yet come down, say the respondents,the petitioners' "attempts to manufacture the appearance of acircuit conflict" notwithstanding.     The respondents also deny that the panel based its decisionon "an agency interpretation first asserted in litigation."Instead, the petitioners argue that the decision was made "on thebasis of a long-standing, properly promulgated federalregulation" that was entitled to deference.               Finally, the respondents assert that "because this caserevolves in large part around the peculiarities of Pennsylvanialaw, a decision by this Court on the merits will have anextremely limited application outside of Pennsylvania."  As aresult, "it would be improvident for the Court to use its limitedresources at this time to decide this case, say the respondents.     The instant litigation had its genesis when the ElizabethBlackwell Health Center, a provider of first trimester abortions,and its two co-appellees, Greater Women's Medical Fund, aprovider of general health care services to the indigent, andCHOICE, a health care information hot line, challenged thoseportions of Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act that placedreporting requirements on women seeking Medicaid-funded abortionsfor pregnancies arising from rape or incest.  Also challengedwere those provisions of the Act which require that a physicianwithout a pecuniary interest in performing abortions verify thatcarrying the pregnancy to term would place the woman's life indanger.     The district court had granted summary judgment in favor ofBlackwell, noting that the 1994 version of the Hyde Amendmentlacked the reporting and physician certification requirements ofthe Pennsylvania statute. The district court interpreted theomission to indicate Congress's intent to eliminate theserequirements.     A majority of the Third Circuit panel agreed that theprovisions of the Act at issue were preempted by the HydeAmendment.  The majority rejected the district court's conclusionthat by omitting reporting and physician certificationrequirements from the 1994 Hyde Amendment, Congress intended toprohibit these types of requirements.  However, the majoritydeferred to the Health Care Financing Administration'sinterpretation of the Hyde Amendment " that any state law notincluding a waiver of the rape or incest reporting requirement incases where the patient is unable to comply for physical orpsychological reasons " unlawfully restricted access to abortionservices.     Also given deference by the panel was the HCFA'sinterpretation that one " and only one " physician need attestthat a patient's life would be endangered by carrying a pregnancyto term.     Representing the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is John G.Knorr III, Chief Deputy Attorney General and Chief, LitigationSection, Harrisburg, PA.  Representing the respondents are LindaJ. Wharton and Susan J. Frietsche of the Women's Law Project,Philadelphia; Mary A. McLaughlin and Cynthia L. Randall ofDechert Price & Rhoads, Philadelphia; Kathryn Kolbert and Eve C.Gartner of the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, New YorkCity; and Seth Kreimer of the University of Pennsylvania Schoolof Law, Philadelphia.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF INJUNCTION ON NE'S COVERAGE LIMITS     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 16 denied the State ofNebraska's petition for review of a lower court's decisionenjoining it from enforcing its abortion coverage limits.  Nelsonet al. v. Orr et al., No. 95-766 (U.S.).     In his Dec. 7 brief in opposition to the state's petition,Dr. G. William Orr, a Nebraska physician, pointed out that theEighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' decision "is in completeaccord with every standing decision of the federal appellate anddistrict courts" to decide the question of whether "stateMedicaid programs must cover abortions for which federal fundingis not proscribed."     Among the cases cited by Orr were Elizabeth Blackwell HealthCtr. for Women v. Knoll, 61 F.3d 170 (3rd Cir. 1995) and Hern v.Beye, 57 F.3d 906 (10th Cir. 1995).     Further, Orr argued that these federal court decisions are"supported by the structure of the federal Medicaid Act"(Title XIX) and the Court's decision in Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S.297 (1980).  In McRae, the Court rejected the claim that a statehad the obligation to unilaterally cover medically necessaryabortions for which federal funding was being withheld.  Orrargued that this decision implies "that Title XIX requires statesto cover those medically necessary abortions for which thefunding obligation is not unilateral...and for which federalfunding is available under the Hyde Amendment."     Additionally, Orr pointed out that the Health Care FinancingAdministration, the federal agency charged with overseeing theMedicaid program, had issued a directive interpreting the changein the Hyde Amendment in a manner consistent with the EighthCircuit panel's ruling.  That interpretation is "entitled tosubstantial deference" by the Court, said Orr.     Finally, Orr argued that the courts below correctly ruledthat Title XIX created a federal right for which 42 U.S.C.Section 1983 provides a remedy.  Orr distinguished Suter v.Artist M., 503 U.S. 347 (1992), where the court found no privateright of action attached to the Adoption Assistance and ChildWelfare Act of 1980, "because no such privately enforceable rightwas 'unambiguously' conferred by Congress."  Orr said that Suteris inapplicable here since "the obligation of participatingstates to provide Medicaid coverage for those medically necessaryabortions for which federal funding is available is unambiguous."     The state of Nebraska had filed suit in the name of Gov. E.Benjamin Nelson, after receipt of a letter from HCFA announcing achange in the Hyde Amendment, an annual appropriations bill riderrestricting federal reimbursement for abortions.  That letterincluded HCFA's interpretation that the change mandated statefunding for abortions of pregnancies resulting from rape orincest.  At the time of receipt of the letter, Nebraska'sMedicaid Manual limited state funding to abortions where thewoman's life was in danger.     The district court granted summary judgment in favor of therespondents on Nov. 4, 1994, and enjoined enforcement of theMedicaid Manual's abortion coverage limits.  A panel of theEighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed the districtcourt's decision on July 25, 1995, holding that Title XIXmandated that the states fund all medically necessary proceduresfor which federal funding is available.     In their Nov. 14 petition for writ of certiorari, thepetitioners asserted that the Eighth Circuit failed to recognizeNebraska's authority under Title XIX to create coverage plans"which are reasonable and consistent with the objectives of theMedicaid Act."  Quoting the court's decision in Beal v. Doe, 432U.S. 438, 444 (1992), the petitioners maintained that "[n]othingin Title XIX requires participating states to fund everyprocedure that falls within the delineated categories of medicalcare."     The petitioners added that the Eighth Circuit decision isirreconcilable with a line of cases, including Zbaraz v. Quern,596 F.2d 196 (7th Cir. 1979) and Preterm, Inc. v. Dukakis, 591F.2d 121 (1st Cir. 1979), which recognize a state's discretion toconstruct Medicaid plans to suit their own circumstances.     The petitioners also advanced the argument that the court inHarris "implicitly rejected the contention that the HydeAmendment substantively amended Title XIX."     Finally, the petitioners asserted that the supremacy clausedoes not give the respondents the right, under 42 U.S.C. Section1983, to nullify a state law.     "Section 1983 was not intended to give a cause of action toindividuals where the only "wrong" committed by a state ismisapprehending the precise location of the boundaries betweenstate and federal power," the petitioners said.     Representing Orr were Simon Heller and Janet Benshoof of theCenter for Reproductive Law and Policy, New York City, andLawrence I. Batt of Batt & Associates, Omaha, NE.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996MAINE MEDICAID PROGRAM AGREES TO LOOSEN NUTRITION SUPPLEMENTREQUIREMENTS     Avoiding the progression of a legal battle to the FirstCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals, the Maine Department of HumanServices on Nov. 14 agreed to expand its state Medicaid coverageto include liquid dietary supplements for clinically malnourishedAIDS patients who do not yet use a feeding tube.  Fisher et al.v. Sheehan (previously, Hines v. Sheehan), No. 94-326-P-H (D ME).     In September, the attorney for now-deceased plaintiffRaymond Hines filed a notice of appeal with the First Circuit,challenging U.S. District Judge D. Brock Hornby's July rulingaffirming the Maine Medicaid rule governing supplement coverage.Hines was previously denied Medicaid coverage for supplements hewas taking.     The trial judge said that although the state failed "even toarticulate a plausible reason" for limiting liquid dietarysupplement coverage only to persons with end stage renal diseasewhile denying coverage for those diagnosed as clinicallymalnourished, such a requirement could not be found to violatethe Americans With Disabilities Act, the federal Medicaid Statuteand regulations (42 U.S.C. Sections1396, 1396r-8; 42 C.F.R.Section 440.230[c]), or the U.S. Constitution's equal protectionclause.     Under a stipulation of dismissal filed with the FirstCircuit by both parties, the Department has agreed to amend itsMaine Medical Assistance Manual to provide coverage of liquidnutrition to Medicaid recipients who are: "A) Currentlymalnourished...; and B) At significant risk for malnourishmentsecondary to an underlying medical condition...."     The Department was instructed to propose such amendments tocurrent rules by Dec. 31, 1995, and to "promptly identify anycurrent Medicaid recipients who have a request pending (includingany pending appeals) for coverage of liquid nutrition.  Thestate, which did not admit to any liability in entering theagreement, will pay $4,105 in legal costs and filing fees and paysubstitute plaintiff William Herbert Fisher $300.     Hines was represented by Jack Comart of Pine Tree LegalAssistance, Inc.  Andrew M. Gattine of the Maine Department ofthe Attorney General represented the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19969TH CIRCUIT REFUSES REHEARING ON ABORTION RECUSAL ISSUE     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 27 rejectedthe suggestion for a rehearing en banc in the matter of a judge'srefusal to recuse himself from an appeal of two abortion protestconvictions.  Feminist Women's Health Center et al. v. Codispotiet al., No. 90-35266 (9th Cir.)     The panel members had polled all active judges of thecircuit, and none requested a vote on whether to rehear thematter en banc.     The plaintiffs, in their Nov. 21 motion for rehearing,asserted the importance of the question of "whether a judgeshould recuse himself in a case concerning the rights of thosewho provide abortions, who has written that Catholic judgesshould ignore controlling judicial precedent if followingprecedent would support abortions and who has also expressedhostility in his writings toward the providers of abortions."     The plaintiffs said that in denying their earlier motion forrecusal, Judge John T. Noonan Jr. incorrectly construed the issueto be his membership in the Catholic church.  Rather, theplaintiffs contended that the issue was whether a judge, based onhis specific writings, "can follow his judicial oath rather thanhis published views."     The plaintiffs opened their clinic (the Center) in Everett,WA, in 1983.  The named defendants began protesting at the sitebefore the opening of business and engaged in harassing tacticsduring the eight months the center operated in Everett.     Beyond pickets and harassing phone calls, the clinic was seton fire on three separate occasions; after the last and mostsevere fire, the plaintiffs opted not to reopen.  Co-defendantCurtis Beseda was subsequently convicted for setting the fires.     The plaintiffs had sued in state court to obtain aninjunction against the protesters.  (The third clinic fire hadbeen set in the midst of the April 1994 trial.)  The state trialjudge granted an injunction barring the defendants from engagingin illegal conduct; the order proved ultimately unnecessary, asthe Center never reopened.     In 1986, the plaintiffs then brought the instant suit underSections1962(c)-(d) in the U.S. District Court for the WesternDistrict of Washington, alleging predicate acts of arson andHobbs Act extortion.  The jury concluded that Beseda had violatedSection 1962(c), and that Beseda, Dottie Roberts and SharonCodispoti conspired to commit the substantive violation.  Thecourt divided the attorney's fees equally among the defendants.     Roberts and Codispoti argued on appeal that the plaintiffscould have raised the RICO allegations in their state courtaction; the Ninth Circuit agreed in reversing the judgment.  "Weconclude that the RICO claims were ripe at the time the statecourt judgment was filed, and therefore, the Center could havebrought them in the earlier trial," the panel wrote.      The trial court had rejected the defense's res judicataarguments, concluding that the RICO claims were based ondifferent infringements of the plaintiff's rights and soughtdifferent redress, and that the RICO claims were not mature atthe time of the state trial because the plaintiffs had not yetdecided not to reopen.     However, the Ninth Circuit panel, by decision dated Aug. 27,held that the appellants satisfied the four requisite elementsfor res judicata.  The panel ruled that both lawsuits concernedidentical subject matter, parties and "quality of the persons foror against whom the claim is made."  The panel also determinedthat the two suits concerned the same cause of action afterconcluding, in an admittedly closer call, that the suits involvedinfringement of the same right.     "In essence, the Center is merely seeking remedies under anew legal theory: treble damages under RICO for the same conducton behalf of appellants," the panel wrote.  "This does notestablish an independent cause of action."  The panel reversedthe decision of the district court on that basis.     Judge Noonan, a member of the panel, denied the plaintiff'smotion for recusal Nov. 7, pointing to the provision ofArticle VI of the U.S. Constitution, which holds that "noreligious Test shall ever be required as a Qualification to anyOffice or public trust under the United States."     Representing the plaintiffs were Kristin Houser ofSchroeter, Goldmark & Bender and William J. Bender of Skellenger,Bender, Mathias & Bender, both of Seattle.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PETITION SEEKS ANSWER ON STANDARD FOR CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES     South Dakota's governor and attorney general on Nov. 29filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the U.S. SupremeCourt, maintaining that the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealserred in striking down South Dakota's one-parent notificationrequirement for minors seeking abortions.  Janklow et al. v.Planned Parenthood et al., No. 95-856 (U.S.).     The petitioners assert that granting the writ will resolvethe disagreement among the circuits on the precedent to follow inchallenges to the constitutionality of abortion statutes.     In striking down South Dakota's parental notificationrequirements, the Eighth Circuit panel applied the "undue burden"standard for determining the facial constitutionality of anabortion law set forth in Planned Parenthood of SoutheasternPennsylvania v. Casey, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (1992).  The court in Caseyheld that an abortion law is unconstitutional if it operates as asubstantial obstacle to the choice to undergo an abortion "in alarge fraction of cases in which [it] is relevant, ...[i]t is anundue burden, and is therefore invalid."     Prior to Casey, the applicable precedent was the strictburden placed on challengers to constitutionality enunciated inUnited States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739 (1979) ("the challengermust establish that no set of circumstances exist under which theAct would be valid").               The petitioners note that the Fifth Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals, in Barnes v. Moore, 970 F.2d 12 (1992), explicitlyrefused to interpret Casey as overruling Salerno.     The petitioners also note that granting the writ would allowthe Supreme Court to decide the important question of whether ajudicial bypass is required in a single-parent notice statute.The court, in Ohio v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, 497U.S. 502, 510 (1990), said that the question of the need forbypass procedures in parental notification statutes has not beendecided, noted the petitioners.  Answering this question, say thepetitioners, would allow state legislatures "[t]o functionproperly in an area which touches on constitutional rights."     The petitioners also argue that the Eighth Circuit panel'sdecision disregards the "rational relationship" test for noticestatutes subscribed to by a court majority in Hodgson v.Minnesota, 497 U.S. 417 (1990).  In Hodgson, the court examined atwo-parent notification statute in terms of its "rationalrelationship" with legitimate state interests.     Finally, even if the undue burden standard of Casey isadjudged to be applicable, the petitioners maintain that thenotice requirement does not place an undue burden on minorsseeking abortions.  First, the statute gives no veto power toparents, say the petitioners.     Second, the petitioners argue that the Eighth Circuit panelerred in (1) "treating South Dakota's one-parent notice statuteas equivalent to a two-parent statute"; and (2) "extend[ing] therationale of Casey for striking down spousal notice to the issueof one-parent notice with regard to 'mature minors.'"     Third, South Dakota's exception to the notice requirementfor minors who are abused by their parents "provides betterprotections for abuse victims than are available in judicialbypass states," argue the petitioners.     Fourth, the petitioners take the stance that the struck-downstatute would "maintain the confidentiality of the abortionrequested."     Last, there was no evidence before the Eighth Circuit panelsupporting "the existence of a large fraction of minors who wouldbe unduly burdened by [the] South Dakota parental noticestatute," the petitioners say.     The instant controversy arose when the U.S. District Courtfor the District of South Dakota ruled that the parentalnotification provision of South Dakota's abortion law wasunconstitutional because it did not allow for mature minors orfor those immature minors whose "best interests" do not includeparental involvement to bypass the requirement.               In affirming the district court's decision, the EighthCircuit panel held that the state had no legitimate interest in"placing a substantial obstacle" in the path of these categoriesof minors when they seek "pre-viability" abortions.  The law'sexception to the notification requirement for abused or neglectedminors did not adequately bypass the notification requirementbecause it did not protect the minor's confidentiality, said thepanel.  Additionally, the panel observed that the exception didnot provide access to an independent decisionmaker for adetermination on the minor's maturity and on whether it was inthe minor's "best interests" to involve a parent.     South Dakota's abortion law, enacted in 1993, prohibited,with some exceptions, the performance of abortions onunemancipated minors prior to 48 hours after written notice wasdelivered to at least one parent.     Representing the petitioners are Mark W. Barnett, AttorneyGeneral, State of South Dakota; and John P. Guhin and JanineKern, Deputy Attorneys General, Pierre, SD.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19966TH CIR. FINDS EXCESS INSURER LIABLE FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES     An excess insurer is liable for $128,232 in medical expensesincurred by a dependent covered by an employer's self-fundedmedical benefit plan, the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsruled Nov. 29, rejecting the insurer's interpretation of thecontract provision governing coverage for disabled beneficiaries.Thorn Apple Valley Inc. v. Allianz Life Insurance Co. of NorthAmerica, No. 94-1841 (6th Cir.).     Thorn Apple Valley sponsored and administered a self-fundedbenefit plan for its employees.  Under an excess risk policy,Allianz Life Insurance Co. was obligated to provide coverageabove a $200,000 deductible or attachment point for 1987 and a$75,000 deductible for 1988.  An employee's husband, RalphHoffer, was added as a dependent in 1981.  Their marriagecertificate described him as "unemployed-handicapped" because hewas blind due to insulin-dependent brittle diabetes mellitus.  Heenjoyed activities in and outside their home until late 1987,when he was hospitalized for end-stage kidney disease.  Hofferdied in 1988 in the hospital.     Thorn Apple was billed about $650,000 for Hoffer's medicalexpenses and notified Allianz it planned to file a claim underthe excess risk policy.  Thorn Apple then decided Hoffer wasineligible for benefits because the plan excluded dependents whoare "in a disabled condition" when they initially become eligiblefor coverage.  Thorn Apple then reversed its position, decidingHoffer was covered, but Allianz denied liability.     A diversity-based complaint was filed in U.S. District Courtfor the Eastern District of Michigan.  After a bench trial, JudgeLawrence P. Zatkoff ruled that Hoffer was not disabled within themeaning of the policy, ordered Allianz to reimburse $128,232 toThorn Apple and awarded post-judgment interest under federal andstate law.     The Sixth Circuit affirmed the award but modified byallowing only federal, not state, post-judgment interest in anopinion by Judge James L. Ryan.  The panel found Hoffer eligiblefor benefits because he was not in a "disabled condition" whenfirst covered by the plan, despite blindness and diabetes.  Theunambiguous language of the plan provides that a person isdisabled only if confined by illness or injury in a hospital,institution or at home and if unable to carry on any substantialpart of customary activities for someone of a similar age andgender.  Hoffer did not fit that definition, the panel held.     Next, the panel found no error in admission of hospitalbills as business records.     Finally, the panel held that Judge Zatkoff had improperlyawarded both federal and state post-judgment interest, thuscreating an impermissible double recovery.  Although it was adiversity-based action, only the federal statutory interestprovision applies, the panel found.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19964TH CIR.: INSURER MUST REVIEW DENIAL OF 'OUTSIDE SERVICE AREA'COVERAGE     A trial judge must have an adequate administrative recordwhen reviewing the discretion of a health plan administratorunder the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, even when theplan gives the administrator sole authority to determine theeligibility of beneficiaries under the plan, the Fourth CircuitU.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 4.  Bernstein v. CapitalCareInc., No. 94-2448 (4th Cir.).     Philip Bernstein filed suit to recover the medical expenseshis late brother Jeffrey Bernstein incurred for treatment of AIDSwhile the brother was in New York and outside the area covered byCapitalCare, a health maintenance organization.  The plan said itwould not cover treatment outside the Washington, DC, area if theneed for such treatment was foreseeable.     "Whether [the brother's] need for care was reasonablyforeseeable is a factual determination that must be supported bycompetent medical evidence" that was not before the court when itmade its ruling, the panel said.  The panel said theadministrative record developed by CapitalCare before itrejected the claim was so skimpy that the trial court had to relyon facts not before it.     Because the court had to review CapitalCare's decision underan abuse of discretion standard since the plan gave it solediscretion to determine eligibility for benefits, "theadministrative record must document the decision-making process.If the evidence before the plan administrator is inadequate, thedistrict court should remand the case to the administrator toreceive additional evidence and to make a new determination."     The panel further emphasized that the deference the trialjudge should accord the decision depends on how much of aconflict the administrator has.  In this case, "Capital Careoperates under a conflict of interest when it makes benefitdeterminations, because it both administers the plan and pays forbenefits received by its members.  In other words, if CapitalCaredenies health benefits to its members, it generally profits bythe amount of expenses avoided."     Bernstein's estate is represented by Richard Carter andJacqueline Bennett of Hudgins Carter & Coleman in Alexandria, VA.Charles Steele and Mary Atchley Jester of Foley & Lardner inWashington, DC represent CapitalCare.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996NEW ENGLAND INSURER TARGETED FOR UNLAWFUL DISCOUNTS     A class action was filed against United Health Plans of NewEngland in U.S. District Court in Boston Dec. 5, allegingdeception in the secret negotiation of discounts with hospitalsand health care providers and the failure to pass those discountson to the insureds.  Powers et ux. v. United Health Plans of NewEngland, No. 95-12633 (D MA).     The suit maintains that this practice caused insureds tooverpay their required copayment for medical procedures.     Lead plaintiffs Lisa and Patrick Powers, who are insured byUnited Health Plans of New England, brought suit on their behalfand on behalf of class members insured from Jan. 1, 1990, throughDec. 31, 1995.     The Powerses purchased health care insurance from United forthe period from March 1993 through Oct. 1, 1994.  Lisa Powersunderwent a Caesarean section on Aug. 9, 1994, for which she wasbilled $3,900 by her physician.  The insurance agreement withUnited required that the insured pay 30% of the charges and thePowerses paid the physician $1,170.  The plaintiffs were unawareof the pre-existing fee arrangement United had negotiated withthe physician, whereby he had agreed to a total payment of$2,100.  United paid the difference between what the plaintiffshad paid and the secret fee schedule the physician had accepted,resulting in United's paying $930 " 44% of the total rather thanthe 70% provided for in the contract.     The plaintiffs allege that as a result of United's unfairand deceptive acts, they and the class paid more than the 30%copayments they were obligated to pay according to theircontracts.  Plaintiffs allege violations of ERISA Section502(a)(1)(B), 29 U.S.C. Section 1132(a)(1)(B), claims forbenefits; ERISA Section 409(a), 29 U.S.C. Sections1109(a) and1106(b), breach of fiduciary duty; breach of contract; deceit andmisrepresentation; and unjust enrichment.  Plaintiffs also seek adeclaratory judgment and an accounting.     The suit alleges that United breached its fiduciary duty toclass members by negotiating discounts with hospitals and healthcare providers that applied only to United's portion of thecharges and did not benefit the class members.  Thus, classmembers paid amounts in excess of what they were contractuallyobligated to pay and United retained the difference, violatingthe terms of its own agreements.     The suit further claims that United has recorded paymentsagainst certain class members' lifetime, annual or proceduremaximums, in excess of what United actually paid, resulting inrestriction of benefits to which certain class members should beentitled.  In keeping the discounts secret, United allegedlymisled class members and hid the fact that it was using itsfiduciary position for its own exclusive benefit.  As a result ofUnited's breaches of fiduciary duty, class members ended uppaying millions of dollars more in health care costs than theywere contractually obligated to pay.     The plaintiffs seek a declaratory judgment, pursuant toERISA Section 502(a)(1)(B), 29 U.S.C. Section 1132(a)(1)(B), asto their entitlement to benefits of discounts negotiated andobtained by United.  They also seek certification of classstatus, an accounting for damages and economic harm allegedlycaused by United, award of damages for overpayment of insurancecopayments, award of prejudgment, and post-judgment interest, andaward of reasonable attorneys' fees.     The plaintiffs are represented by Norman Berman, GlenDeValerio and Jeffrey C. Block of Berman, DeValerio & Pease inBoston.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996AR BLUE CROSS ACCUSED OF CHEATING POLICYHOLDERS OUT OF DISCOUNTS     Arkansas Blue Cross and Blue Shield is cheating policyholders by not passing along discounts it negotiates withhospitals, clinics and other health care providers, contend twopolicyholders in a class action filed Nov. 15 in federal court inLittle Rock.  Hause et al. v. Arkansas Blue Cross and BlueShield, No. LR-C-95-729 (ED AR).     The suit contends that policyholders and others coveredunder plans governed by the Employee Retirement Income SecurityAct of 1974 are forced to pay disproportionate shares of hospitalcosts because the mutual insurance company negotiates discountsfor itself but not for policyholders.  As a result, the suitcontends, policyholders pay their copayment share on the basis ofthe full hospital bill while the company pays only a discountedshare of the bill.     Among other allegations, the plaintiffs assert the companyviolates the civil provisions of the Racketeer Influenced andCorrupt Organizations Act, as well as ERISA and its fiduciaryduties.  The plaintiffs also contend the company was guilty ofmisrepresentation to policyholders and concealed "its tortious,contract-breaching, statutorily prohibited, inequitable conductfrom the class," which is defined as "all individuals who are orwere participants, insureds/certificate holders under sicknessand accident benefit plans maintained by an employer or employeeorganization constituting employee welfare benefit plans coveredby ERISA (within the meaning of ERISA Section 3(1) and 4,29 U.S.C. Sections 1002(1) and 1003), which plans were written,underwritten or administered" by the company.     The suit asserts that under a typical plan, the companywould cover 80% of the costs, and the policyholder would pay 20%.The plaintiffs allege that the company would negotiate discountswith hospitals and clinics but that the discounts would not applyto the insureds' copayments, meaning that policyholders would paythe full 20% of the total bill, but the company would pay only80% of the negotiated, discounted portion it covered.  This hadthe effect of increasing the burden on the policyholders beyondthe 20% they were obliged to pay, the suit contends.     The plaintiffs allege that similar systems are used in atleast 13 other states and the District of Columbia.  However,they are not seeking to represent possible class members.     Arkansas Blue Cross breached its fiduciary duties, assertthe plaintiffs, because it negotiated discounts for itself butnot the beneficiaries; as a result, it paid less than theproportion of the actual bill it contracted to pay.  The suitalso contends that the company kept the discounts secret from thebeneficiaries, and recorded the shares paid by beneficiariesagainst their "lifetime maximums or procedure maximums in excessof what Arkansas Blue Cross paid."     The plaintiffs further allege that the company violated theRICO Act by receiving "income derived directly or indirectly froma pattern of racketeering activity."     The suit asks the court to declare a class action as soon aspossible, award compensatory damages based on the allegedoverpayments by policyholders because of the discounts, tripledamages under the RICO allegation, prejudgment interest, a fullaccounting of the unwarranted profits and disgorgement of thoseprofits, and an injunction requiring the company to disclose thediscounts and pass along the benefits to the beneficiaries.     The plaintiffs are represented by David S. Mitchell of theLittle Rock firm of McHenry and Mitchell and by Jay Youngdahl ofthe firm of Youngdahl and Sadin of Albuquerque.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996U.S. SUP. CT. DENIES REVIEW OF HMO VICARIOUS LIABILITY CLAIM     The U.S. Supreme Court on Dec. 4 denied the petition of ahealth maintenance organization seeking preemption of thevicarious malpractice claim filed against it by two of itssubscribers.  U.S. Healthcare, Inc. et al. v. Dukes et al.,No. 95-442 (U.S.).     In its Sept. 15 petition for writ of certiorari, U.S.Healthcare, Inc. (USHC) asserted that a panel of the ThirdCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals erred in remanding the plaintiffs'vicarious malpractice action against it to state court.  USHCargued that removal to federal court was required under thecomplete preemption doctrine of the Employee Retirement andIncome Security Act.     In their Oct. 11 response brief, the respondents argued thatremand to state court was proper because their complaint wasbased on only state law negligence, malpractice and agencytheories.     The litigation arose after the deaths of two individualsbeing cared for by USHC network providers.  One, Darryl Dukes,died with a highly elevated blood sugar level that allegedlycould have been diagnosed with a timely blood test.  The otherwas the stillborn infant daughter of USHC subscriber LindaVisconti.  Visconti developed symptoms of preeclampsia duringpregnancy, but her obstetrician allegedly did not react to thosesymptoms.     Both plaintiffs brought medical malpractice suits againstthe various providers involved.  They also alleged medicalmalpractice against USHC under ostensible and/or actual agencytheory.  The actions were removed to federal district court inPhiladelphia on the motion of USHC.     The district court subsequently dismissed both claimsagainst on the basis that they were "related to" an ERISA planand thus were preempted by ERISA.     The Third Circuit reversed the district court's dismissal ofthe claims against USHC and remanded them to state court.  Thepanel said that preemption hinged on whether the claims werefiled "to recover benefits due...under the terms of [the] plan,to enforce...rights under the terms of the plan, or toclarify...rights to future benefits under the terms of the plan."The panel ruled that the claims were filed strictly over thequality of the health care received under the plan and thus fellinto none of these categories.               Dukes and Visconti were represented by Attarah B. Feenaneand Stephen C. Josel of Stephen C. Josel and Associates, P.C.,Philadelphia.  U.S. Healthcare was represented by John T. Kelleyof Kelley, Wardel & Craig, Haddonfield, NJ, and David F. Simon ofits corporate legal staff.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PETITIONER SAYS ERISA AUTHORIZES INJUNCTIONS OF STATE COURTACTIONS     An employee welfare plan fiduciary in a Nov. 27 petition forwrit of certiorari claimed that the courts below erred indeclining to enjoin the Commonwealth of Virginia from subjectingthe plan to its statutory and regulatory requirements.  EmployersResource Management Co., Inc. et al. v. Shannon et al., No. 95-823 (U.S.).     In its brief in opposition filed Dec. 19, the Commonwealthargued that the petitioners' stance "would place state insuranceregulations into turmoil, and would effectively jettisonfundamental principles of federalism and comity."     Employers Resource Management Co. (ERM) provides "co-employment" services to client employers in 13 states.  As partof its agreements with the client employers, ERM assumesresponsibility for employee payroll and benefits in return forcontrol over employee training, performance, discipline and otherareas.  ERM maintains an employee benefit plan that providesmedical, dental, accidental death and dismemberment, andoccupational injury benefits and others for its "co-employees."     The Commonwealth of Virginia, through its State CorporationCommission and Commissioner of Insurance, notified ERM that itintended to move to enjoin ERM from operating in Virginia on thebasis that ERM's benefit plan was a multiemployer welfarearrangement (MEWA) subject to Virginia's insurance laws andregulations.  ERM had apparently failed to obtain the license tooperate required by the Commonwealth.  ERM filed its own suit infederal district court, seeking to enjoin the Commonwealth fromtaking that action.  In its action, ERM argued that its plan wasan employee welfare benefit plan under ERISA and was not a MEWA.ERM contended that the federal courts had the jurisdiction toenjoin any state action in violation of ERISA.     The Commonwealth responded to ERM's action with a motion todismiss, arguing that (1) the injunctive relief sought by ERM wasbarred by the Anti-Injunction Act, 28 U.S.C. Section 2283;(2) the district court must abstain, pursuant to Younger v.Harris, 401 U.S. 37 (1971), from exercising its jurisdiction; and(3) ERM's plan was a MEWA subject to its laws and regulations.     On Nov. 22, 1994, the district court granted theCommonwealth's motion to dismiss.  While it did not reach themerits of ERM's argument that its employee benefit plan is anERISA plan, the district court did rule that ERM did not make a"facially conclusive" ERISA preemption claim.  It also ruled thatERM's claim for injunctive and declaratory relief was barred bythe Younger abstention doctrine.     That decision was affirmed by a panel of the Fourth CircuitU.S. Court of Appeals on Sept. 19, 1995.  The Fourth Circuitpanel said that "[w]hile we appreciate that Congress intended forERISA to operate primarily in the federal sphere, we do notbelieve that ERISA created the type of 'unique' federal right orremedy [that qualifies as an exception to the Anti-InjunctionAct]."  The panel also rejected ERM's claim that "extraordinarycircumstances" existed warranting bypass of the Youngerabstention doctrine.     In its petition for writ of certiorari, ERM pointed to aconflict among the circuits as to "whether ERISA is a statute inwhich Congress has 'expressly authorized' the federal courts toenjoin state court proceedings within the meaning of the Anti-Injunction Act."  ERM cited as an example the decision in GeneralMotors Corp. v. Buha, 623 F.2d 455 (1980), wherein the SixthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals concluded that federal courts werenot barred from enjoining state court proceedings violatingERISA's preemption provisions.  U.S. Supreme Court review couldresolve this conflict, said ERM.     Also subject to resolution, said ERM, is the apparentconflict among earlier U.S. Supreme Court decisions on thequestion of "whether federal courts have the power under theAnti-Injunction Act to enjoin state court proceedings involvingmatters over which Congress has conferred exclusive jurisdictionupon the federal courts."  ERM cited to Capital Service, Inc. etal. v. NLRB, 347 U.S. 501 (1954), as teaching that federalagencies with exclusive jurisdiction over a class of claims mayenjoin state actions that tend to invade that jurisdiction.  Onthe other side, ERM cited to the lead opinion in Vendo Co. v.Lektro-Vend Corp., 433 U.S. 623 (1977), wherein exclusivejurisdiction under the Clayton Act did not support a stay instate court proceedings.     Finally, ERM asserted that the district court erred infinding abstention mandated under Younger.  In its petition, ERMstated, "ERISA, among all of the federal statutes, makes one ofthe most compelling cases for federal courts to refuse to abstainon Younger grounds.  ERISA preemption is a class of 'fieldpreemption' which has been categorized as 'super preemption,'displacing virtually all state laws from the field of employeebenefit plans, even state laws which are fully consonant withERISA.  Congress has coupled ERISA's expansive preemption with agrant to the federal courts of exclusive jurisdiction overequitable suits to enjoin violations of ERISA or enforce itsprovisions, which, in effect, is a manifestation of Congress'intention to have preemption claims resolved by federal courtsrather than the state courts."               In its brief in opposition, the Commonwealth argued that thepetitioners incorrectly contended "that ERISA's preemptive effectwholly deprives state courts of the ability to determine theirown jurisdiction in an area expressly left to the states byCongress in the McCarran-Ferguson Act."     The Commonwealth said that the federal courts "should notinterfere with the state enforcement proceedings pending in theVirginia court, which [is] fully capable of determining, andwhich should determine, both ERM's status as a MEWA underVirginia law and whether such proceedings had been preempted byCongress under ERISA."  As a result, it maintained that thedistrict court and the Fourth Circuit panel correctly ruled thatthe Anti-Injunction Act and the Younger abstention principlescompelled them to avoid interfering with the state proceedings.     Finally, the Commonwealth argued that ERISA does not meetthe two-prong test for an "expressly authorized" exception to theAnti-Injunction Act as specified in Mitchum v. Foster, 407 U.S.225, 238 (1972).  ERISA does not "create the type of uniquelyfederal right considered in Mitchum," said the Commonwealth, nordoes it "expressly authorize or its legislative historycontemplate injunctions against state court proceedings."     Employers Resource Management Co., Inc. is represented byAllan J. Graf of Farmer & Ridley, Los Angeles, Robert W. Ridley,of counsel.  The Commonwealth is represented by Patrick H.Cantilo, Randolph N. Wisener, and Steven E. Adkins of Cantilo,Maisel & Hubbard, L.L.P., Austin; and by Anthony Gambardella,General Counsel; Peter B. Smith, Senior Counsel; and Michael D.Thomas, Associate General Counsel of the Virginia StateCorporation Commission, Richmond.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19966TH CIRCUIT: CARDIAC SURGEON FAILED TO SHOW CONCERTED ACTION     The Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in an unpublishedNov. 22 decision upheld summary judgment against a cardiacsurgeon who filed a Sherman Act complaint against a hospital anda number of cardiologists.  Schwartz et al. v. Aultman HealthServices Association d/b/a Aultman Hospital et al., No. 94-3967(6th Cir.).     The court found insufficient evidence to support claims ofconspiracy and monopoly stemming from the physicians' refusal torefer patients to him for surgery.     Richard Schwartz, a cardiothoracic surgeon, had privilegesat Aultman Hospital.  He failed the thoracic surgery board examthree times, then stopped performing cardiac surgery from 1990 to1992.  After he decided to resume surgery, Aultman Hospitalrequired him to undergo further training before grantingtemporary privileges.  Even when his privileges were restored,the defendant cardiologists allegedly did not refer patients tohim.     Schwartz's Sherman Act complaint in the Northern District ofOhio alleged a conspiracy among the cardiologists and hospital torestrain trade and a monopoly or attempted monopoly of therelevant market for cardiac surgery.  Judge Ann Aldrich granted adefense motion for summary judgment.     Affirming in a per curiam opinion, the Sixth Circuit statedthat there was no direct evidence of a conspiracy, nor was therecircumstantial evidence of a conspiracy in restraint of trade.None of the defendants competed with Schwartz for cardiac surgerycases, and Aultman Hospital, in fact, lost revenue when patientswere sent to surgeons elsewhere.  It also said the purportedconspiracy makes no practical sense and noted the cardiologistsreceived no referral fee and, therefore, had no financial reasonto prefer other surgeons over Schwartz.     The court rejected the monopolization claim due to the lackof evidence of concerted action.  It said there was no attemptedmonopolization because the defendants were not Schwartz'scompetitors and were not motivated by incentives that would showan intent to monopolize or to destroy competition.  Nor was theredata defining a relevant geographic market to support his claimfor actual monopolization, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LAW LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996DISCOVERY CONTINUES IN PRIVACY SUIT AGAINST INDIANA HOSPITAL     A July 1996 trial date is set in an HIV-positive man'sconfidentiality suit against an Evansville, IN, hospital where heclaims the failure of emergency room personnel to use universalprecautions in treating him resulted in the disclosure of his HIVstatus to others and the loss of his job when his employer heardthe news.  Conway v. St. Mary's Medical Center et al., No. 82D03-9503-CT-637 (IN Super. Ct., Vanderburgh Cty).     Although an Americans With Disabilities Act-based suit overplaintiff Larry Conway's firing from an Evansville restaurantsettled in October for $25,000, his personal suit against St.Mary's Medical Center and two nurses there continues and is nowin discovery.     Conway says that because of emergency room nurse DonnaElder's failure to use proper precautions in treating the hand hecut severely while at work in 1993, he warned her of his HIVstatus and she refused to provide him with continued treatment.His suit alleges that he was sent to a patient waiting room wherenursing supervisor Robin Zeibell soon told him, in earshot ofothers, that he would have to submit to HIV and hepatitis Btesting before he could be treated.  Because of his need forimmediate medical attention, Conway says he submitted to thetests.               The suit says because Conway's HIV infection was noted onhis medical chart, "one or more" St. Mary's employees observedthe entry and told him that a copy of the record would be sent tohis employer, "The Pub" restaurant.  Upon learning of his HIVstatus, the restaurant effectively terminated Conway by failingto schedule him for work hours.     Conway's suit says St. Mary's was negligent in the hiring,training and retention of Elder and Zeibell, and that theplaintiff's privacy rights were violated under the IndianaCommunicable Disease Confidentiality Law (IN Code 16-41-8-1).     The hospital has denied violating Conway's privacy rightsand failed in an attempt to have the case reviewed by a medicalreview panel under the claim that the complaint sounded inmedical malpractice.     Conway is represented by Paul Chase and Sandra Gosling ofthe Indiana HIV Advocacy Program and John Jay Boyce of LegalServices Organization of Indiana's HIV/AIDS Legal Project.  Allare located in Indianapolis.  Patrick A. Shoulders of Ziemer,Stayman, Weitzel & Shoulders in Evansville represents thedefendants.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-6IA086-000615-B039-231http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015427 text/html 57966HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:45 GMTContent-length: 57779Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh22.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNet NOVEMBER 20, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES President Vetoes HHS Funding Bill (366 words) House Set To Block Medicaid Rules As White House Negotiations Drag (480 words) Self-Insured Tax Credit Could Expire (270 words) No Hill Override Expected On Medicare Physician Fee Plan (512 words) Disease Prevention Services Bill Readied For House Consideration (153 words) House VA Panel Backs Drug Discount Bill (170 words) Democrats Call Off Health Reform Vote, Mitchell Scrambles for Support (329 words) Health Professions, Prevention Bills Travel On Senate Fast Track (155 words) Cohen, Pryor Propose DME Reforms (181 words) HCFA Needs More Enforcement Authority Over Medicare HMOs (198 words) LEGISLATIVE SUMMARIES S.1933 (83 words) Health Professions Education (1279 words) Nurse Training (199 words) H.R.3508 (22 words) Health Professions Amendments (1846 words) Nurse Education (1229 words) NEW BILLS IN CONGRESS Following is a summary of health-related bills introduced in the (39 words) HOUSE BILLS (153 words) SENATE BILLS (234 words) CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991President Vetoes HHS Funding BillAs promised, President Bush Nov. 19 vetoed the fiscal 1992 HHSappropriations bill (H.R.2707) because of its provision overturning1988 regulations barring abortion counseling at federally fundedfamily planning clinics. A quick vote to override the veto wasdefeated Nov. 19, 276 to 156, or 12 votes short of the needed two-thirds majority. "I will sign a bill that does not include languagethat prohibits implementation of the abortion counseling andreferral rule," Bush said in his veto message. The President made itclear that his argument with Congress is over abortion. "I haveinformed the Congress on numerous occasions that. . .I would vetoany legislation that would entangle Title X with abortion." Title X ofthe Public Health Service Act authorizes funds for family planningclinics and bars provision of abortions. In 1988, HHS issued rulesprohibiting Title X clinics from referring patients to abortionclinics; in May, the Supreme Court found the rules constitutional. Abipartisan team of legislators amended the HHS funding bill to blockimplementation of the rules until Oct. 1, 1992. In his message, Bushsays the rules do not inhibit the doctor/patient relationship andallow women to receive "complete medical information." Speaking onthe Senate floor shortly after Bush's veto was received, Sen. EdwardKennedy (D-MA) sharply criticized the President. "Abortion forwomen is not the issue -- free speech for doctors is. The WhiteHouse is pandering to the right wing, and their position isindefensible," Kennedy said. Twenty members of the HouseCongressional Caucus for Women's Issues urged an veto override in aNov. 18 letter members of the House. "This is an unconscionableintrusion on the right of free speech, on the right of healthprofessionals to advise their patients, and on the right of women tomake an informed decision," the letter read.In 1992, Congress will take another shot at overturning the regs aspart of a Title X reauthorization. The House may try to vote on itsversion (H.R.3090) before adjourning; the Senate already hasapproved a freestanding bill (S.323) to overturn the ban. But finalvotes wouldn't occur until 1992, moving the fight closer to theelection.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991House Set To Block Medicaid Rules As White House Negotiations DragCongress appears poised to enact a short-term delay in BushAdministration regulations limiting states' Medicaid fundraising.With negotiations between the White House and the nation'sgovernors dragging, lawmakers seem determined to pass a billdelaying an Administration bid to ban state use of provider taxrevenues to gain federal matching dollars. The question now is forhow long? A House bill (H.R.3595) scheduled for a Nov. 19 floor votewould hold off the regulations until Sept. 30, 1992. That wouldprompt a veto by President Bush, says HCFA Administrator GailWilensky. The House is expected to approve the bill but may not havethe two-thirds majority needed to override a veto. Senators arewaiting for the House to act before moving forward. FinanceCommittee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) may push for a shortermoratorium, perhaps until April or July. That would allow forcontinued negotiations while blocking states from creating newprograms in the interim. HCFA and the National Governors' Assn.(NGA) staff have negotiated a tentative agreement that wouldeliminate use of "voluntary" donations by hospitals and others andlimit use of provider taxes to 22 percent of each state's Medicaidbudget. But that plan appears to be gaining little support fromindividual states. The deal would have to be ratified by Congress,which plans to adjourn by Thanksgiving. With time running out,Wilensky says she would favor a short term moratorium that alsowould block states from starting new programs. Otherwise, "theshort-term federal exposure to increased Medicaid spending will bevirtually unlimited," she says. Steps should be "taken now to reviseour approach to donations and taxes," she told the FinanceCommittee Nov. 19. Bentsen says HCFA should "be prepared to freezeframe the issue" so negotiators can spend the next weeks workingtoward a "reasonable" deal.A key sticking point in the negotiations is state designation ofdisproportionate share hospitals. HCFA wants to limit states' abilityto choose those hospitals. Some states are giving all of their acutecare hospitals that status and paying the higher rates with incomederived from provider taxes. HCFA and the NGA have suggestedlimiting the size of payment increases to 11-to-12.5 percent. Buthospital groups are threatening to go to court if any limits areincluded. A coalition of 61 groups representing hospitals, children,and labor are urging lawmakers to block the regulations. Thegovernors efforts are "well intentioned," says National Assn. ofPublic Hospitals President Larry Gage but the compromise is "illconceived and unacceptable." NAPH filed suit Nov. 14 to try todeclare the regulations illegal. Alabama also has filed suit. ButTexas Gov. Ann Richards told the Finance Committee Nov. 19 thatmost states would be willing to accept a cap on disproportionateshare payments if HCFA gives states flexibility "to spend the moneyin the way that works best."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Self-Insured Tax Credit Could ExpireThe 25 percent health insurance tax deduction for self-employedworkers appears likely to expire at the end of 1991 but may beresurrected in 1992. The credit, which was created in 1986, wasextended in 1990 for one year and is due to expire Dec. 31. Sen. JohnDanforth (R-MO) and Rep. Frank Guarini (D-NJ) have offeredlegislation (S.1950, H.R.3752) to extend the credit for one year, butsources say it is unlikely Congress will act before adjourning for1991. Also due to expire: a 20 percent tax credit for research anddevelopment and a 5 percent tax credit for orphan drug development.Danforth and Guarini also would extend those for one year. Butextension of the expiring tax breaks would cost the governmentabout $5 billion over the next five years, a move that would bust thebudget. House Ways & Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski(D-IL) also is concerned that a small tax bill would become a"Christmas tree" on which to hang other tax breaks. Senate FinanceCommittee Chief Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) predicts the credit will beextended retroactively if a free standing bill fails to pass.Individuals and corporations wouldn't be affected by the delay sincethey still get a writeoff for 1991. Hoping to pull those nails fromthe coffin, 76 Senators sent a Nov. 14 letter to Senate leadersGeorge Mitchell (D-ME) and Robert Dole (R-KS), saying they will"oppose any amendment to a bill which extends these 12 expiring taxprovisions." Bentsen and Rostenkowski recently proposed expandingthe credit for the self-insured from 25 percent to 100 percent.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991No Hill Override Expected On Medicare Physician Fee PlanCongress won't try to override HCFA's decision to reduce 1992Medicare physician fees to offset an expected surge in the volume ofservices provided the elderly and disabled. On Nov. 15, HCFAannounced the final terms of the fee schedule, which kick in Jan. 1.As expected, the agency decided to reduce fees paid under thatschedule by 6.5 percent in expectation of a 3 percent rise in volume.Doctors have been protesting the so-called behavioral offset formonths but despite sympathetic rhetoric, lawmakers don't appear tohave an interest in fighting HCFA. Under the rules, which HCFA plansto publish this week in the Federal Register, fees paid for primarycare services and to rural doctors will rise while payments tosurgeons and other specialists will decrease. A fight with Congresswas avoided when HCFA agreed in August to eliminate anasymmetrical transition to the new schedule that would haveresulted in lower fees (HLeg. 8/28/91). More than 300 members ofthe House had cosponsored a bill (H.R.3070) by Rep. Pete Stark (D-CA), chairman of the House Ways & Means Health Subcommittee, tooverride that proposal. Nearly 30 members of the Senate had signeda companion measure (S.1810) by Jay Rockefeller (D-WV). While theStark-Rockefeller proposal also would have blocked the behavioraloffset, lawmakers were more concerned with the cumulative effectof the proposed rules. In the final plan, HCFA Administrator GailWilensky says fees will be 13.2 percent higher than those includedin the earlier version. Wilensky argues that the behavioral offset --which she now calls a baseline adjustment -- is needed to keep thenew system budget neutral. The 1989 law creating the schedulerequires the program to cost no more and no less than the oldsystem.By eliminating the skewed transition, HCFA was able to raise theconversion factor -- which translates the relative value scale (RVS)into dollars -- from $26.87 in the June proposed rules to $31 in thefinal version. Counting inflation, Wilensky says overall payments tophysicians will rise from $27.3 billion in 1991 to $47.5 billion in1996. The 74 percent jump in physician spending over the next fiveyears also encompasses inflation, the aging of the population, andintroduction of new technology. But despite that cumulative rise, in1992 many doctors will see their fees fall. Reductions include a 14percent cut for thoracic surgeons, an 11 percent reduction foranesthesiologists and ophthalmologists, and a 10 percent chop forgastroenterologists, radiologists, pathologists and neurosurgeons.Fees will rise sharply for primary care specialists including generalpractitioners, who will get a 17 percent increase, familypractitioners, 15 percent, and optometrists, who will see a 20percent hike. To buffer the effects of the behavioral offset,Wilensky has made other changes to the rules to help specificspecialties. HCFA has agreed to temporarily let anesthesiologistscount the actual time they spend with a patient until a better codingsystem is developed and to count only services provided the daybefore surgery rather than 30 days when figuring global surgicalfees.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Disease Prevention Services Bill Readied For House ConsiderationA new private nonprofit foundation would be created to supplementdisease prevention efforts by the Centers for Disease Control undera bill (H.R.3635) moving toward the House floor. Approved Nov. 15 bythe House Commerce Committee, the bill would extend for five yearsthe preventive health services block grant at $135 million for fiscal1992 and "such sums as necessary" through FY96. It also wouldauthorize use of part of the preventive block grants for states todevelop trauma care systems. The plan by Commerce HealthSubcommittee Chairman Henry Waxman (D-CA) also would requirestates to submit by Apr. 1, 1992, a list of health goals for the year2000, and authorizes $10 million for that effort. A Senatecompanion bill (S.1912) introduced Nov. 4 by Peter Domenici (R-NM),the ranking minority member of the Budget Committee, is pending inthe Finance Committee. No action is expected until after recess.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991House VA Panel Backs Drug Discount BillLegislation to roll back prescription drug prices paid by veterans'hospitals won approval Nov. 13 from the House Veterans' AffairsCommittee. The bill (H.R.2890), would set prices at the level paid onSept. 1, 1990, in order to negate a year of sharp price increases. Italso would limit annual price hikes of veterans' medical inflationrates. The legislation comes a year after Congress required drugmakers to give Medicaid their "best price." That triggered price hikesto Veterans Administration (VA) facilities and others who had beenreceiving deep discounts. The House bill, by Veterans' CommitteeChairman Sonny Montgomery (D-MS) would exempt VA fromcalculation of Medicaid prices. That concerns members of the HouseCommerce Committee who worry that exempting the VA will raisedrug prices for Medicaid and various public health clinics. CommerceCommittee member Ron Wyden (D-OR) plans to amend Montgomery'sbill to roll back drug prices for all government buyers. Montgomeryis said to be receptive "as long as it doesn't leave the VAvulnerable."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Democrats Call Off Health Reform Vote, Mitchell Scrambles forSupportSenate Democrats were forced to call off a planned vote on theirhealth reform plan because of continued disagreement among partymembers. Human Resources Committee Chairman Edward Kennedy (D-MA) hoped to report the bill (S.1227) out of his committee Nov. 14but was ordered to cancel the session by Majority Leader GeorgeMitchell (D-ME), the bill's chief sponsor. Mitchell still is trying togain support for the plan from Finance Committee Chairman LloydBentsen (D-TX), who balks at the proposal to mandate employer-paidinsurance. Kennedy had rewritten the bill to circumvent Finance, butMitchell didn't like that tactic. Instead, the vote was "postponed"until Jan. 22, the first scheduled day of the Senate's 1992 session.Mitchell meanwhile plans to conduct five field hearings in Decemberand early January "to hear from individual Americans and businessesthat have been bankrupted by the current system." The hearings willbe held in Tampa FL, Atlanta GA, Cleveland OH, Detroit MI, and DenverCO. Mitchell's orders didn't sit well with Democrats on the panel whowant to build on the momentum created by the Nov. 5 election ofPennsylvania Sen. Harris Wofford, who ran on a health reformplatform. Republicans label Mitchell's hearings "a show designed tomake Republicans look bad." "If we don't work together we'll end upwith a partisan piece of junk," said the panel's senior GOP memberOrrin Hatch (R-UT).House Democrats appear no closer to agreement than their Senatecounterparts. After failing to develop a consensus behind oneproposal, the House Democratic Caucus last week backed aresolution to support legislation that would guarantee universalhealth care. The resolution is supposed to "keep the process movingalong," says an aide to Caucus Chairman Steny Hoyer (D-MD). Earlierthis summer, House Speaker Thomas Foley (D-WA) asked his seniorcommittee chairmen to draft a reform plan. So far there is littleagreement and Ways & Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-IL)introduced his own bill (H.R.3626).Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Health Professions, Prevention Bills Travel On Senate Fast TrackCongress hopes to quickly complete work on a bill to reauthorize aidto medical and nursing students and the schools that train themalong with another measure to continue several disease preventionprograms. Introduced by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA), the bills wereapproved a week later by the Human Resources Committee. The first(S.1933) would authorize $525 million in fiscal 1992, $555 millionin FY93, $610 million in FY94, $636 million in FY95, and $660million in FY96 to support training of nurses, nurse midwives, nurseanesthetists, physician assistants, and primary care physicians. Themeasure also would require grantees to provide instruction onuniversal precautions and infection control for HIV transmission.The second (S.1944) would authorize $275 million in FY92 and "suchsums as necessary" for FY93-96 to provide grants for breast andcervical screening, hypertension and cholesterol screening, healtheducation, emergency medical technician training, rodent control,water fluoridation, and dental health.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Cohen, Pryor Propose DME ReformsThe number of Medicare carriers handling claims for durable medicalequipment (DME) would be reduced from 34 to five under a bill bySens. William Cohen (R-ME) and David Pryor (D-AR). An investigationby Cohen's staff of the Senate Aging Committee uncovered as muchas $200 million in annual fraud and abuse in Medicare's DME program.The bill (S.1988) is similar to measures (S.1736, H.R.2534) offeredby Sen. Jim Sasser (D-TN) and Rep. Benjamin Cardin (D-MD) earlierthis year (HLeg. 9/11/91). The reforms are supported by the NationalAssn. of Medical Equipment Suppliers (NAMES). The Cohen/Pryor billalso would prevent DME suppliers from shopping for the best-payingcarrier by establishing uniform coverage and utilization criteria andrequiring HHS to set requirements for issuing and renewing providernumbers. The Senate bills primarily address fraud and abuse in theDME system, while the House bill also tries to solve some ofadministrative problems facing carriers, says Corrine Parver, NAMESpresident. The bills will probably not see action before Congress'recess but could be a 1992 priority.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991HCFA Needs More Enforcement Authority Over Medicare HMOsHCFA should be given broader authority to penalize Medicare HMOsthat fail to comply with quality standards, says the GeneralAccounting Office. In Nov. 15 testimony to the House CommerceHealth Subcommittee, GAO said its investigation into a Florida HMOrevealed that HCFA has "not been effective in getting certain HMOsto take corrective actions promptly." The GAO investigation ofHumana Inc. found abuses of federal standards of marketing, claimspayment, processing of beneficiary appeals, and implementation ofan internal quality assurance system. Humana enrolls about 15percent of the 1.3 million Medicare HMO members. In 1987, followingproblems with the previous owners of the Humana plan, Congressgave HCFA the power to levy fines and short suspensions againstHMOs that violate federal rules. Since then, HCFA has terminatedtwo contractors from Medicare. HCFA should be allowed to suspendMedicare enrollments when HMOs fail to respond to violationsnotices, says GAO. HCFA Administrator Gail Wilensky defended theagency's record, pointing to development of a "strengthened andstreamlined enforcement" process. Wilensky also cited publicationof a July 22 proposed rule to implement intermediate sanctions andcivil monetary penalty authority, which defined eight violations forwhich sanctions can be imposed.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991S.1933S.1933Health Professions Training and Nurse Education Improvement andReauthorization Act as reported by the Senate Human ResourcesCommittee Nov. 7, 1991Sen. Kennedy (D-MA) has introduced, and the Labor and HumanResources Committee has approved, legislation to extend and amendthe federal programs of support for training of health professionals,allied health professionals, and nurses. The bill emphasizes thetraining of primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, nursemidwives, nurse anesthetists, and allied health professionals infields in which there are shortages.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Health Professions EducationMISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS: Graduate programs in social work thatoffer a training concentration in health or mental health care andgraduate programs that provide training in a concentration leadingto a graduate degree in marriage and family therapy would beincluded among the programs for which support could be provided.A Subcommittee on Allied Health would be established to theNational Advisory Council on Health Professions Education. TheSubcommittee would advise with respect to a broad range of issuesrelating to allied health education and placement.Prohibitions against discrimination in administration of the programwould be expanded. Health professions data collection requirementswould be expanded to include information pertaining to healthprofession shortage areas.GRANT PRIORITY: In awarding grants under the health professionsprogram and under the nurse education program, the HHS Secretarywould give priority to entities with programs designed to help meetthe National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectivesestablished for the year 2000 and that either have a high permanentrate for placing graduates in settings to serve underservedpopulations or provide for at least four of six specified activitiesdesigned to encourage graduates to practice in such areas.Preference in the awarding of competitive grants to healthprofessions schools would be given to schools that can demonstratethat at least 20 percent of their graduates practice in shortageareas or that the number of graduates practicing in such areas hasincreased by at least 50 percent over that for the previous two-yearperiod.STUDENT ASSISTANCE: Funding for the federal student loan insuranceprogram would be provided through fiscal 1996. Certain changeswould be made with regard to the period to begin repaying loans andthe maximum interest that could be charged for such loans. Healthprofessions education institutions would have to agree to assist inthe collection of delinquent loan payments by providing informationconcerning the borrower to the Secretary and to lenders.The Secretary would establish performance standards and fees to bepaid by lenders and loan holders for the servicing of loans and forthe processing of default claims. The bill would redefine the term"default rate." The Secretary would assess a risk-based premium onan eligible borrower and, if required, an eligible institution based onthe default rate of the institution. For institutions with defaultrates below 5 percent, the borrower would be assessed 6 percent ofthe loan amount.If the default rate of the institution is between 5 percent and 15percent, the borrower would be assessed a premium of 10 percentand the institution a premium of 5 percent. If the institution'sdefault rate is between 15 percent and 25 percent, the borrower andthe institution each would be assessed a premium of 10 percent ofthe loan amount. Other procedural provisions are set out.There would be no statute of limitations with regard to loanrepayment obligations. An annual report concerning default rateswould be required for each institution that participates in loanprograms as well as for each lender and for each loan holder. A listof borrowers who are in default would be compiled and published inthe Federal Register.The Secretary would promulgate regulations to ensure that tuitionand fees for borrowers are equal to or less than those fornonborrowers; to require institutions to submit informationconcerning each loan that is made; to allow the withholding ofservices from an institution to a borrower who is in default; and tohave lenders offer borrowers a variety of repayment options.Institutions would be required to conduct workshops for studentborrowers.The National Health Service Corps would give priority to borrowerswho enter and remain in the primary care fields of general internalmedicine, general pediatrics, and family medicine.An Office for Health Education Assistance would be created to studyloans and loan defaults, to respond to circumstances that may leadto defaults, to carry out activities to reduce defaults, and to carryout other similar activities.DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM: The bill would establish a direct studentloan demonstration program to examine the viability of such aprogram and to determine whether such a program will reducedefault costs and provide loans on more favorable terms and todetermine whether the current Health Education Assistance Loanauthority should be replaced by a direct loan program in whichschools rather than lenders make loans directly to borrowers.The bill outlines the detailed procedures and conditions that wouldapply in creating this direct student loan demonstration program.The program would involve at least 20 institutions.OTHER ASSISTANCE AUTHORITIES: The loan repayment program forallied health personnel would be extended through FY96 as wouldauthority for scholarships for first year health professions studentsof exceptional financial need, the scholarship authority for studentsfrom disadvantaged backgrounds, and the faculty loan repaymentprogram. The Lister Hill Scholarship Program would be repealed.SPECIAL PROGRAM GRANTS: Funding would be provided through FY96 toassist departments of family medicine. Area Health Education Center(AHEC) agreements would be for six years. Preference in awarding AHECgrants would be for applicants that would establish new programs.Priority would go to applicants that establish linkages with a schoolof public health if such a school exists in the area. Various otherexpansions would be authorized for the AHEC program.Funding would continue for programs of excellence in healthprofessions education for minorities; for training, traineeships, andfellowships in general internal medicine and general pediatrics; fordentistry residency programs; and for family medicine residencyprograms. There would be new authority for assistance for trainingin dental public health. Educational assistance to individuals fromdisadvantaged backgrounds also would be continued. There would bea new program of minority faculty development fellowships.Authority to assist schools that provide the first or last two yearsof medical education would be replaced by demonstration grantauthority for the improvement of health professions education andfor the assurance of competency of health personnel. There would benew authority for chiropractic training and demonstration grants.Also extended would be assistance for training in preventivemedicine, physician assistant programs, and podiatric medicineprograms. AIDS education and training program authority would beexpanded. Also extended would be authority for geriatric educationcenters and geriatric training.Programs of assistance for projects for schools of public healthwould be extended as would various other public health trainingauthorities.There would be new grant authority for projects related to alliedhealth professions with personnel shortages. An extensive listing ofpossible project areas is provided. Assistance also would beauthorized for training centers for allied health professions toprovide fellowships to students. The program of traineeships foradvanced training of allied health personnel would be extended andexpanded. A Division of Allied Health would be created.OTHER PROGRAMS: Changes would be made in the mission of theCouncil on Graduate Medical Education to place greater emphasis onthe adequacy of current and future supplies of primary carephysicians, to study the impact of Medicare graduate medicaleducation funding, and the feasibility of including health promotionand disease prevention as a part of graduate medical education.New activities would be required under the rural health trainingprogram with emphasis on research on the processes involved inhealth care decisionmaking and development of training modelsfocusing on disease prevention and health promotion.An advisory Council on Medical Licensure would be created. It wouldadvise the Secretary concerning the establishment and operation ofthe American Medical Association system for verifying andmaintaining information regarding the qualification of individuals topractice medicine. The Secretary also would conduct a study of statelicensure procedures for domestic medical graduates as compared tointernational medical graduates.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Nurse TrainingSPECIAL PROJECTS: Various changes would be made in the specialproject authority to emphasize assistance to nurses serving inshortage areas. The bill would extend the advanced nurse educationprograms, the nurse practitioner and nurse midwife programs,nursing education opportunities for individuals from disadvantagedbackgrounds, traineeships for advanced education of professionalnurses, the nurse anesthetist program, the nurse loan repaymentprogram, and assistance for undergraduate education of professionalnurses. New authority would provide funds to assist schools ofnursing to support projects to develop resources or strengthenprograms or faculty to address the National Health Objectives forthe year 2000.A new program would provide fellowships to licensed vocational orpractical nurses, nursing assistants, and other paraprofessionalnursing personnel to assist them in obtaining a professional nursingeducation. Such individuals would agree to work in long term carefacilities for a period of time at least equal to the period duringwhich the individual received assistance.A new primary care program authority also would be established.The funds would be used to establish or expand clinical nursetraining sites to provide training in the delivery of primary care inrural areas or areas within 50 miles of Indian country.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991H.R.3508H.R.3508Health Professions Education Amendmentsintroduced Oct. 3, 1991by Rep. Henry Waxman (D-CA)referred to the House Commerce CommitteeBack to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Health Professions AmendmentsThe bill would amend and extend various authorities for educationalassistance for schools and students of the health professions. Thebill also would amend and extend the Nurse Training Act.PRIMARY SERVICES PRIORITY: The bill would add a general provisionto the Public Health Service Act provisions authorizing support forhealth professions education providing that in the case of any entityapplying for federal financial assistance under that authority, theHHS Secretary would give priority to the applicant if a substantialpercentage of the providers who have completed the applicantsprogram of training in the health or allied health professions areproviding primary health services to a substantial number ofmedically underserved individuals or if the applicant has establishedpolicies that may reasonably be expected to result in a substantialpercentage of the program's participants providing their services toa substantial number of such individuals.Schools of medicine and osteopathy, in order to qualify for priorityconsideration, also would have to have an academic administrativeunit to provide clinical instruction in family medicine and wouldhave to require, as a condition of receiving a degree, that eachstudent have had significant clinical training in family medicine bythe end of the third year of the curriculum.Applicants with residency programs would receive priority inreceiving federal support only if a substantial percentage of theindividuals completing the residency program have had, throughparticipation in the applicant's program, significant experience inproviding primary health services to medically underservedindividuals or significant experience in providing such services inambulatory health facilities.GRADUATE STUDENT INSURED LOANS: The total principal amount ofnew loans and installments paid to borrowers covered by federalgraduate student loan insurance could not exceed $365 million, $425million, and $475 million respectively for fiscal years 1992-1994.Currently repayment of loans must begin within twelve months ofcompleting a program or ceasing to be a participant in a program forwhich the loan was made. The bill would allow initial repayment tobegin up to 21 months after the determining event has occurred.The premium charged by the Secretary for insured loans currentlycannot exceed eight percent. The bill would increase the maximumallowable premium to 13 percent. Different percentages could becharged for different health professionals.The bill would authorize the Secretary to impose on eligibleinstitutions, eligible lenders, and holders reasonable limits ondefault rates for borrowers. If any such limit is exceeded, theSecretary could suspend, terminate, or otherwise restrict theauthority for students to obtain insured loans from the school orlender in question or, if it is a holder who exceeds such a limit, forthe holder to purchase insured loans.The term "default rate" means the percentage constituted by theratio of the principal amount of insured loans that are made withrespect to an entity and enter repayment status after Apr. 7, 1987,and for which amounts have been paid to insurance beneficiaries,exclusive of any loans for which amounts have been paid as a resultof death or total and permanent disability of the borrowers, andexclusive of any loans for which amounts have been paid but havebeen recovered or are being recovered by the Secretary, to the totalprincipal amount of insured loans that are made with respect to theentity and enter repayment status after Apr. 7, 1987.OFFICE OF DEBT COLLECTION: The bill would establish an Office on StudentLoan Debt Collection. The Director of the Office would coordinate effortswithin the HHS Department and the Department of Justice to recoverpayments from health professionals who have defaulted on insured studentloans. In cooperation with the Secretary of Education, the Director woulddevelop a uniform deferral form or process to ensure coordination indeferment certification requirements for in-school, residency, andinternship deferments.The Director would provide advice to eligible lenders, institutions,and holders of deferrals of the provisions that relate to collectionof the principal and interest on insured loans. The Director wouldassist students in avoiding default by making information on loandeferments, forbearance, and correction of default readily availableand, directly or through the provision of grants and contracts, wouldcarry out projects to reduce the extent of defaults on insured loans.The Director annually would report to Congress on the total amountsrecovered and would provide a plan for improving the extent ofrecoveries during the year.NEEDY STUDENTS: Any funds from a student loan fund that arereturned to the Secretary could not be available for any purposeother than allotment for other student loan funds. The bill wouldauthorize $9,760,000 for FY92, $11 million for FY93, and $13million for FY94 for scholarships for first year students ofexceptional need and $17 million for each of FY92 and 1993 forscholarships and other purposes regarding disadvantaged students.Current faculty, and anyone who has been on the faculty of a schoolduring the previous 18 months, would be ineligible for the loanrepayment program regarding service by disadvantaged students onfaculties of health professions schools. Loan repayments under theprogram would be reduced from 50 percent a year to 20 percent ayear of the outstanding principal and interest on loans.FAMILY MEDICINE: The bill would authorize $6,830,000 for FY92 toassist in the establishment of departments of family medicine.Authority for this assistance would be repealed as of Oct. 1, 1992.FUNDING OF SPECIFIC PROGRAMS: The area health education centerauthority would be funded at $20 million, $22 million, and $24million for FY92-94 respectively. The bill would provide $15 millionand $16 million for FY92 and FY93 for programs of excellence inhealth professions education for minorities.The bill would provide $17,260,000, $18.5 million, and $20 millionfor FY92-94 respectively for training, traineeships, and fellowshipsin internal medicine and general pediatrics. Currently the first twopurposes for which these funds can be utilized are for the planning,development, and support of residency training programs andresidents in these practice areas. The bill would expand the eligibleprograms for these funds to include professional training programs,including residencies and internships, in these areas for medical andosteopathy students, interns, residents, or practicing physicians andfinancial support for the individuals participating in these programs.Funding for residency programs in the general practice of dentistrywould be provided at $3,830,000, $4.5 million, and $6 million for1992-1994. Authorized for family medicine programs would be$36.1 million, $43 million, and $45 million.Educational assistance to individuals from disadvantagedbackgrounds would be authorized at $30,820,000 and $31.5 millionfor FY92 and FY93. The Secretary would assure that these grants areequitably distributed geographically and that services of individualsfrom disadvantaged backgrounds are equitably allocated among thevarious racial and ethnic populations.The bill recodifies provisions relating to training in preventivemedicine authorizing $1,650,000, $2 million, and $2 million for1992-1994 respectively, for these activities. Authority to assistschools which provide the first two or last two years of medicaleducation and to aid in faculty and curriculum development andclinical training sites would be deleted.There would be new authority for health professions research.Recipients of grants and contracts would conduct research on one ormore of the following: the impact of student indebtedness onspecialty choice and practice location; the impact of minority healthprofessional programs in majority schools on recruitment,retention, and practice choices of minority health personnel; theeffects of graduate medical education payments on the distributionof physician specialties; and the effectiveness and variation ofstate licensing authorities in identifying problem providers andundertaking disciplinary actions. Funding would be authorized at$1,320,000, $1.5 million, and $1.5 million. The bill also wouldauthorize $7 million, $8 million, and $10 million for 1992-1994 forphysician assistant projects and $600,000, $750,000, and $750,000for podiatric physician projects.AIDS TRAINING: Schools of marriage and family therapy would be addedto those eligible to receive grants to train faculty to teach healthprofessions students to provide for the health care needs ofindividuals with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. Funding forthis general training program would be authorized at $17,020,000, $19million, and $21 million. For such training at schools of dentistrythe bill would authorize $6 million, $8 million, and $10 million.MEDICAL SOCIAL WORK: Graduate programs of medical social workwould be added to those eligible for aid to assist individuals fromdisadvantaged backgrounds as well as to those which can receiveassistance for training with respect to AIDS.The term "graduate program in medical social work" is defined tomean an accredited graduate program which provides trainingleading to a graduate degree in social work and which emphasizesthe provision of social services related to health care or mentalhealth care.GERIATRIC TRAINING: Current authority to train physicians anddentists who plan to teach geriatric medicine or dentistry would beexpanded to include optometrists who plan to teach geriatricoptometry.Currently such programs are for one year. The bill would eliminatethe one year specification. Also currently, with regard to dentalgeriatric training programs, training is available to dentists whoare faculty members at schools of dentistry or hospital departmentsof dentistry. The bill would amend these eligibility provisions tomake this training available to dentists who have demonstrated acommitment to an academic career, and who have completedpostdoctoral dental training programs or who have relevant trainingor experience.Funding for geriatric education centers and geriatric training wouldbe authorized at $13,710,000, $14 million, and $15 millionrespectively for FY92-94.YEAR 2000 HEALTH OBJECTIVES: Current authority for specialprojects conducted by schools of public health would be replaced byauthority for special projects by such schools to establishcomprehensive programs of education that are appropriate withrespect to meeting the objectives established by the Secretary forthe health status of the population of the U.S. for the year 2000.Also authorized would be projects to recruit individuals foreducation in health specialties in which an increased number ofpractitioners is necessary to meet the year 2000 objectives and toimprove access to community-based health prokbe emphasized in theawarding of public health traineeships. Under the bill students wouldhave to be pursuing a course of study in a field the entry into whichis appropriate with respect to meeting the Secretary's health statusobjectives for the year 2000.ALLIED HEALTH: In awarding project grants regarding allied healthpersonnel the Secretary would give special consideration to uniqueneeds regarding the supply of physical therapists, occupationaltherapists, and clinical laboratory technologists.Currently recipients of traineeships for advanced training of alliedhealth personnel must be doctoral students in doctoral programs.The bill would allow traineeships to postgraduate students inpostgraduate programs. Special consideration to the unique needsregarding the supply of the above mentioned therapists andtechnologists also would be provided with regard to thesetraineeships.HEALTH CARE FOR RURAL AREAS: Schools or programs for marriageand family therapy would be eligible for grants to improve thedelivery of health services for rural areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Nurse EducationSPECIAL PROJECTS: The bill would delete authority for specialprojects to provide continuing education for nurses, to demonstrateimproved geriatric training in preventive care, acute care, and longterm care, and to collect the names of health facilities willing torepay loans for nurses who agree to serve in the facilities. Alsoauthority to develop curricula for the achievement of baccalaureatedegrees by registered nurses would be replaced by authority forprojects for nursing assistants and other paraprofessional nursingpersonnel to become licensed vocational or practical nurses fornursing facilities.There are provisions to allow continuation of already fundedprojects of the types to be deleted.ADVANCED NURSE EDUCATION: The bill would delete authority toprovide assistance to maintain programs which lead to masters' anddoctoral degrees and which prepare nurses to serve asadministrators, researchers, or to serve in clinical nurse specialtiesdetermined by the Secretary to require advanced education.Assistance still would be provided to plan, develop, operate, orsignificantly expand such programs but only with regard to programsthat prepare nurses to serve in clinical nurse specialties. No morethan 10 percent of funds appropriated for advanced nurse educationcould be used for programs leading to doctoral degrees.NURSE PRACTITIONERS AND MIDWIVES: Authority to assisttraineeship programs for nurse practitioners and nurse midwiveswould be repealed.PROJECTS FOR DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS: Funding for specialprojects for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds would beauthorized at $4 million, $5 million, and $6 million for 1992-1994.ADVANCED EDUCATION TRAINEESHIPS: Authority for project grantsfor nursing school faculty investigations into alternate health caremodalities, nursing interventions that result in positive outcomesand similar matters would be deleted. The current authority toprovide traineeships for nurses in advanced degree programs wouldbe expanded to allow traineeships for individuals in these programs.Only individuals in master's degree programs would be eligible forthese traineeships. Doctoral candidates no longer would be eligible.Authority to provide these traineeships for programs to trainindividuals to serve in and prepare for practice as nurseadministrators, nurse educators, and nurse researchers would bedeleted.In awarding these traineeships for advanced education specialconsideration would be given to programs that provide significantclinical experience in any of the following: an Indian Health Servicehealth center; a Native Hawaiian health center; a public hospital; amigrant or community health center or other nonprofit communityclinic; a nursing facility; a rural health clinic; or a health facilitylocated in a health professional shortage area determined by the HHSSecretary to have a critical shortage of nurses.Funding for advanced nursing education traineeships would beauthorized at $17 million, $19 million, and $21 million with at least25 percent of appropriated funds to be used for traineeships forstudents who are enrolled at least on a half-time basis in programsthat offer a master's degree in nursing and who agree to completethe requirements for the degree by the end of the academic year inwhich the traineeship is provided.NURSE ANESTHETISTS: The bill would add a provision indicating thatin making grants for nurse anesthetist training grants the Secretarywould give special consideration to applications for traineeshipprograms whose participants gain a significant experience inproviding health services at rural hospitals or rural clinics.The nurse anesthetist program would be funded at $3 million, $4million, and $5 million respectively for FY92-94.STUDENT LOAN PROGRAMS: Current law authorizes $5 million a yearfor loan repayments for service in facilities such as those referredto above in the advanced education traineeship provisions. The billwould authorize $3 million, $4 million, and $5 million for FY92-94respectively.OTHER PROVISIONS: The authority for undergraduate scholarships fornursing students would be ended. The bill also would make schools ofnursing eligible, along with already authorized health professionsschools and schools of allied health, for geriatric training andrelated activities. This authority is similar to that which relatesonly to schools of nursing and which would be repealed as outlinedabove.LABORATORY TECHNOLOGIST STUDY: The Secretary would conduct astudy with respect to the shortage of clinical laboratorytechnologists. The purpose of the study would be to determine theextent of the shortage, determine the causes of the shortage, anddevelop recommendations on the manner in which the shortage canbe alleviated.In developing recommendations the Secretary would consider anyspecial or unique factors affecting the supply of clinical laboratorytechnologists in rural or urban areas and would consider theeffectiveness of any mechanisms that are available for alleviatingthe shortage in rural areas, urban areas, or both, includingcompetency-based examinations as an alternative route forcertification of the competence of individuals to serve as suchtechnologists, and consider the role of entities that provide suchcertification.MEDICAL LICENSURE ADVISORY COUNCIL: The Secretary wouldestablish an Advisory Council on Medical Licensure. The AdvisoryCouncil would advise the Secretary regarding the establishment andoperation of the system established by the American MedicalAssociation for verifying and maintaining information regardingqualifications of individuals to practice medicine.The Advisory Council would monitor the operation of the privateverification system and develop recommendations for improvement.The Council would determine to what extent the system hasexpedited and otherwise improved the efficiency and equitableoperation of the process of licensure in one state of individuals whopreviously have been licensed in another.The Council would review the policies and practices of the states inlicensing international medical graduates and in licensing domesticmedical graduates and would consult with appropriate organizationsregarding the establishment of nondiscriminatory policies andpractices of licensing individuals to practice medicine.The 14-member Advisory Council would consist of a representativefrom each of the following; state licensure authorities, practicingphysicians, the private verification system, medical schools, anorganization that tests international medical graduates, anorganization that tests graduates of U.S. medical schools, a native ofthe U.S. who attended a U.S. medical school, an international medicalschool graduate from a coalition of such graduates as well asinternational medical school graduates to represent schools fromsouthern or eastern Asia; Europe, Australia or New Zealand; asubsaharan African country; and a Latin American or Caribbeancountry, and a native of the U.S. who is an international medicalschool graduate.During FY96 the Secretary would determine whether the privateverification system is operating with a reasonable degree ofefficiency and whether the policies and practices of the system arenondiscriminatory.If the Secretary finds that the system fails to meet either of thesecriteria, the Secretary would develop a plan for the establishment ofa national verification system. If the Secretary finds that theprivate system meets the criteria, the Advisory Council wouldterminate.INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GRADUATE LICENSURE REPORTS: Withrespect to licensure by the states of individuals to practicemedicine, the Secretary annually would conduct a study of at least10 states. The study would determine the average length of timerequired for the states involved to process the licensureapplications of domestic medical graduates and the length of timefor such processing for international medical graduates and thereasons underlying any significant differences.The study also would determine the percentage of licensureapplications from domestic applicants that are approved and thepercentage of international medical graduate licensure applicationsthat are approved, and the reasons underlying any significantdifferences.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991Following is a summary of health-related bills introduced in theFollowing is a summary of health-related bills introduced in theHouse of Representatives and Senate, along with sponsors andcommittees to which the measures were referred.  The key wordsthat identify each bill's subject matter have been underlined.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991HOUSE BILLSH.R.3696. To provide for assessments in each state of the incidenceand prevalence of substance abuse and of the extent to which theavailability, from public and nonprofit private providers, oftreatment for such abuse is insufficient to meet the need for suchtreatment. (Rangel) Commerce.H.R.3698. To amend the Public Health Services Act with respect toservices for mental health and substance abuse, includingestablishing separate block grants to enhance the delivery of suchservices. (Waxman) Commerce.H.R.3724. To authorize appropriations for Indian health programs,and for other purposes. (Miller) Interior and Insular Affairs andCommerce.H.R.3725. To require Senators and Members of the House ofRepresentatives to pay for medical services provided by the Officeof the Attending Physician. (Moody) House Administration.H.R.3736. To repeal the $2 copayment requirement for medicationfurnished certain veterans on an outpatient basis. (DeFazio)Veterans Affairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH LEGISLATION AND REGULATION via NewsNetNOVEMBER 20, 1991SENATE BILLSS.1803. To prohibit recoupment of certain Medicare payments tocertain Uniformed Services Treatment Facilities. (Gorton) Finance.S.1810. To provide for corrections with respect to theimplementation of reform of payments to physicians under Medicare.(Rockefeller) Finance.the treatment of voluntary contributions and provider-specific taxesby states as a source of a state's expenditures for which federalfinancial participation is available under Medicaid and to maintainthe treatment of intergovernmental transfers as such a source.(McConnell) Finance.S.1886. To delay until Sept. 30, 1992, the issuance of anyregulations by the HHS Secretary changing S.1887. to establish theNational Center for Nursing Research as a National Institute.(Harkin) Human Resources.S.1891. To permit the HHS Secretary to waive certain recoveryrequirements with respect to the construction or remodeling offacilities. (Thurmond).S.1902. To require certain review and recommendations concerningapplications for assistance to perform research and to permitcertain research concerning the transplantation of human fetaltissue for therapeutic purposes. (Adams) Human Resources.S.1912. To increase the availability of primary and preventive healthcare. (Domenici) Finance.S.1933. To amend Titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service Actto reauthorize and extend programs under such titles. (Kennedy)Human Resources.S.1936. To provide improved access to health care. (Chafee) Finance.S.1944. To strengthen the nation's health promotion and diseaseprevention activities. (Kennedy) Human Resources.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-7IA086-000615-B039-247http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015453 text/html 26651HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:52:49 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:48 GMTContent-length: 26464Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh01.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * TODAY's NEWS * Medicaid per-capita cap proposals may change current entitlement status, promise state funding conflicts, CBO says; budget talks stretch into weekend. (698 words) Medicare growth rate increases likely under MedicarePlus provisions in White House, Republican budget plans, American Academy of Actuaries report concludes. (678 words) Ivax begins shipping generic albuterol metered-dose inhaler Dec. 29 following approval of generic equivalent to Glaxo's Ventolin. (333 words) FDA sets RDIs for six nutrients, including vitamin K and selenium; agency publishes DSHEA implementing regs Dec. 28. (598 words) * BRIEFS * PEOPLE: Senate Finance Committee. (25 words) PEOPLE: Dura. (34 words) PEOPLE: Endogen. (24 words) REGULATORY NEWS: KV Pharmaceutical. (44 words) RESEARCH: OXiGENE Sensamide. (74 words) RESEARCH: Lidak's LP 2307. (60 words) RESEARCH: Alpha-Beta Technology. (49 words) FINANCIAL NEWS: Arris. (116 words) FINANCIAL NEWS: ChiRex Inc.. (82 words) FINANCIAL NEWS: Boston Life Sciences. (41 words) INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum. (77 words) INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome. (22 words) INDUSTRY NEWS: Sepracor. (71 words) INDUSTRY NEWS: Fountain Pharmaceuticals. (24 words) CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Medicaid per-capita cap proposals may change currententitlement status, promise state funding conflicts, CBO says; budgettalks stretch into weekend.MEDICAID PER-CAPITA CAP COULD EXCLUDE ELIGIBLE POPULATIONS, theCongressional Budget Office concludes in an outline of the provsionincluded in President Clinton's Medicaid reform proposal. In aDecember memo, CBO states that such "proposals would not necessarilymaintain a true federal entitlement to benefits for the eligiblepopulation groups." CBO states that a "program that capped federalexpenditures per enrollee probably could not meet all" criteria of anentitlement program; an entitlement program's establishing law "mustdescribe who is eligible and the benefits to which they are entitled,as well as assuring that federal funds accommodate changes inenrollment and in the cost of benefits." The CBO memo raises two specific issues in its discussion of aper-capita federal "entitlement." First, it notes that "there wouldbe no guarantee that all populations currently covered by theMedicaid program would continue to be eligible," since "states mightcut back on coverage of high-cost optional groups" or eliminateoptional services as a means of keeping "expenditures below the capamounts." Secondly, according to CBO, "it is much less clear...what wouldhappen if the caps were sufficiently constraining in some states thataccess to services for entitled populations was seriously limited."CBO explains further that whether beneficiaries could accordingly suethe state and/or federal governments, "and the resulting implicationsfor Medicaid expenditures, would depend critically on whether and howthe individual entitlement was defined in the law." While congressional Republicans included in their vetoed budgetpackage a move from Medicaid's individual entitlement to a"Medigrant" block grant to states, the White House and severalcentrist groups of lawmakers have offered per-capita cap proposalsthat they claim would preserve an individual entitlement. However,both the White House and the conservative House Democratic"Coalition" have been denied CBO scoring of any savings to their capas CBO has cited insufficient legislative detail. The gap between the block grant and per-capita cap in Medicaidpolicy may be the most contentious aspect of budget negotiations.Talks resumed Dec. 29 involving President Clinton, House Speaker NewtGingrich (R-Ga.), and Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.);Gingrich forecast that "this is the weekend where we get it alldone." Both sides expressed their willingness to work through theweekend into the new year. Earlier in the day, White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta metwith congressional Budget Committee leadership, after which Rep. JohnKasich (R-Ohio) reported that both sides began a "give and take." Thebudgeteers planned to reconvene that evening following the WhiteHouse session, and Dole said talks with the President would continueon Dec. 30. Both sides expected to rapidly pass legislation over theweekend allowing furloughed federal employees to return to work. Addressing another issue with Medicaid per-capita caps, the CBOmemo also notes that states "could use a variety of methods to keeptheir average expenditures below the cap amounts" and that somemethods "might raise, rather than lower, aggregate federal Medicaidexpenditures." Since "improvements in efficiency alone would probablybe insufficient to maintain expenditures below the cap" under tightconstraints, states might employ tactics such as shifting enrolleesfrom lower-cost groups to higher-cost groups that have higherper-capita caps. CBO added that states might also "increase theirefforts to shift more of the costs of the elderly and the disabled tothe Medicare program, likewise lowering average Medicaid expendituresper enrollee but raising total federal spending." As a further consideration with per-capita cap proposals, CBOreported that funding to states "would raise some of the same equityquestions as block grants." Both determining base year per capitaamounts and annual growth rates would be important policy decisions.Since states' caps would likely be based on their historicalexpenditure patterns, "states with high expenditures per beneficiarywould be able to lock in higher caps than states with lowexpenditures per beneficiary." Low-cost states with rapid beneficiarygrowth could receive a mixed bag; "some of the negative effects" oflower caps "might be mitigated by the fact that enrollment would notbe constrained." However, for other low-cost states, "basing the percapita caps on the existing wide discrepancies among the states wouldbe more problematic."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Medicare growth rate increases likely under MedicarePlusprovisions in White House, Republican budget plans, American Academyof Actuaries report concludes.GOP/CLINTON MEDICAREPLUS FINANCIAL INCENTIVES COULD INCREASEPROGRAM GROWTH rates rather than reduce Medicare expenditures,according to a recent report prepared by the American Academy ofActuaries. Commenting on the congressional Republican and the ClintonAdministration Medicare reform plans, AAA concludes that "theintended geographic reconfiguration of the payment rates will tend toincrease Medicare expenditures, rather than reduce them." The reportauthors are AAA Medicare workgroup chairman Guy King and membersDavid Axene, Solomon Mussey, David Kerr, Walter Liptak, Robert Lynch,and David Wille. The report states that in areas where new capitation paymentswill be higher than under current law, new enrollment in MedicarePlus plans will increase expenditures; however in these areasfinancial incentives for beneficiaries to join new plans will beincreased. AAA argues that in areas where new capitation paymentswill be less than under current law, new enrollment will reduceexpenditures; however, these are areas where financial incentives forbeneficiaries to join new plans will be diminished. The academyemphasizes that the growth rate targets may not be reachable due tothe lack of incentives in areas where new enrollment could achievesavings from the program. AAA also states that capitation payments under the GOP plan willrise faster than the rates designated by law. The report notes thatthe Medicare Preservation Act specifies a minimum capitation paymentof $300 per month in 1996, and $350 in 1997. "But the law also saysthat no capitation payment can ever increase by less than 2%annually," according to the report. AAA concludes that "the increasesin capitation payments in the counties where these minimums applywill make average rates rise more rapidly than the rates designatedin the law." "Two significant deficiencies" in both the GOP and ClintonAdministration proposals are that they rely heavily on providerpayment reductions, the report states. The academy argues that"reducing unit payments won't produce incentives for reducing therate of growth in health expenditures." The report notes "in manycases, the rate of growth in volume and intensity of services,increases when unit payments are lowered." In addition, the fail-safemechanism in the GOP plan provides no incentives for morecost-effective delivery of health care, according to the report. Second, the academy states that the structure of payments in bothproposals allows providers to choose capitation over fee-for-servicepayments "if it turns out that capitation payments provide morerevenue" to providers. The Administration and GOP proposals "merely"offer providers an alternative payment mechanism for maximizingMedicare revenues, the academy contends. The academy predicts that the Administration proposal would notsignificantly impact the long-range actuarial deficit in the HospitalInsurance program. The report states that President Clinton'sproposal employs "an accounting trick," by transferring part of theobligation to pay for home health benefits from the HI trust fund tothe supplementary medical insurance trust fund, without acorresponding increase in the Part B premium. Expected to make the HIprogram meet short-range solvency standards, the tactic undermines"the fiscal discipline imposed by the trust fund, and makes itpossible to avoid producing genuine, effective reform," AAAconcludes. The academy lists several recommendations for improving theproposals, in addition to suggesting less reliance on providerpayment reductions, elimination of "tricks in the HI program" andsubstitution of market- based capitation rates under the MedicarePlusplan. One recommendation includes providing financial incentives forbeneficiaries to join MedicarePlus plans in the form of increasedout-of-pocket payments such as co-payments and deductibles forbeneficiaries desiring to stay in fee-for-service. Also the Academy's workgroup notes that the fail-safe mechanismshould be retained, but should be modified to increase programdeductibles if expenditures exceed the allowances. The report statesthat this modification will ensure that providers do not refuse careto Medicare beneficiaries because payments are inadequate. A finalrecommendation notes that the legislation should provide a mechanismto deal with long-range financial instability of the HI program,"even if the mechanism is nothing more than the appointment of abipartisan commission to study the problem."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Ivax begins shipping generic albuterol metered-dose inhalerDec. 29 following approval of generic equivalent to Glaxo's Ventolin.IVAX BEGINS SHIPMENTS OF GENERIC VERSION OF GLAXO's VENTOLINmetered-dose inhaler on Dec. 29, less than 24 hours after FDAapproval of the albuterol product. The company will market thealbuterol metered-dose inhaler approved on Dec. 28 through its ZenithGoldine subsidiary. The asthma treatment is made at Ivax' Nortonsubsidiary Waterford, Ireland plant. Schering-Plough also markets analbuterol MDI under the brand name Proventil. Ivax has sold over 28 mil. albuterol inhalers in over 30countries worldwide. The albuterol approval gives Ivax a total of 18ANDA approvals in 1995 for 12 different chemical compounds, thecompany reports. The FDA approval for the controversial generic drug during thelate 1995 holiday season ends an almost seven-year effort by brandname manufacturers to block clearance of the nonsystemically absorbedproduct. As of Dec. 29, none of the innovator companies had takenlegal action against the approval. In a Dec. 29 "Talk Paper," FDA declared the Ivax product "safeand effective as the brand name product" based on "a series oflaboratory analyses and in vivo tests in humans." FDA lays out the bioequivalence tests that supported the approvalof the generic albuterol MDI, which included in vitro particle andplume tests, bronchoprovocation studies in asthmatics, andcardiovascular and metabolic tests in healthy volunteers. In vitro performance tests for aerosol products "determined theequivalence or similarity of the generic and brand name products forthe delivered amount of albuterol, the particle size and the shape ofthe aerosol cloud produced by both products." In the bronchoprovocation study, "the equivalence of thepharmacological action of albuterol MDIs was established by comparingthe generic version and the brand name product's capacity to protectthe airways from constriction induced by histamine." The agency adds that "the bioequivalence of the generic albuterolMDI and Ventolin MDI was also confirmed by comparing thecardiovascular and metabolic effects of these products in healthypeople at exposure levels substantially exceeding the recommendedtherapeutic doses."Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FDA sets RDIs for six nutrients, including vitamin K andselenium; agency publishes DSHEA implementing regs Dec. 28.FDA SETS RDIs FOR SIX NUTRIENTS, INCLUDING SELENIUM, CHROMIUM,vitamin K, molybdenum, chloride and manganese in a final rulepublished in the Dec. 28 Federal Register. Initially, in a proposedrule published in January 1994, the agency considered reference dailyintakes (RDIs) for seven nutrients--these six and fluoride. Theagency established the rule in order to extend RDIs to essentialnutrients not covered in previous rules. "These actions are intended to assist consumers in understandingthe nutritional significance of foods in the context of a total dailydiet and are in recognition of the fact that the National Academy ofSciences (NAS) established Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) andEstimated Safe and Adequate Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDIs) for"these six nutrients, FDA states. The agency develops RDIs as a way ofcommunicating dietary information to consumers on the new "nutritionfacts" and "supplement facts" boxes on food and dietary supplementproducts. FDA decided to drop fluoride from consideration for an RDIbecause, it notes, "fluoride does not meet the first criterion" forassigning a nutrient an RDI, "namely, that there is significantscientific consensus as to the essentiality of the nutrient." NAS,the agency explained, said that study results so far justify noclassification of fluoride as essential. The agency clarified that it had, in the proposed rule,"mistakenly proposed an RDI for each nutrient listed in the NAS' RDAand ESADDI tables...[failing] to focus on the fact that, unlike othernutrients listed, the supporting text did not conclude that fluorideis an essential element." The RDIs set for vitamin K (80 mcg), selenium (70 mcg) andchloride (3,400 mg) are the same as those proposed by FDA in theearlier rule. However, because of a change in methodology fordetermining RDIs for nutrients with ESADDIs, FDA is proposing lowerRDIs for manganese (previously 3.5 mg, now 2 mg); chromium(previously 130 mcg, now 120 mcg); and molybdenum (previously 160mcg, now 75 mcg). The agency "intends to propose to establish RDIs for infants,children less than four years, and pregnant and lactating women inthe near future. In that proposal the agency intends to address allnutrients for which RDIs have been established for adults andchildren four or more years of age." The final rule establishing new RDIs is one of four rulesaffecting dietary supplement labeling published in the Dec. 28Federal Register. Also published are three proposed rules --essentially implementing regs for the Dietary Supplement Health andEducation Act of 1994 -- that cover the "how tos" of nutrition andingredient labeling, nutritional support claims, and "high potency","antioxidant", and "sugar-free" claims. The nutrition and ingredient labeling proposed rule sets outFDA's interpretation of dietary supplement labeling under DSHEA andthe Nutrition Labeling & Education Act. Under FDA's proposal, somedietary supplements, including herbal and fatty acid products, mayhave to include information on calories and amounts of carbohydrates(sugars) or fats. In addition, FDA is proposing to list ingredientsand amounts on a "per serving" basis rather than on a per dose basis. FDA would allow "high potency" claims for products with onedietary ingredient at a level of 100% of the RDI. For dietarysupplement products that contain more than one dietary ingredient, atleast two-thirds of the ingredients in the product for which there isan RDI or DRV (daily reference value) would have to be at 100% ofthat level. The proposal will only allow "antioxidant" claims to bemade for dietary supplements that contain beta carotene, vitamin Cand/or vitamin E.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PEOPLE: Senate Finance Committee.Senate Finance Committee: Chief Medicaid aide Roy Ramthum leavesto join Humana starting Jan. 8. Finance welfare staffer Dennis Smithis acting in Ramthum's capacity....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PEOPLE: Dura.Dura: President and CEO Cam Garner is appointed chairman,replacing James Blair, who resigned but continues to serve on theboard of the San Diego-based company. Garner has been president andCEO since 1990....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PEOPLE: Endogen.Endogen: Dennis Walczewski is appointed VP-sales of theCambridge, Massachusetts-based company. Walczewski comes from T-CellDiagnostics, with previous experience at Boehringer-Mannheim andFisher Scientific....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996REGULATORY NEWS: KV Pharmaceutical.KV Pharmaceutical: FDA certifies manufacturing operations ascompliant with current Good Manufacturing Practices. In June 1993,the St. Louis, Missouri-based company signed a consent decree tocorrect cGMP violations and recondition certain products, followingFDA's April 1993 seizure of solid-dose prescription and OTCpharmaceuticals....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996RESEARCH: OXiGENE Sensamide.OXiGENE Sensamide: Phase I/II trial results for metoclopramideformulation used as a sensitizer of radiation in treating patientswith inoperable non-small cell lung cancer published in the EuropeanJournal of Cancer showed "no drug induced amplification ofradiation-induced side effects." In the 23-patient trial, half thepatients had complete or partial tumor response, the Swedish companyreports. Since May 1994, OXiGENE has been accruing patients in a226-subject multicenter Phase II/III trial of Sensamide....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996RESEARCH: Lidak's LP 2307.Lidak's LP 2307: Melanoma vaccine Phase I/II trial initiated. LP2307 is a high concentration of isolated melanoma antigens attachedto cell-size microspheres. The one-year, 18-patient study willexamine LP 2307's safety and ability to elicit tumor-specific immuneresponses in patients with late-stage disease and will be conductedat the University of California at San Diego by Malcolm Mitchell,MD....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996RESEARCH: Alpha-Beta Technology.Alpha-Beta Technology: Betafectin Phase III trial for preventionof serious post-operative infection will switch to using commerciallyproduced lots of Alpha-Beta's anti-infective. "This validates ourcommercial manufacturing capability and, given a successful Phase IIItrial, should speed our introduction of Betafectin to the market,"the Worcester, Massachusetts-based company says....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCIAL NEWS: Arris.Arris: Acquisition of Khepri Pharmaceuticals is complete withArris' purchase of all of Khepri's outstanding stock. SanFrancisco-based Arris transferred 1.4 mil. shares of its common stockto Khepri security holders and a second payment is scheduled to occurDec. 30, 1996, when at Arris' option, approximately 530,000additional shares will be issued to Khepri security holders. About350,000 shares of Arris Common Stock are reserved for issuance uponexercise of options, warrant and exchange rights. In the fourthquarter of 1995, Arris will write off $20.5 mil. in in-process R&Dcosts associated with the acquisition, according to the company.Cowen and Company advised Arris, and Hambrecht and Quist providedfinancial advice to San Francisco-based Khepri....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCIAL NEWS: ChiRex Inc..ChiRex Inc.: Newly-formed U.S. company files registrationstatement with the Securities & Exchange Commission for an initialpublic offering of 5.5 mil. shares at a maximum price of $16.50 pershare. Proceeds from the offering will be used to combine Sepracor'schiral chemistry business with Sterling Organics Limited in the newcompany. The offering will be overseen by CS First Boston, LehmanBrothers and Smith Barney. ChiRex will have 9.8 mil. sharesoutstanding after the offering; Sepracor will hold a 38% stake....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FINANCIAL NEWS: Boston Life Sciences.Boston Life Sciences: $1 mil. private placement of convertibledebentures with institutional investors is complete. The company alsoannounces that it commenced a private placement this fall to raise$12 mil. BLS is developing Therafectin (amiprilose) for treatment ofrheumatoid arthritis....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum.Quantum: Company realignment will result in a 10% reduction infull-time employees for the Indianapolis-based alternate-site healthcare company. Reductions will be primarily in corporate and fieldmanagement and marketing. The company projects annual savings ofaround $5.7 mil. in salaries and benefits. President and ChiefOperating Officer John DeStefanis has resigned, effective Dec. 31.The position of president will be consolidated with that of CEO andwill be filled by current chairman and CEO Douglas Stickney....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INDUSTRY NEWS: Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome.Quantum/Glaxo Wellcome: Quantum announces an agreement with GlaxoWellcome to distribute Flolan (epoprostenol sodium) injection topatients with severe primary pulmonary hypertension....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INDUSTRY NEWS: Sepracor.Sepracor: U.S. patent for an improved chemical entity is grantedto Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sepracor for purified(2R,4S)-itraconazole for the treatment of local and systemic fungaland yeast infections. Janssen's Sporonox (itraconazole) had 1994worldwide sales of $276 mil. and its composition of matter patent iseffective through June 1998. Sepracor's (2R,4S)-itraconazole, apurified version of parent drug Sporonox, has antifungal activitywith reduced risk of drug-drug interaction, according to thecompany....Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH NEWS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INDUSTRY NEWS: Fountain Pharmaceuticals.Fountain Pharmaceuticals: Court order confirming the company'splan of reorganization is final. The Clearwater, Florida-basedcompany specializes in the application of encapsulated deliverysystems....Back to Headline List WT03-B02-8IA086-000615-B039-271http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh29.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015508 text/html 29503HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMTContent-length: 29316Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh29.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNet February 17, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEW PUBLIC HEALTH RESIDENCY LAUNCHED IN ST. LOUIS (461 words) ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICAL COLLEGES, MEDICAL SCHOOLS PROVIDING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITY COVERAGE (323 words) DEMAND FOR OPTOMETRISTS GROWS BUT NUMBER OF APPLICANTS AT A VIRTUAL STANDSTILL (794 words) * LEGISLATIVE OUTLOOK * BUSH PRESENTS BUDGET, CALLS TO END FUNDING TO "UNTARGETED" PROGRAMS (499 words) CALL FOR PAPERS: NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS 20th ANNIVERSARY CONFERENCE (532 words) * GRANTS AVAILABILITY UPDATE * CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE GRANTS (585 words) EXTRAMURAL ASSOCIATES PROGRAM FOR MINORITIES AND WOMEN (300 words) * RESEARCH NOTES * LOYOLA SURGEONS PIONEER USE OF LAPAROSCOPY FOR TRAUMA DIAGNOSIS (377 words) CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992NEW PUBLIC HEALTH RESIDENCY LAUNCHED IN ST. LOUISThe department of community medicine at St. Louis University Schoolof Medicine will soon be offering a new residency program in preventivemedicine/public health.  The two-year program, to begin operation inJuly, will be open to individuals who hold a medical or equivalentdegree and who have completed one year of postgraduate clinicaltraining in an accredited residency program.Establishing this residency will be SLU's way of helping to increase thenumber of public health physicians who are in demand across thecountry.  Rodney M. Coe, Ph.D., professor and chairman of thedepartment of community medicine, told Health Professions Reportthat communities and government organizations at the city, county andfederal levels lack the needed public health manpower.  This gap isespecially apparent in rural areas, many of which have no physician atall.The program has already proven to be unique in several ways.  First, itis the only preventive medicine/public health residency in Missouri.Second, but perhaps more significant, is the program schedule.  Unlikeother programs where a year of classroom study is followed by up totwo years of practicums, this program will integrate the two phases.Residents will do their practicums in coordination with subjects taughtin the classroom over a two-year period, rather than the usual threeyears.In addition to the public health residency, SLU has opened a residencyin occupational/environmental medicine.  Coe told Health ProfessionsReport that the two programs will be in close collaboration, sharingmany of the same SLU faculty.  The lecture portions of both programswill be conducted at SLU's School of Public Health.  James R. Kimmey,M.D., M.P.H., dean of the school, will serve as program director of thenew public health residency.The practicum segment of the public health program will  be  providedprimarily  by   the Missouri  Department  of Health.  Corporate entitiessuch as the Monsanto chemical company will collaborate with SLU toprovide practicums for the occupational medicine residents.At the beginning, each of the new residencies will have two openings ineach of the two years.  Dr. Coe told Health Professions Report thatSLU has already received inquiries from interested applicants fromother states, as well as local physicians who wish to pursue new careersin public health.  The school is hoping that the new residency programwill really "catch on."Residents who complete the public health program will be eligible to beboard certified in preventive medicine/public health.  The majority willmost likely be employed by government public health departments, atthe local, state or federal level, depending upon the extent of theireducation.Applications to both residencies are now being accepted.  For moreinformation, contact Kath Engelhardt, department of communitymedicine, phone (314) 577-8527.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICALCOLLEGES, MEDICAL SCHOOLS PROVIDING STUDENTSWITH DISABILITY COVERAGEThe Association of American Medical Colleges has reported success inits efforts to help medical schools provide disability insurance tostudents.  The impetus for the Association of American MedicalColleges' initiative was the desire to protect students from the financialdevastation of HIV infection.  And although the Association points outthat the risk of a student acquiring HIV during clinical training is quitelow, students still need access to the basic benefits they don't currentlyhave, such as workman's compensation.The Association's staff negotiated with insurance companies to createdisability plans that include the best features of group and individualpolicies.  One of the attractive aspects of the plans is their guaranteethat students can both continue coverage after graduation and  purchaseincreased  coverage,  without  medical  underwriting.Robert F. Jones, Ph.D., assistant vice president for institutional studiesat the Association of American Medical Colleges, spearheaded theorganization's move to create these insurance plans.  "Our intention wasnot to get into the insurance business but to prod the industry," Jonesexplained.  "These companies deserve credit for coming through withthese programs when many dismissed the idea."Although the threat of HIV transmission prompted the development ofthese insurance plans, the broad-based policies will provide coverage forany disabling condition, however acquired.  Residency and fellowshipprograms are eligible to participate in the insurance plans as well.Two insurance programs are now being marketed independently of theAssociation.  One, offered through CM Financial Group of Chicago, isunderwritten by Connecticut Mutual and GroupAmerica.  The second,marketed by the University Physicians Trust in Boston, has UNUM andthe United States Life company of New York as carriers.Among the first institutions implementing the insurance are the medicalschools at New York University, Washington University at St. Louis,Harvard University and Jefferson Medical College and the MedicalCollege of Wisconsin.For more information, contact Dick Green at Association of AmericanMedical Colleges, phone (202) 828-0418.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992DEMAND FOR OPTOMETRISTS GROWS BUT NUMBER OFAPPLICANTS AT A VIRTUAL STANDSTILLThe American Optometric Association has reported that despite growthin the number of minority and women optometrists over the last fewyears, the total number of students now studying optometry will not beenough  to  fulfill  the  country's  future  eye  care needs.According to Association, the expanding demand for optometrists isexpected to continue, because people of all ages require eye care.However, there are particular segments of the population that willcontribute disproportionately to that demand.The population of school age children are expected to multiply from49.1 million in 1990 to 52.6 million by 2000. One out of five children hasa vision-related learning problem.The group that includes adults ages 26-44 will remain relatively stable,changing from 77.7 million in 1990 to only 77.6 million in 2000.However, as the "baby-boomer" generation ages, the 45-64 age groupwill increase from 46.8 million in 1990 to 61.7 million by 2000.  Thenation's workforce is comprised of both groups, 46 million of whom usevideo display terminals, placing greater stress on their eyes.  The 40 andolder group will experience the onset of presbyopia, an age-relatedcondition which makes reading and up-close work difficult.The segment of adults 65 years and older will grow from 31.6 million to34.9 million during that same time period. Virtually everyone in thisgroup develops presbyopia. Older people in this group may also sufferfrom cataracts (15.5%), glaucoma (two to three percent), and othervision impairments.Who will be caring for the eyes of all these people? According toAssociation, fewer students are applying to schools of optometry thansix years ago. In 1986, there were 1.67 applicants for every available seatin U.S. schools and colleges of optometry. That number declined to 1.49applicants in 1989, and dropped even further in 1990, to a low of anestimated 1.42 applicants. By 1991, the number of applicants competingfor each optometry seat had risen, if only slightly, to an estimated 1.52per seat.In addition to the slump in overall applications, minorities remainunderrepresented in optometry compared to their populations insociety, despite percentage gains over the last few years.  About onepercent of practicing optometrists are black, less than one percent areHispanic, about 0.2 percent are Native American and three to fourpercent are Asian.Fortunately, the diversity of the optometric student body has seen somerecent improvements. From 1979 to 1989, Asian students increasedfrom fewer than 4 percent of the student population to ten percent. Thenumber of Hispanic students grew from 1.5 percent to 3.3 percent. Theblack student population doubled, from 1.4 percent to 2.8 percent. TheNative American presence in optometry schools tripled from 0.2 percentto 0.6 percent.While optometry still has a distance to go in recruiting and trainingminority practitioners, the field is about to experience a boost in thenumber of women eye care professionals. Of the 26,400 optometristscurrently practicing in the U.S., 4,200 or about 16% of them are women.Of the current crop of optometric students, over 45% are women. By2000, the number of practicing optometrists is expected to grow to30,600, with women numbering 8,000, or 26% of that total.The positive attributes of a career in optometry that are attracting morewomen to the field are a selling point for any interested student. Forexample:* the average annual net income for optometrists is $70,000, while somepractitioners earn up to six-figure incomes;* recent graduates earn an average of $40,000 in their first year inpractice;optometrists average 40-hour work weeks, leaving time for family andleisure;* career opportunities other than private practices include teaching,research, public health, the military, multidisciplinary practices, industryconsulting;* optometrists may specialize in contact lenses, vision therapy, pediatricoptometry, geriatrics, low vision care for the visually impaired andsports-related eye care;the growing demand for optometry services creates a larger measure ofjob security.In 1990-91,  the  tuition  for  first-year  optometry  students  rangedfrom  $4,342  for  in-state  residents  at public  schools  to  $12,763  forout-of-state  residents  at private  schools.  These  figures  remain  aboutthe  same  for  the  succeeding  three  years  of  optometry  school.The loan programs most commonly used by optometry students includePerkins and Stafford loans; Health Professions Student Loans; HealthEducation Assistance Loans; Supplemental Loans for Students, andloans made directly from schools. During the 1990-91 academic year,the Stafford loan program was most widely used by optometry students.For more information about a career in optometry, contact theAmerican Optometric Association, 243 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis,MO  63141, phone (314) 991-4100, or the Association of Schools andColleges of Optometry, phone (301) 231-5944.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992BUSH PRESENTS BUDGET, CALLS TO ENDFUNDING TO "UNTARGETED" PROGRAMSThe FY 93 budget proposal recently presented by the BushAdministration includes $585 billion for the department of Health andHuman Services, which represents an increase of $41 billion (7.5%)over FY 92. With the President calling for the termination of healthprofessions assistance grants in FY 93, and the elimination of over 200domestic discretionary programs, it is no surprise that the "new blood"in the Health and Human Services budget is not targeted toward healthprofessions education.On the contrary, the budget document noted that "after two decades offederal support, the aggregate shortage of health professionalsperceived in the 1960s when these subsidies were initiated, has abated."The budget goes on to call for the elimination of federal funding to"untargeted" health professions curriculum assistance programs.  Sowhat exactly will health professions be getting?* Medicare/IME: Neither the budget itself nor the Health and HumanServices budget summary contain wording that would reduce Medicarepayments for graduate medical education.  In particular, there are noprovisions reducing the Medicare indirect medical education (IME)adjustment or the Medicare direct graduate medical educationpayments.* National Health Service Corps: is slated to receive a $20 millionincrease (19%), to a total of $120 million.  Of this amount, $65 millionwould be available for scholarships and loan repayment.* Health Career Opportunity Program: would receive an increase of $6million, as part of a $96 million provision for programs specificallytargeted to health professions education for minorities.* HIV/AIDS: The Public Health Service has been scheduled to receive$2.069 billion for research, prevention and other related activities havingto do with these diseases. This funding level is $101 million more thanwas apportioned in FY 92. A breakdown of some of the Public HealthService components receiving HIV/AIDS funding includes the Foodand Drug Administration, $75 million; Health Resources and ServicesAdministration, $349 million; Indian Health Service, $3 million; Centersfor Disease Control, $505 million; National Institutes of Health, $873million.* National Institutes of Health: has been slated for $9.396 billion, anincrease of $443 million (4.9%) over FY 92. The budget proposes $5.277billion for research project grants in FY 93, a $350 million (7.1%)increase. This amount would provide funding for 5,800 new andcompeting renewal research project grants and 22,132 total researchproject grants. These figures show a decrease from the number ofprojects funded in FY 92: 6,000 and 21,671 respectively. The budgetprovided no funding increases for research centers, research training,Research Centers in Minority Institutions, Minority BiomedicalResearch Support grants or the Minority Access to Research Careersprograms.* Community and Migrant Health Centers: received a 15% increase infunding.* Nursing: education programs failed to be funded again this year, butthe National Center for Nursing Research received $48.5 million.* Veterans Administration: has been designated to receive $34.3 billionfor FY 93, an increase of $1 billion for the third consecutive year.  Ofthat amount, $58.6 million will be used to hire additional health careprofessionals.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992CALL FOR PAPERS:NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS20th ANNIVERSARY CONFERENCEThe National Health Service Corps, in conjunction with the Alliance forPrimary Care, will present "Serving America's Communities," aconference to acknowledge the 20th anniversary of the National HealthService Corps. The meeting will be held June 25-26, 1992 in Arlington,Va.The conference program will consist of a formal program of scholarlypresentations, papers and poster sessions, discussion and round tablesessions, plenary sessions, keynote presentations by community healthleaders, and recognition activities and awards honoring service to theNational Health Service Corps. A special event will be focus groups ofclinicians designing a national practice-based research agenda forprimary care issues facing underserved populations.The target audience for the national meeting is National Health ServiceCorps active and alumni personnel, individuals involved or interested incommunity and public health, and clinicians desiring to help develop anational primary care research agenda.The National Health Service Corps has called for paper proposals to bepresented at the meeting. Papers should address substantive issues,successes, and models regarding the role of health professionals andimpacts upon the health of underserved populations. Individuals beingencouraged to submit proposals include clinical practitioners, Corpsclinicians and alumni, practitioner and academician collaborators, andinterdisciplinary groups.The Corps has offered these ideas for possible paper topics:(1) the community impact of successful National Health Service Corpsplacements;(2) models and strategies for increasing the number of primary careproviders serving the underserved;(3) clinical issues: National Health Service Corps placements leading toimproved patient outcomes* sensitivity of National Health Service Corps providers in the deliveryof quality primary care services* successes and paradigms for retention and recruitment of primarycare providers for underserved populations* strategies for improving access to oral health care* increasing the role of clinical nurse midwives, nurse practitioners andphysician assistants in the delivery of primary health care* topics and issues relating to clinical training programs* community health issues* community involvement in health care decisions.Proposals for papers must include a completed application form;updated curriculum vitae of author(s); a short (maximum two pages)description of the paper, including what the audience will learn, and a150-word abstract.Submitted papers will be blind-reviewed by a panel, and those authorswhose papers are accepted will be invited to prepare a paper offive-page maximum length to be included in the proceedings to bedistributed at the program.Application for continuing education credit for various professions willbe made for this program.  Persons submitting proposals forpaper/presentations must be present at the conference or send arepresentative to present the paper.For more information or an application form, contact Dr. Barbara F.LeGrand, National Health Service Corps 20th National AnniversaryMeeting, Continuing Education, 465 East High Street, Suite 204,Lexington, KY  40507-1935.Proposals should be submitted to Dr. LeGrand at the same address, orfaxed to (606) 258-2437. Deadline for submissions is March 2, 1992.Notices of acceptance or rejection will be mailed March 30, 1992.Those individuals whose papers are accepted must have a camera-readypaper of a maximum of five pages submitted no later than June 1, 1992for inclusion in the meeting proceedings.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE GRANTSThe Health Resources and Services Administration is acceptingapplications for grants for Centers of Excellence in Minority HealthProfessions Education.  The FY 92 appropriation for the Center OfExcellence program is $24.1 million.Total continuation support previously recommended is $14,544,957, tobe distributed as follows: Historically Black Colleges and Universities,$12,092,527; Hispanic COEs, $1,456,107; Native American COEs,$996,324.  Approximately $9.6 million will be available to support about45 competing awards averaging $210,000.  Payments under grants forCOEs may not exceed three years.Grants awarded under this program may be used to establish,strengthen or expand programs to enhance the academic performanceof minority students attending the school; establish, strengthen orexpand programs to increase the number and quality of minorityapplicants to the school; to improve the capacity of such schools to train,recruit and retain minority faculty; to carry out activities to improve theinformation resources and curricula of the school and clinical educationat the school with respect to minority health issues, and to facilitatefaculty and student research on health issues particularly affectingminority groups.In addition, grants for eligible Historically Black Colleges andUniversities may also be used to develop a plan to achieve institutionalimprovements, including financial independence, and to improve libraryaccess. Applicants must address at least three of these five legislativepurposes.To qualify as a Center Of Excellence, a school is required to have asignificant number of minority individuals enrolled in the school,including individuals accepted for enrollment in the school; demonstratethat it has been effective in assisting minority students of the school tocomplete the program of education and receive the degree involved;show that it has been effective in recruiting minority individuals toattend the school, including providing scholarships and other financialassistance to such individuals, and encouraging minority students ofsecondary educational institutions to attend the health professionsschool, and demonstrate that it has made significant recruitment effortsto increase the number of minority individuals serving in faculty oradministrative positions at the school.  For the purposes of thisprogram, "health professions schools" are defined as schools ofmedicine, dentistry and pharmacy.  Applicants will be expected toincorporate the principles of Healthy People 2000 in their proposals.Funding preference will be given to applications scoring in the upper40th percentile or better, submitted by schools located in states whichdo not currently have a Center Of Excellence in that discipline.  Theproposed funding preference does not preclude funding of other eligibleapproved applications.Interested persons are invited to comment on the proposed fundingpreferences. Written comments should be addressed to Clay E.Simpson, Jr., Ph.D., Director, Division of Disadvantaged Assistance,Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and ServicesAdministration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 8A-09, Rockville, MD  20857.Deadline for comments is February 26, 1992.Requests for grant application materials and questions regarding grantspolicy and business management aspects should be directed to Ms.Diane Murray, Grants Management Specialist (D34), Bureau of HealthProfessions, Health Resources and Services Administration, 5600Fishers Lane, Room 8C-26, Rockville, MD  20857, phone (301)443-6857. Completed applications should be returned to the GrantsManagement Specialist at the above address.To obtain specific information regarding programmatic aspects of thisgrant program, direct inquiries to Ms. Cynthia Amis, Acting Chief,Program Coordination Branch, Division of Disadvantaged Assistance,Bureau of Health Professions, Health Resources and ServicesAdministration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 8A-09, Rockville, MD  20857,phone (301) 443-4493.  Deadline for applications is March 13, 1992.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992EXTRAMURAL ASSOCIATES PROGRAM FORMINORITIES AND WOMENThe National Institutes of Health has called for applications to itsExtramural Associates Program for Minorities and Women.  Thisprogram is designed to bring more underrepresented minorities intobiomedical and behavioral research.Associates spend two months (the summer program) or five months atthe National Institutes of Health, and the federal governmentreimburses faculty members' institution for salary, travel and relatedexpenses. For more information, contact Dr. Percy Thomas at theNational Institutes of Health, phone (301) 496-9728. Deadline forapplications to the two- and three-month programs is June 15, 1992.The Department of Veterans Affairs has announced the availability ofscholarships to nursing, nurse anesthesia and occupational or physicaltherapy students for the 1992-93 school year.  The Health ProfessionalScholarship Program and the Reserve Member Stipend Programprovide financial support to associate degree nursing students in theirlast year of study, and third- and fourth-year students in baccalaureateor entry-level master's degree programs in nursing, occupationaltherapy and physical therapy.  In the Reserve Member StipendProgram, reservists must be members of the Selected Ready Reservesand eligible for the Montgomery Reserve GI Bill.Department of Veterans Affairs Health Professional Scholarshiprecipients receive tuition, educational expenses and a monthly stipend of$621. Reserve Stipend recipients receive $400 monthly while enrolled infull-time course work. In exchange, participants in both programs agreeto serve as a full-time registered nurse, occupational or physicaltherapist in a Department of Veterans Affairs medical center for aperiod of one year for each year of support. The maximum length of anaward is two years.Requests for applications may be made to the Health ProfessionalsEducational Assistance Programs (143B), 810 Vermont Ave. N.W.,Washington, DC 20420, phone (202) 535-7528.  Deadline forapplications is May 26, 1992.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH PROFESSIONS REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 17, 1992LOYOLA SURGEONS PIONEER USE OFLAPAROSCOPY FOR TRAUMA DIAGNOSISSurgeons at the Loyola University Medical Center and Hines VeteransAdministration Hospital are pioneering the diagnostic use of thelaparoscope in emergency medicine, and expanding its use to includekidney removal and other surgeries.  These innovations are evolvingalong with the development of the Medical Center's LaparoscopicSurgery Center.The goals of the new center are to train specialists and students inlaparoscopic techniques, research and develop new applications of thelaparoscope and provide a liaison between surgeons and manufacturersto assist in the development of new surgical devices.  A key componentof the center will be an education and research facility which will allowfaculty to integrate laparoscopy principles and techniques into theeducation of surgical residents and students, as well as providingadvances courses for surgeons.Laparoscopy is currently being used for appendix removal,cholecystectomy, bile duct exploration and lymph node biopsy.  Otherprocedures to which the laparoscope will soon be applied include kidneyremoval, colon resection, vagotomy, Nissen fundoplication and herniarepair.One of the major breakthroughs in laparoscopy, the diagnosis ofinternal injury in trauma patients, has been advanced by Dr. Wendy J.Marshall, trauma director, and Dr. Christopher K. Salvino.  Thesurgeons have shown in an ongoing, randomized study that thelaparoscope is highly effective in evaluating abdominal injuries resultingfrom trauma such as stab wounds, auto accidents and assault.Salvino explained that before the laparoscope, internal bleeding wasdetected by a diagnostic lavage -- or needle inserted into the abdomen.The lavage is not accurate enough to pinpoint the location of thebleeding, and needs to be confirmed by using a CAT scan.  These twoprocedures can consume precious time, and may necessitate moving anunstable patient.Laparoscopy combines the best of both procedures, indicating thesource of the bleeding and often enabling surgery to be performedimmediately. The Loyola study has indicated that laparoscopy maysometimes even eliminate unnecessary surgery, because about 20% ofpatients who test positive for bleeding by the lavage method actuallystop bleeding prior to surgery.Other new uses for the laparoscope still being tested in the lab includeusing the method to insert feeding tubes into stomachs of patientsunable to eat; internally stapling stab wounds to stop bleeding, andinjecting fibrin glue to control hemorrhaging.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-9IA086-000615-B039-288http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015523 text/html 18202HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMTContent-length: 18015Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh25.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH RECORD via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Regulatory Activity (110 words) NOTICES (752 words) AGENCY MEETINGS & HEARINGS (316 words) Legislative Activity (536 words) SENATE BILLS (107 words) HOUSE BILLS (267 words) Calendar (243 words) CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Regulatory ActivityPROPOSED RULESHHS/FDA - CORRECTIONFederal Register 12-21-95, p. 66227.Correction to certain statements in the preamble to a proposed rule regardingclassification, reclassification, and codification of pedicle screw spinalsystems (orthopedic devices) published in the October 4, 1995 FederalRegister.  The document is being corrected to reflect an accurate descriptionof the formation, membership, and activities of the Spinal ImplantManufacturers Group and the Scientific Committee, two separate entitiesestablished by the spinal implant manufacturers and medical professionalsocieties to collect and submit to the FDA all available valid scientific dataon the performance of pedicle screw spinal devices.  Information:  MarkMelkerson, 301/594-2036.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NOTICESHHS - REPORT SUBMITTED TO OMB FOR REVIEWFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65659.HHS/HRSA, National Practitioner Data Bank for Adverse Information onPhysicians and Other Health Care Practitioners:  Regulations and Forms:0915-0126 (Extension, no change).  Information:  Reports Clearance Office,301/443-1129.Federal Register 12-22-95, p.  66552.HHS/ACF, National Study of Outcomes for Children Placed in Foster Care withRelatives (New).  Information:  Reports Clearance Office, 202/690-7275.HHS/ACF - DEADLINE EXTENSIONFederal Register 12-18-95, p.  65064.Notice amending the public notice published in the September 7 FederalRegister by extending the deadline for accepting new child welfare waiverdemonstration proposals and the second round of proposals.  A notice will bepublished in January 1996 providing a new deadline.  Information:  MichaelAmbrose, 202/205-8618.HHS/ACF - EARLY HEAD STARTFederal Register 12-21-95, p.  66276.Notice of the availability of funds and a request for applications to conductresearch in Early Head Start programs.  The deadline for submission isFebruary 20, 1996.  Information:  ACYF Operations Center, 800/351-2293.HHS/FDA - APPLICATION APPROVALFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65347.Notice of the approval of the premarket approval application by ProgressiveAngioplasty Systems, Inc., of Menlo Park CA, for the PAS LaCrosse PTCACatheter.  Petitions for administrative review must be submitted by January18.  Information:  Veronica Price, 301/443-8243.HHS/FDA - PREMARKET APPROVALFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65347.Notice of the application approval of Westbrook ME's Bioetica, Inc.'sHEMOSTAGENE Absorbable Collagen Hemostatic Sponge.  Petitions foradministrative review must be submitted by January 18.  Information:  FrancesCurtis, 301/594-3090.HHS/FDA - NEW INDICATION APPROVALFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65348.Notice of the supplemental application approval by Cochlear Corp.  ofEnglewood CO, for premarket approval of a new indication for use for theNucleus 22-Channel Cochlear Implant.  Administrative appeals petitions must besubmitted by January 18.  Information:  Marilyn Flack, 301/594-2080.HHS/FDA - INTRAOCULAR LENSFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65349.Notice of the approval of the application by Pharmacia, Inc.  of Dublin OH,for premarket approval of Model WS-100 Pliolens ultraviolet-absorbing siliconeposterior chamber intraocular lens.  Administrative appeals petitions are dueJanuary 18.  Information:  Ashley Boulware, 301/594-2053.HHS/FDA - CORRECTIONFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65349.Correction of a notice published in the August 11, 1995 Federal Register.  Thenotice, entitled "Nicotine In Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco Products Is ADrug And These Products Are Nicotine Delivery Devices Under The Federal Food,Drug, And Cosmetic Act," announced the availability of appendices to it.  Thisnotice corrects some proofreading errors in the references in that document.Information:  Phillip Chao, 301/827-3380.HHS/FDA - DRUG EXPORTFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65658.Notice that Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Inc., has filed an applicationrequesting approval for the export to Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,Denmark, The Federal Republic of Germany, Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland,Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom of the human biologicalproduct SELECTOGEN 0.8%, Reagent Red Blood Cells.  Information:  Cathy Conn,301/594-2006.HHS/FDA - HUMAN DRUG EXPORTFederal Register 12-22-95, p.  66553.Notice that Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Inc.  has filed an applicationrequesting approval for the export of the human biological product SURGISCREEN0.8 percent, Reagent Red Blood Cells, to 20 countries.  Information:  CathyConn, 301/594-2006.HHS/NIH - LICENSING OPPORTUNITYFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65660.Notice that the National Institutes of Health seek licensees to commercializea method to manipulate non-templated nucleotide addition to ensure that allamplified DNA products of polymerase chain reaction are either specificallymodified or unmodified.  Information:  Ronald King, 301/496-7735.HHS/NIH - GOVERNMENT INVENTIONSFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65660.Notice of the list of government-owned inventions available for licensing inthe U.S.  Foreign patent applications are filed on selected inventions toextend market coverage for U.S.  companies and may also be available forlicensing.  Information:  Robert Benson, 301/496-7056.HHS/OS - SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCTFederal Register 12-21-95, p.  66276.Notice that the Office of Research Integrity has made final findings ofscientific misconduct in the cases of Ruth Lupu, of Georgetown UniversityMedical Center, who was found to have submitted a false letter ofcollaboration in an unfunded application to the Public Health Service; andVictoria Santa Cruz, of the University of Arizona, who fabricated interviewdata on a questionnaire intended for use in two studies funded by PublicHealth Service grants.  Information:  Lyle Bivens, 301/443-5330.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AGENCY MEETINGS & HEARINGSHHS/AHCPR - POLICY, RESEARCH, EVALUATIONFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65346.Meeting of the National Advisory Council for Health Care Policy, Research, andEvaluation, January 26, Madison Hotel, Washington DC.  Information:  DeborahQueenan, 301/594-1459.HHS/CDC - HEALTH EFFECTSFederal Register 12-22-95, p.  65662.Meeting of the Citizens Advisory Committee on Public Health Service Activitiesand Research at DOE Sites:  Savannah River Site Health Effects Subcommittee,January 11-12, Hilton - The De Soto, Savannah GA.  Information:  Paul Renard,770/488-7040.HHS/HRSA - GME COUNCILFederal Register 12-19-95, p.  65351.Meeting of the Council on Graduate Medical Education, January 9-10, Governor'sHouse Hotel, Washington DC.  Information:  Lawrence Clare, 301/443-6326.HHS/NIH - AIDS RESEARCHFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.Meeting of the National Institute of Allergy & Infectious Diseases' AIDSResearch Advisory Committee, January 30, NIH, Building 45, Natcher ConferenceCenter, Executive Board Conference Room D, Bethesda MD.  Information:  AnneClaysmith, 301/402-0755.HHS/NIH - LITERATURE SELECTIONFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.Meeting of the National Library of Medicine's Literature Selection TechnicalReview Committee, February 8-9, National Library of Medicine, Building 38,Bethesda MD.  Information:  Lois Ann Colaianni, 301/496-6921.HHS/NIH - EYE COUNCILFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65661.Meeting of the National Advisory Eye Council, January 25, Executive PlazaNorth, Conference Room G, Bethesda MD.  Information:  Lois DeNinno,301/496-9110.HHS/NIH - COMMUNICATIONS DISORDERSFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65662.Meeting of the National Deafness and Other Communication Disorders AdvisoryCouncil and its Planning Subcommittee, Teleconference, January 25-26, NIH,Building 31, Conference Room 7, Bethesda MD.  Information:  Earleen Elkins,301/496-8693.HHS/NIH - MENTAL HEALTHFederal Register 12-20-95, p.  65662.Closed meeting of the National Institute of Mental Health Special EmphasisPanel to review and evaluate grant applications, January 8-9, Hyatt RegencyBethesda, Bethesda MD.  Information:  William Radcliffe, 301/443-1000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Legislative ActivityHEALTH PERFORMANCE PARTNERSHIPSSenate reported the measure S.1180, to amend Title XIX of the Public HealthService Act to provide for health performance partnerships, with an amendmentin the nature of a substitute, on December 19.  Information:  Clerk,202/224-2120.TEEN DRUG USESenate Judiciary Committee concluded hearings December 19 to examine recenttrends in drug use among American youth, focusing on prevention and treatmentprograms.  Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-5225.BALANCED BUDGETBy a unanimous voice vote of 94, the Senate passed H.J.  Res.132, affirmingthat budget negotiations shall be based on the most recent technical andeconomic assumptions of the Congressional Budget Office and shall achieve abalanced budget by FY2002 based on those assumptions, after agreeing to thefollowing amendment:* Daschle Amendment No.  3108, to ensure Medicare solvency, reform welfare,and provide adequate funding for Medicaid, education, agriculture, nationaldefense, veterans, and the environment.  Information:  Daschle's Office,202/224-2321.LABOR/HHS APPROPRIATIONSSenate reached a unanimous-consent agreement December 20 providing for thecloture vote on a motion to proceed to the consideration on December 22 ofH.R.2127, making appropriations for the Departments of Labor, Health & HumanServices, and Education, and related agencies, for the fiscal year endingSeptember 30, 1996.  On December 22, a unanimous consent agreement was reachedto provide for the scheduled cloture vote to proceed to the consideration ofH.R.2127 to occur at a time to be determined, but not before January 3.Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-4594.WELFARE REFORMHouse agreed to the conference report on H.R.4 on December 21, to restore theAmerican family, reduce illegitimacy, control welfare spending, and reducewelfare dependence - clearing the measure for Senate action.  The followingmeasure was rejected by a recorded vote of 192-231:* Rose motion to recommit the conference report to the committee of conferencewith instructions to the managers on the part of the House to recede fromcertain House provisions and agree to certain Senate amendments relating tochild abuse prevention and treatment, child care and development block grants,state maintenance of social security efforts, SSI disabled children, family-and school-based nutrition block grants, child nutrition programs, andcontinued application of current standards under the Medicaid program.Information:  Rose's Office, 202/225-2731.VA MEDICAL FACILITIESHouse Committee on Veterans' Affairs ordered reported H.R.2814 on December 21,to authorize major medical facility projects and leases for the Department ofVeterans' Affairs for FY96.  On December 22, the House filed H.R.2814.Information:  Committee Office, 202/225-3527.DAYTON AREA HEALTH CARE PLANSenate Finance Committee was discharged December 22 from further considerationof H.R.1878, to extend for two years the period of applicability of enrollmentmix requirement to certain health maintenance organizations providing servicesunder the Dayton Area Health Care Plan.  The bill was then passed, clearingthe measure for the President.  Information:  Committee Office, 202/224-4515.WELFARE REPORTSenate agreed to the welfare reform conference report, H.R.4, by a vote of 52to 47 on December 22, to enhance support and work opportunities for familieswith children, reduce welfare dependence, and control welfare spending.  Themeasure is now cleared for the President.  Information:  Clerk, 202/225-2120.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SENATE BILLSDOD MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENTS.1487.  To establish a demonstration project to provide that the Departmentof Defense may receive Medicare reimbursement for health care servicesprovided to certain Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries.(McCain) Finance.ERISAS.1490.  To amend Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of1974 to improve enforcement of such title and benefit security forparticipants by adding certain provisions with respect to the auditing ofemployee benefit plans, and for other purposes.  (Simon) Labor & HumanResources.NSAIDSS.1496.  To grant certain patent rights for certain non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs for a two-year period.  (Simon) Judiciary.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996HOUSE BILLSPREMIUM REDUCTIONH.R.2805.  To amend Title XVIII of the Social Security Act to reduce theamount of the premium charged for enrollment in Part A of the Medicare programfor individuals 80 years of age or older.  (Stark) Ways & Means.VETERAN COMPENSATIONH.R.2813.  To ensure that payments during fiscal year 1996 of compensation forveterans with service-connected disabilities, of dependency and indemnitycompensation for survivors of such veterans, and of other veterans' benefits,and payments to Department of Veterans' Affairs contractors providing servicesdirectly related to patient health and safety, are made regardless ofGovernment financial shortfalls.  (Hutchinson) Appropriations.VA MEDICAL FACILITIESH.R.2814.  To authorize major medical facility projects and major medicalfacility leases for the Department of Veterans' Affairs for fiscal year 1996,and for other purposes.  (Stump) Veterans' Affairs.VA AMBULATORY CAREH.R.2831.  To authorize establishment of a Department of Veterans' Affairsambulatory care facility in Brookhaven NY.  (Forbes) Veterans' Affairs.HEALTH CARE BENEFITSH.R.2836.  To provide increased access to health care benefits, to provideincreased portability of health care benefits, to provide increased securityof health care benefits, to increase the purchasing power of individuals andsmall employers, and for other purposes.  (Roukema) Commerce.MEDICARE PHARMACEUTICALSH.R.2839.  To amend Title XVIII of the Social Security Act to establish amedication evaluation and dispensing system for Medicare beneficiaries, toimprove the quality of pharmaceutical services received by our nation'selderly and disabled, and to reduce instances of adverse reactions toprescription drugs experienced by Medicare beneficiaries.  (Stark) Ways &Means.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH RECORD via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CalendarAACC 1996 MEETINGSThe American Association for Clinical Chemistry, Inc.  will hold the followingmeetings in 1996:* February 4-5, Arnold O.  Beckman Conference, "Drugs and Toxins in ClinicalLaboratory Practice," Wyndham Emerald Plaza, San Diego CA; * March 5, "TakingCharge of Point-of-Care Testing," McLean Hilton, Washington DC; * April 10-12,Oak Ridge Conference, Tomorrow's Technology Today, "New and AdvancedTechnology for the Clinical Laboratory," Fairmont Hotel, San Jose CA; * April17, "Taking Charge of Point-of-Care Testing," Holiday Inn - O'HareInternational, Chicago IL; * May 8, "Taking Charge of Point-of-Care Testing,"Sheraton Newport Beach, Newport Beach CA; * May 14-15, Laboratory 2000Conference, Sheraton Gateway Suites Hotel, Chicago IL; * July 28-August 1,48th AACC Annual Meeting & Clinical Laboratory Exposition, McCormack Place,Chicago IL; * October 1996, Video/audio conference, "Strategies for Survival:How Laboratorians Must Reengineer To Cope with New Laboratory Needs; *November 1996, Clinical Chemistry Forum; and * November 21-23, San DiegoConference on Nucleic Acids, San Diego CA.  Information:  Peggy Abbott,800/892-1400.To order individual copies of the "Federal Register," send $4.50 to:Superindendent of Documents, GPO, Washington, DC 20402; 202/512-0132.For a free copy of a House bill or report, send a self-addressed mailing labelto House Document Room, B-18, Ford Building, Washington, DC 20515.  For a freecopy of a Senate bill or report, send a self-addressed mailing label to SenateDocument Room SHB04, Washington, DC 20510.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-10IA086-000615-B040-10http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh42.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015559 text/html 26470HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:53:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMTContent-length: 26283Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh42.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNet January 11, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES APA STUDY ENCOURAGES PSYCHOLOGICAL STRATEGIES FOR COST CONTROL (202 words) MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS MEDICARE MARKETERS FEEL HCFA'S CRACKDOWN (609 words) ADVERTISING ONLINE HEALTH SERVICES OFFER TARGET MARKETING (902 words) CASE STUDY NO. 78: MARKETING MARKETERS USE LEGACY OF OLYMPIC STAR IN CAMPAIGN (422 words) HEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS BRIEFS HHS RELEASES PSA ON AIDS (142 words) GHHA CAMPAIGN COUNTERS CRITICISM (56 words) U.S. HEALTHCARE SATURATES CHARLOTTE MARKET (205 words) UPCOMING EVENTS (45 words) TOOL BOX KIOSKS EFFECTIVE TOOL FOR HEALTHCARE MARKETERS (516 words) MARKETING DIRECT MAIL WORKS WITH SENIOR MEDICARE MARKET (218 words) CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996APA STUDY ENCOURAGES PSYCHOLOGICAL STRATEGIES FOR COST CONTROL     A new study by the American Psychological Association (APA) showscommunications specialists can affect their hospital's bottom line byencouraging physicians and other medical staff to use self-helptactics in their demand management programs.      "There is growing evidence that addressing the multiplepsychosocial reasons that prompt patients to visit physicians can beboth health- and cost- effective," said Doug Fizel, public affairsspecialist for the APA.      "For example, there are patient-specific and disease-specificcommunication intervention strategies that can be integrated intoclinical care with the same degree of scientific credibility aspharmaceutical or surgical interventions."      An overall psychological and behavioral management communicationsstrategy can be used effectively in concert with increased sensitivityto psychiatric disorders to achieve cost savings, he said.      The underlying reasons patients visit physicians are multi-faceted and often influenced strongly by psychological factors andbehavioral variables, said the study.      Acknowledging the success of self-help can have a significantimpact on the type of care given, the efficacy of that care and,importantly, the bottom line cost of that care, it notes.      Improving medical care and reducing medical costs, assert theauthors of the study, can best be accomplished by integratingpsychiatric, psychological, behavioral, and biomedical evaluations andinterventions.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MEDICARE MARKETERS FEEL HCFA'S CRACKDOWN     HMOs targeting the Medicare population must conform to a batteryof new federal requirements, including submitting their marketingplans to the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) at least 45days before materials are distributed.      In the agency's new crackdown on Medicare risk contracts, con-tractors also will have to provide clear, written descriptions oftheir plans for Medicare beneficiaries; notify the public aboutenrollment periods; and inform prospective enrollees that contractswith HCFA may be terminated compliance with the requirements is notfound.    HCFA, which only recently released its requirements, will supply amarketing model to contractors upon request and has stipulated thatminor deviations can derail or delay a marketing plan.       Medicare-risk contractors would be wise to pay particularattention to HCFA's "report cards" on, or assessments of, acontractor's marketing materials, cautioned Lynn Shapiro Snyder, anattorney with the Washington, D.C., firm of Epstein Becker & Green.Required and Prohibited Marketing Activities      Prohibited marketing activities under HCFA's regulations includediscrimination based on health status; intentionally confusingbeneficiaries; dispensing gifts or payments of above $10 to encourageenrollment, door-to-door solicitations, and distribution of marketingmaterials not approved by HCFA.      Violations range from $25,000 to $100,000 per abuse.  Acontractor also can be prohibited from continuing to accept enrollmentapplications and payments for enrolled beneficiaries, and may be askedto cease marketing activities.      Medicare-risk contractors must use care in selecting marketingagents for their plans and should avoid using physicians.  Physicians,Snyder noted, often are unaware of membership plans' benefits andcosts.     In addition, a physician's "inside knowledge" of the patient'shealth increases the potential for discrimination in favor ofhealthier beneficiaries when acting as a marketing agent--a prohibitedmarketing activity, Snyder said.     The best way to avoid such problems:  "Tell your doctors not totalk about Medicare risk contracts," Snyder said.  "Let the marketing departmentdo that."      Taking care with their marketing practices will help contractorsavoid problems that potentially could reflect badly on their status,said Geraldine Dallek, executive director of the Los Angeles basedCenter for Health Care Rights (CHCR).     "The experiences of CHCR's Health Insurance Counseling andAdvocacy Program (HICAP) and other HICAP programs throughoutCalifornia are reflective of very serious problems in therisk-contracting program that must be addressed," said Dallek whosegroup in 1993 published a study on marketing, quality of care and dueprocess protections in Medicare risk-contract HMOs.     Some of the problems the study cited were:     *  Poorly trained marketing agents;      *  Inappropriate financial incentives inherent in thecommission-based compensation of marketing agents;      *  Marketing fraud/abuse resulting from these problems;      *  Lack of marketing materials in an enrollee's primary language;and,     *  HMO delays in disenrolling Medicare members.      In a number of documented instances, HMO employees have lied toprospective Medicare enrollees about the benefits of HMO enrollment,pressured them to join, enrolled individuals who were unable to makean informed enrollment decision, and obtained enrollment signaturesunder false pretenses, Dallek said.      Generally, these problems are prevalent in geographic areas wherebeneficiaries have little experience with Medicare HMOs, in areas offierce competition for Medicare enrollees, and with HMOs inexperiencedin marketing to this population.      Many HMOs pay their marketing agents a commission for each newMedicare enrollee.  Without proper training and oversight, thiscompensation system is a recipe for disaster.      For example, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Los AngelesCounty Medicare beneficiaries were subjected to massive marketingfraud by one HMO, she said.      "Although HCFA was slow to react to this problem, once theagency took strong action, the HMO changed its agent compensationsystem and significantly increased agent training and oversight," saidDallek.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ONLINE HEALTH SERVICES OFFER TARGET MARKETING     Providers of healthcare services and pharmaceutical may now beable to promote their wares by tapping into the interactive healthcarecommunications service "Better Health & Medical Forum" on AmericaOnline.         Health ResponseAbility Systems Inc. (HRS), a pioneer indeveloping online and interactive healthcare communications, startedthe Better Health Medical Forum on America Online (keyword: BetterHealth), one of the fastest growing areas (with almost 1.4 millionvisits per month).     Under an agreement with Hill and Knowlton Public Relations in NewYork City, the company will seek to increase awareness of the forumand open opportunities for corporate sponsors to underwrite expansionof the services.     Corporate sponsors will be able to link advertising and marketingmaterials to appropriate areas and to sponsor chat rooms orinformational sites.     The forum is an easy-to-use, searchable health and medicalinformation database and service that facilitates "real-time"communication and information exchange with hundreds of thousands ofindividuals across the nation.           "Some of the benefits of sponsoring a site is having a captive,alive audience that is interested in your information.  It is targetmarketing," said Allen Douma, creator of HRS.     For example, Douma said, a pharmaceutical company that spendsthousands of dollars in television advertising for a certainmedication may do better on-line by targeting a select group ofpatients that would be interested in it.      "We have a very strong community of people who are seeking healthinformation," said Douma.      Although Better Health is one of the most popular sites at AOL,Douma expects to see a four-fold increase in the number of visits nextyear.       The forum embraces an integrated, synergistic approach toinforming, motivating and supporting individuals in making moreinformed choices about factors that influence health and well-being,from personal decisions such as lifestyle and self-care, to nationaldecisions such as health reform, said Elin Silveous, co-founder of theservice.  Silveous started the forum when she discovered she hadmultiple sclerosis but could not find an online support group.          The forum also offers full-text documents and downloadablesoftware files spanning the continuum of health topics, from lifestyleand prevention, to rehabilitation and long-term care.            Following are some of the features the Better Health & MedicalForum includes:--  More than 50 Message Boards (See complete list below.  Eachmessage board can contain up to 50 folders.  Each folder can containup to 500 messages.);--  Thirty five Community Health Forums as part of the PersonalEmpowerment Network; --  MEDLINE, the world's leading bibliographic database complied bythe National Library of Medicine;--  Shopping Services (for health educational and related items);--  Forums for Voluntary Health and Disability Related Organizations,including: the American Cancer Society, American Diabetes Associationand American Lung Association;--  Four chat rooms in which more than 250 "LIVE" mutual support andself-help group meetings or health professional networking meetingsare held each month; and, --  Numerous Software Libraries     Within the Better Health & Medical Forum, HRS has embedded anumber of additional information and support sources, such as thePersonal Empowerment Network (PEN) and MEDLINE.     PEN is a community in which members reach out and help oneanother in dealing with life's challenges and with the personal--andsometimes difficult decisions--that influence health and quality oflife.     PEN offers more than 30 areas of medical special interest,linking AOL members with information and access to the web.  MEDLINEprovides members with easy-to-use, low-cost access to the database ofthe National Library of Medicine.  To obtain free software and freetrial time to peruse the Better Health & Medical Forum, members cancall 1-800-531-2626.(EDITOR'S NOTE: This week's Ask Your Colleague explores easy ways todevelop a communications plan during a merger or acquisition.HCPRMN asked Paula Lovell, president of Lovell Communications inNashville, Tenn., for her tips.)What are the first steps in developing an overall communications plan?     "The most important step to remember is to be in the informationpipe line.  Being part of the management group that is dealing withthe merger first hand will help in getting a handle on theinformation.      You should get the information first in order to assimilate itinto a communications plan.  By being a member of the "project team"assigned with working on the merger--you can be in the loop because ifyou don't, the information could potentially be leaked.      The second step is to identify target audiences--Board ofTrustees, stakeholders, stockholders, volunteers, fundraisers, media,patients and families, physicians and managed-care organizations.     Then develop a core message and a rationale for merger for eachgroup.      Also, identify the single best ways to communicate your messagewith memos, personal phone calls, press releases, advertising,hospital meetings and advertising.     Also develop your own communications team--a different team fromthe "project team" with your own worker bees.      The CEO and the CFO of the hospital would be part of the team. He needs to be aware of his role and be provided with press releasesas well as be advised about potential confusion, morale issues, publicempathy for disgruntled employees.      He also needs to be prepared for competitors in managed care andwhat it means to the business."When is the best time for an announcement?          "Ideally if you are an organization in the private sector, at thetime the letter of intent is signed, an announcement should be made." Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MARKETERS USE LEGACY OF OLYMPIC STAR IN CAMPAIGN    Capitalizing on the legacy of Olympic athlete and Oklahoma native,Jim Thorpe, Integris Health's Southwest Medical Center in OklahomaCity has retained a 95 percent occupancy and attracted younger andmore affluent patients at its new rehabilitation center.     Not long after the campaign was launched, the referral rate goalsfor the Jim Thorpe Rehabilitation Hospital of six to seven new names amonth were surpassed by 30 percent and three months ahead of schedule.     "A center of excellence was established as evidenced by patientsasking their physicians to refer them to Jim Thorpe," said SamArmstrong-Lopez, marketing director for Integris Health.     The campaign promoted a consistent and unified message of triumphover adversity in all of its components.      Words like "drive, determination, success, legacy and desire,"which symbolize the Jim Thorpe legacy, were threaded through allpieces of the campaign."     "The positive image garnished from the Jim Thorpe RehabilitationHospital campaign will serve as the base for other marketing efforts,"said Lopez. "We will make strides in image enhancements and generate revenue inother areas for a "halo effect" from the successful launch of thehospital."     The $280,000 campaign, which focused on Thorpe's life, used amulti-phased approach to market assessment and strategy.      Phase I, which occurred in the summer of 1994, was a six-stepprocess that focused on strategic, creative and action-plandevelopment.      Phase II, entailed the print and television production process. Some of the photography took place in Denver, including footagerecreating Thorpe as a young athlete.      The hospital even went to great effort to find antique athleticgear and period props for the scenes.      Photographs of Thorpe were borrowed from the family and theThorpe estate.     To reach an audience most apt to use or contribute to thehospital, the campaign--launched two weeks before the rehabilitationcenter's grand opening--included print ads touting an open house andtestimonials, an outpatient brochure, physician direct mail series,patient and volunteer medals and television spots.     "A pieces approach with an ad here and a brochure there wouldhave done little to properly position a new rehabilitation hospital. Through a comprehensive effort, we were able to leverage theindividual components into a whole that was stronger than the sum ofthe parts," said Lopez.        "The Jim Thorpe legacy and message of hope, triumph andovercoming obstacles was versatile enough to reach all of ouraudiences as exhibited by the applicability of the creative to thedirect-mail series, brochures and video, community and donor-directedprint ads, patient directed medals and the T.V. spots," Lopez added.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996HHS RELEASES PSA ON AIDS     Amid troubling new evidence of the toll AIDS continues to take onAmerica's young adults, the Department of Health and Human Servicesreleased a new series of public service announcements urging youngAmericans to take personal responsibility for protecting themselvesfrom HIV.     The new PSAs entitled "Respect Yourself, Protect Yourself," wereproduced by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Itshows young adults talking candidly about their sex lives. Youngadults who are HIV educators and service providers, as well as membersof the target audience, worked closely with CDC and its partners tocreate the PSAs.     HHS Secretary Donna Shalala cited data that identify both theincrease in HIV-related deaths among young adults and the ongoing riskof new HIV infections.  In 1994, AIDS became the leading cause ofdeath among 25- to 44-year-olds, increasing from 37,000 to 42,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996GHHA CAMPAIGN COUNTERS CRITICISM     The Group Health Association of America (GHHA), a Washington-based managed-care trade group, is planning a campaign tocounteroffense media criticism.  The GHAA is expected to releasedetails about the effort this month.     Popular TV series like "ER" have mentioned HMOs negatively, whilesurveys have shown that HMO enrollees are satisfied with their qualityof healthcare.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996U.S. HEALTHCARE SATURATES CHARLOTTE MARKET      Two months after receiving the go-ahead to operate in Charlotte,N.C., U.S. Healthcare Inc. is living up to its reputation as anaggressive marketer.      The $2.8-billion health maintenance organization has saturated the Charlotte market, even the sides of buses.     "It's pretty typical of what we do," says Vaughan Delk, generalmanager for U.S. Healthcare of the Carolinas Inc.         "Part of what we're doing is name recognition.  We're not ahousehold name yet in the Charlotte market, but we certainly plan onbeing one."        To do so, the Blue Bell, Pa.-based HMO -- which counts more than2 million members -- took out two-page ads in The Business Journal andThe Charlotte Observer announcing its arrival.  "The Whole Town'sJumpin' As Charlotte WelcomesU.S. Healthcare," its first ad read, only days after receivingapproval from state regulators.       One media reporting service estimates the HMO spent $155,000 onTV spots in Charlotte in October alone.  In Atlanta, the HMO devotednearly $1.2 million to its marketing efforts in a quarter, accordingto a statement filed with the Georgia Insurance Department. That totalincludes salaries for a staff of about 20.  By comparison, KaiserPermanente, Georgia's largest HMO, reports spending $5.4 million onmarketing in all of 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996UPCOMING EVENTSFeb. 11-14: Society for Healthcare Planning & Marketing's "NationalManaged Care Forum," San Diego, Calif. (708-698-4137)Feb. 20-30: Healthcare Strategies Institute's "Integrated DeliverySystems: Building Successful Payer-Provider Relationships,"Scottsdale, Ariz.March 3-6: Alliance for Healthcare Strategy and Marketing's "1996Annual Conference," New Orleans, La. (602-990-7839)Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996KIOSKS EFFECTIVE TOOL FOR HEALTHCARE MARKETERS      The newest tool in healthcare marketing is the use of interactivekiosks or "ATMs" for marketing programs.         Market research firm Intelco Corp., based in Norwalk, Conn.,predicts that the number of installed multi-media kiosks will grow 69percent this year from 125,000 units last year to a total of 211,000units.        Blue Cross Blue Shield in Massachusetts (BCBSMA), for example,has a group of kiosks called "Health Navigator" which allow acompany's employees to view information about various health insuranceplans, select a plan and even select a preferred doctor.     "It is a virtual-reality customer service center in a kiosk whichuses attractive graphics, high-quality digital video, sound andanimation to communicate with the consumer," said Ethel Shepard,BCBSMA spokesperson.     The Health Navigator kiosk is transportable and provides avariety of essential healthcare information, ranging from primary carephysician directories, prescription and over-the-counter druginformation, wellness surveys and health and wellness articles.     In addition, members can easily obtain a print-out of theirmember profile and can even change their primary care physician byselecting the "Members Only" function and swiping a member ID card.     "Health Navigator reflects our growing confidence in technologyto meet the needs of our customers," said William Van Fassen, BCBSMApresident.  "We are entering a new era for health care and healthcaretechnology.  This system will lower our administrative costs andprovide critical health information for our customers when and wherethey need it."      An interactive video host guides the user through the availableoptions; the user requests information via a touch-screen monitor.       The kiosk provides laser quality print-outs as well as a phonehandset for using a touch screen monitor.  It also provides laserquality print-outs for direct access to BCBSMA customer servicerepresentatives.     Greg Swistak, president of Factura Inc., a kiosk maker based inRochester, N.Y., believes his company's kiosk sales will grow 50percent.  The company has installed 30 percent of the 100,000 kiosksnow in operation in the United States.  Swistak created the BCBSMAkiosk.     Health Navigator leverages the health information highwaytechnologies that are already in place--connecting health careproviders and the business communities and BCBSMA's mainframes, saidShepard.      Kiosks may be expensive depending on their capabilities.  Theminimum cost is $750, and a touchscreen monitor is between $700 and$1,000.      A personal computer which sits inside the kiosk may cost about$1,500 and a printing device could add another $1,000.  Depending onthe choice of hardware, an individual kiosk may cost between $4,000and $20,000.  And then there is also the cost of designing thesoftware to interact with a kiosk user which depends on a company's computer expertise.       Some of the information available on the Healthcare Navigatorkiosk includes:     *  Descriptions of available health plans;     *  Information about such special programs as safety helmetdiscounts, health fitness network, Caring Program for Children,preventive time lines for adults and children, fitness and eyewearnetworks, Living Healthy Books and Living Healthy Magazine.     *  Primary Care Physicians Directories, which provide users withan up-to-date list of available and appropriate PCP's located neartheir homes or work.   Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE PR & MARKETING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DIRECT MAIL WORKS WITH SENIOR MEDICARE MARKET     When selling Medicare risk products to the senior and baby boomermarket, traditional marketing techniques such as seminars may not leadto success.         "Medicare risk products present a very new challenge. Marketers must learn to target their senior market one by one,recognizing the needs of the individual, not a group," said JohnHarrison, president of DiMark Inc., a database marketing outsourcecompany, in Langhorne, Pa.     "It is in this venue that a database marketing strategy, and theuse of direct marketing techniques, will make the difference betweensuccess and failure in Medicare risk marketing."     A database marketing strategy allows Medicare risk marketers tocollect marketing data on an individual prospect or customer basis, torespond to the needs of their customers.     Direct marketing provides the tools to implement a databasemarketing strategy.     "Insurance marketers have traditionally relied on a two-tieredapproach, utilizing personal sales and seminars to attract and sellprospects.  When a marketer, however, adds direct marketing to themix, a dual purpose is served," said Harrison. "These techniquesprovide a means of targeting the senior market and, in some cases,successfully enrolling these individuals through a one-step salesprocess.     For the balance of the market, which relies on the personal touchof seminars and sales representatives, direct-response techniquesoffer a cost-effective means of generating leads.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-11IA086-000615-B040-29http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015615 text/html 31329HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:54:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMTContent-length: 31142Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh11.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DOJ GIVES SEAL OF APPROVAL TO THREE PROVIDER NETWORKS (517 words) BUSINESS BRIEFS HOSPITAL SATISFACTION WITH JCAHCO IMPROVING, ACCORDING TO AHA (150 words) BAXTER INTERNATIONAL TO CREATE TWO $5-BILLION FIRMS (97 words) MERGER OF MARYMOUNT, CLEVELAND CLINIC RECEIVES NEEDED APPROVALS (126 words) ST. JUDE MEDICAL INKS PREFERRED PROVIDER PACT WITH COLUMBIA/HCA (89 words) FTC DECIDES TO DROP CHALLENGE OF MISSOURI HOSPITAL MERGER (135 words) TENET FORMS EQUIPMENT-MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (100 words) MEDICAL RESOURCE NETWORK, ANTHEM COMPLETE PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT (56 words) JOHNS HOPKINS, HUMANA TEAM TO BUILD MD. MCO NETWORK (382 words) MD.'S MATERNITY LOS LAW ISN'T BOOSTING HOSPITAL STAYS, SOME SAY (420 words) EXPECT MORE COMPETITION, CAPITATION, CONSOLIDATION IN 1996, EXPERT SAYS (1733 words) HOSPITAL'S ELECTRONIC NURSING STATION GIVES DOCS OFF-SITE VIEW OF PATIENTS (256 words) CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DOJ GIVES SEAL OF APPROVAL TO THREE PROVIDER NETWORKSFederal antitrust authorities have given the okay to threeprovider networks, including one that would represent nearly50% of the dermatologists in its market.South Carolina dermatologists will be allowed to form anetwork to contract with managed care organizations toprovide skin services currently being provided byinternists, general and family practitioners and otherspecialists.  In two other decisions, DOJ okayed a plan byFlorida dermatologists, plastic surgeons anddermatopathologists to form a network and agreed to allow aGeorgia foot care network to act as an intermediary forsoliciting and managing managed care contracts between itsmembers and third-party payers.DOJ says the non-exclusive South Carolina dermatologynetwork will allow 85 board-certified dermatologists tocontract with managed care plans at competitive rates fordermatologic services commonly provided by other types ofdoctors.Based on the assumption that the number of networkdermatologists in any local market will not exceed 30% ofall doctors available to provide the same kinds of services,the Justice Department's antitrust division says it isunlikely that network members would attain market power orcause anticompetitive effects.Even with 44% of market, network earns DOJ okayIn another ruling, the antitrust division last month decidedto allow a group of south Florida dermatologists, plasticsurgeons and dermatopathologists to form a joint network toprovide comprehensive services to third-party payers.Dermnet Inc. will provide services in Dade, Broward and PalmBeach counties.  "By offering more choices and greaterefficiency, Dermnet might inject a healthy dose ofcompetition in these markets," said Anne Bingaman, assistantattorney general for antitrust.Bingaman's letter said that Dermnet's operations, whilerepresenting around 44% of board-certified dermatologists inthe area, are not likely to result in anticompetitiveeffects.  The network presents sufficient safeguards, shewrites, to prevent threats to competition for dermatologyservices in the market.Dermnet's members will share substantial financial riskthrough capitation, and the network will be non-exclusive,Bingaman says.  In addition, large healthcare payers in thearea expressed no competitive concerns about the proposal,instead viewing it as a possible way to enhance efficiency,she says.A Georgia foot care network will be allowed to act as anintermediary for soliciting and managing managed carecontracts between its members and third-party payers under athird proposal granted approval by DOJ.The proposed non-exclusive network will be open to anymember of the Georgia Podiatric Medical Association.  Thenetwork, which will be called Georgia Preferred PodiatricMedical Network, represents 92 of the state's 212podiatrists.The department said the proposed activities are not likelyto be anticompetitive because the network will function as afacilitator of managed care contracting between its membersand payers.  The network will not negotiate fees on behalfof its members, and members will be prohibited fromdiscussing contract terms among themselves.In addition, the department said the discussions that payersmay request with the network's agent concerning non-priceissues may be efficiency-enhancing, because they may assisthealth plans in developing effective standards of care andcost controls.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HOSPITAL SATISFACTION WITH JCAHCO IMPROVING, ACCORDING TOAHAOverall hospital satisfaction is increasing with the on-sitesurvey process of the Joint Commission on Accreditation ofHealthcare Organization, according to the second in a seriesof national opinion polls conducted for the AmericanHospital Association.  Satisfaction with the pre-surveyprocess increased as well.  But hospitals reportedincreasing dissatisfaction with the time needed to getwritten accreditation reports after their on-site surveys.The poll, conducted by the National Research Corp. ofLincoln, Neb., was mailed in November to 660 hospitals thathad been evaluated by the Joint Commission from May 20 toSept. 30, 1995.  Three hundred and thirty-four responded.Data for the first poll in the series was gathered inAugust.  The polls seek to identify the reasons whyhospitals want Joint Commission accreditation; to assesshospitals' level of support for the accreditation processand to learn which areas of that process need improvement.Contact AHA at (202)638-1100.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BAXTER INTERNATIONAL TO CREATE TWO $5-BILLION FIRMSBaxter International's board of directors has approved aplan to create two $5-billion entities, a global medical-technology company and a healthcare cost management company.The medical technology firm will continue to be known asBaxter International Inc.  It will consist of the company'shigh-growth medical technology and international businesses,which include biotechnology, renal therapy, cardiovascularmedicine, international hospital and intravenous systems.The healthcare cost management company will consist ofBaxter's cost management, U.S. distribution and surgicalproducts operations and will provide an array of productsand cost-saving services to healthcare providers.  ContactBaxter at (708)948-2875.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MERGER OF MARYMOUNT, CLEVELAND CLINIC RECEIVES NEEDEDAPPROVALSAn agreement initiated last year to merge Marymount Hospitaland the Cleveland Clinic Foundation has received all neededapprovals and was signed.  Working together, the twoorganizations will have a collaborative approach to sharingclinical and educational information, research, technologyand managed care responsibilities.  They will function as asingle economic entity with a common bottom line.  Marymountwill remain a Catholic hospital, and its mission, philosophyandvalues will be preserved.  Marymount, founded by the Sistersof St. Joseph of the Third Order of St. Francis in 1949,will continue to be sponsored by the Sisters, who willparticipate in its governance.  For more information,contact Mary Parsons of Marymount Hospital at (216)587-8213or Holli Birrer of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation at(216)44-0141.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ST. JUDE MEDICAL INKS PREFERRED PROVIDER PACTWITH COLUMBIA/HCASt. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul. Minn., has signed a supplyagreement with Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.  Under theagreement, St. Jude Medical's heart valve division andPacesetter, its cardiac rhythm management business, haveadditional access to all Columbia/HCA accounts.  Theagreement is in force from October 1995 to the end of 1996,with a renewal option for 1997.  Pacesetter has been undercontract with Columbia/HCA since 1994.  The company says itexpects continued growth with the new contract.  Fordetails, contact Paul Vetter, St. Jude Medical,  at(612)481-7791.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FTC DECIDES TO DROP CHALLENGE OF MISSOURI HOSPITAL MERGERThe Federal Trade Commission unanimously decided to drop itscase challenging the merger of two Missouri hospitals onantitrust grounds.  "The decision not to pursue the Freemanand Oak Hill hospitals case marks the first time that theFTC has used the new rule it adopted to review and dismiss apending case after reconsidering it," says Thomas Campbell,a hospital antitrust attorney representing the Joplinhospitals.  The five FTC commissioners unanimously announcedthe dismissal of the case after being denied a preliminaryinjunction Nov. 1 by the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals in St.Louis.  Previously, U.S. District Judge Dean Whipple inKansas City issued an opinion and, after holding anevidentiary hearing in Joplin, concluded that the FTC'sevidence did not meet the requirements for a preliminaryinjunction.  Contact Campbell at (312)245-8425.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TENET FORMS EQUIPMENT-MANAGEMENT PROGRAMTenet Healthcare Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., has formed acomprehensive equipment-management program projected to savethe company more than $13 million over the next three years.The program, which oversees all equipment-maintenancecontracts -- will be implemented in the company's 75 acutecare hospitals.  The program will employ three majorstrategies to reduce costs:  development of a centralizeddatabase for all existing major maintenance contracts;moving away from long-term, noncancelable agreements anddevelopment of uniform terms and conditions for allmaintenance contracts; and assignment of selective equipmentmaintenance to one of two independent service organizations.Call Tenet at (310)998-4000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MEDICAL RESOURCE NETWORK, ANTHEM COMPLETE PARTNERSHIPAGREEMENTMedical Resource Network and Anthem Health Plans havecompleted formation of a partnership that they say willoffer Georgians "cost-effective access to qualityhealthcare."  The partnership will do business as AnthemHealth Plan of Georgia.  MRN is an 18-member Georgia healthsystem consisting of physicians and healthcare systemslocated in every major community in Georgia.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996JOHNS HOPKINS, HUMANA TEAM TO BUILD MD. MCO NETWORKBaltimore-based Johns Hopkins HealthCare will team with HMOgiant Humana Inc., Louisville, Ky., to capture more managedcare business in Maryland and build the foundation for afive-state health plan.The alliance gives Johns Hopkins' network building efforts abig boost, and should mean more managed care tertiary carebusiness for the system's flagship, Johns Hopkins Hospital.For Humana, the deal could jump-start its entry into thewider Maryland market, where its business now is limited tometropolitan Washington, D.C.Humana's subsidiary Humana Group Health Plan Inc.,Washington, will soon move into the Baltimore market.  TheHMO plans to follow that growth with a push into Delaware,Virginia, West Virginia and Pennsylvania.Deal means more tertiary care business for Johns HopkinsJohns Hopkins has much to gain, too, says Michele Deverich,vice president of product and network development for JohnsHopkins HealthCare, notably increased business in tertiarycare.Humana will use and expand physician networks Johns Hopkinshas established, such as pediatrics and cardiology, and willwork with the health system to form other provider andancillary networks."Every bit of market share Humana garners will flow throughour network, and all tertiary care is pointed in thedirection of Hopkins," Deverich says.  With the network thatHumana and Hopkins will develop, the HMO will never need tosend a patient out of that system, she predicts.Partnership boosts Humana's metro D.C. effortsThe two partners could prove to be a good match.  Two yearsago, Humana took over the Washington-based Group HealthAssociation, one of the oldest HMOs in the country.  Withthe rechristened Humana Group Health's enrollment stalled ataround 120,000 members since the purchase, Humana is readyto boost its fortunes through expansion outside theWashington market.  And Hopkins sees an opportunity to grabmore primary care business for the provider networks it'sbuilding."We realized we needed a strong presence in the primary caremarket," says Deverich.  But "this is not an effort to getbread-and-butter care into Johns Hopkins.  Our goal is no todrive every appendectomy and normal [baby] delivery to JohnsHopkins."  Primary care will be channeled to a nine-hospitalMaryland network, Atlantic Health Alliance.Call Ron Sauder, of Johns Hopkins, at (410)955-5384.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MD.'S MATERNITY LOS LAW ISN'T BOOSTING HOSPITAL STAYS, SOMESAYMaryland's pioneering mandatory maternity length of stay lawis having little effect on hospital stays because of aloophole, state providers say.In the legislation, insurers are given the option ofallowing an extra day in the hospital beyond the now-standard 24 hours or paying for a home visit by a nurse.The much-cheaper home visits are winning by a landslide."If it's $1,000 for an extra day in the hospital and $100 tosend a nurse, in every instance the insurer has a choice ofspending $100 or $1,000, and they're going to choose thelesser amount," says Mark Seigel, an obstetrician who ispresident of the Montgomery County Medical Society insuburban Washington."If I don't send a patient home after one day, the patient'sgoing to get a bill for that extra day," Seigel says.Maryland was the first state to approve maternity staylegislation, and was followed closely by New Jersey andNorth Carolina.  The Maryland law took effect Oct. 1.The legislation requires insurers to cover maternity staysin accordance with the medical criteria outlined in"Guidelines for Perinatal Care," published jointly by theAmerican Academy of Pediatrics and the American College ofObstetricians and Gynecologists.The guidelines recommend a 48-hour hospital stay followingnormal vaginal delivery, but allow for shorter stays ifcriteria for medical stability are met.  In cases where themother and her physician agree to discharge prior to 48hours, the Maryland law requires an initial home visit thatincludes metabolic screening for the infant.The Maryland Hospital Association says it does not yet havestatewide information on the length of hospital stays forchildbirth during October, when the law took effect.But Seigel and other physicians say that insurers are notgiving them the option of choosing the extra day in thehospital over the home visit.Insurers have not lengthened hospital stays -- despite thenew law -- because they need to save money somewhere,according to Robert Sheff, president of HMOs for Blue CrossBlue Shield of Maryland.  If insurers allow new mothers tostay in the hospital longer, they will have to take benefitsfrom someone else, he says.Maryland physician organizations will press for amending thelaw during the next session to close the loophole, Seigelsays, adding, "The details can be worked out.  It's just aquestion of coming up with the right language."Contact Seigel at (301)921-4300 and Sheff at (410)581-3000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EXPECT MORE COMPETITION, CAPITATION, CONSOLIDATION IN 1996,EXPERT SAYSThe healthcare market will begin changing dramatically in1996 as payers demand and get lower prices, predicts RussellC. Coile, Jr., president of the Health Forecasting Group,Santa Clarita, Calif.Competition, capitation and consolidation are in theforefront of the forces that will drive health trends in thepost-reconciliation era beginning in 1996.  It's all part ofthe re-engineering of the American healthcare market,propelled by payers -- employers, business coalitions, andgovernment -- who are demanding and getting lower prices andreduced expenditures from the healthcare sector.The year ahead will be a war over the premium.  Price warsbetween HMOs and insurers are expanding on a national basis.The decline in HMO/insurance premiums is triggering a waveof health industry consolidations and deeply slashedprovider payments.  Angered by the cuts, physicians andhospitals are organizing their own provider-sponsorednetworks and fighting back.  The year ahead will be a battlebetween providers and payers to control more of theshrinking premium.Purchasers will win, providers will losePurchasers and government health programs are "winners,"delighted that national health inflation is coming down.Corporate health benefit costs rose only 2% from 1994 to1995, due to widespread switching by employers to managedcare.  Employer-sponsored health costs were one-third belowthe level of consumer inflation, according to thePhiladelphia-based Hay Group.Health plans and providers will be "losers," as pricecompetition starts a downward spiral for HMO profits andprovider payments.  For the first time in a decade, medicalcare prices slipped down to the level of overall consumerinflation, rising only 0.3% in October 1995, the Wall StreetJournal says.Managed care and employer-driven price competition areslashing health costs.  As recently as 1988, the nation'shealthcare prices were soaring at an annual rate of 14%.Government payment cuts and private-sector competition arelooming for 1996.  Impacts of those trends will rippleacross America's $1 trillion health system, affecting everyhospital, physician, health plan and consumer.Premium warfare comingEconomic competition between providers and payers --HMOs/insurers -- over control of the premium could turn uglyin 1996.  All buyers -- employers, business coalitions andgovernment programs -- are driving cost competition amongHMOs and insurers.  In 1995, HMO prices fell by 1.2%.  Thedown cycle is not over.  Early signals for HMO pricesindicate that health plan premiums will range from noincreases to 2% to 3% rollbacks from 1995 price levels.In Northern California, which is an emerging "Stage Five"market including many metropolitan areas with more than 40%HMO enrollment, the average health plan premium has shrunk50% in a 10-year period, from $2,460 per enrollee for amanaged care plan in 1986 to $1,260 for HMO coverage in1995, according to Steve McDermott, CEO of PriMed Inc. andexecutive director of the Hill Medical Group, in San Ramon,Calif.  PriMed manages more than 250,000 capitated livesthrough a network of 2,160 physicians.  In 1986, hospitalsgot 41% of the premium, and physician services accounted for33%.  Doctors increased their share of premium to 37% in1995, while the hospital component shrank to 30%.  The bigwinner was the payer, whose administrative costs and profitsgrew from 14% in 1986 to 21% today, according to McDermott.A new "health czar" in town?Move over Hillary.  Newt Gingrich is the next "health reformczar" for the 1990s. The Republican-driven federal budgetreconciliation act of 1996 would end the Great Societycommitment to healthcare for the poor and elderly, accordingto the Wall Street Journal.  House Speaker Newt Gingrich's(R-Ga.) deficit-reduction proposal is the most sweepinghealth reform legislation since 1983, when Congressconverted Medicare to a pre-paid health plan.  Wrenchingcuts in Medicare and Medicaid spending may total some $440billion in the next seven years.  Doctors could see theirfederal payments reduced by almost $30 billion, whilehospitals could lose $120 billion or more.That strategy leans more toward Margaret Thatcher thanHillary Rodham Clinton. Medicare and Medicaid would beprivatized, with incentives for conversion to HMOs.  Theresult would be a multi-tiered health system in whichbeneficiaries choose health plans with different coverages,depending on their ability to pay extra for wider providerchoice or scope of benefits.Extended wrangling between the White House and GOPCongressional majority could delay -- but probably not stop-- GOP-led health reform initiatives.  If Republicans cannotovercome Clinton vetoes, the GOP may take an "unbundled"approach to health reform, inserting pieces of their healthreform strategy into other legislation.  Key objectives forRepublican health reformers include:*  Placing spending limits on entitlement programs such asMedicare and Medicaid.*  Reducing Medicare and Medicaid spending and holding downfederal expenditures to 4% to 7% annual increases for thenext five to seven years.*  Conversion of Medicaid to a block-grant program managedby the states.*  Conversion of Medicare to a managed care program thatputs HMOs and provider-sponsored networks -- not government-- at risk for managing health costs.*  Caps on Medicare hospital and physician payments.*  Provider-sponsored networks to allow physicians andhospitals to enroll Medicare beneficiaries without an HMOlicense.*  Small-business insurance reforms to eliminate waitingperiods, prior existing conditions and experience ratings*  Malpractice reform that limits "pain-and-suffering" non-medical damages to $250,000 per case.*  Medical IRAs and medical savings accounts.*  Reducing subsidies for teaching hospitals and"disproportionate share" facilities.*  Protecting rural hospitals.Provider-sponsored networks are "silver lining"The "silver lining" in the massive budget reconciliationbill is congressional support for provider-sponsorednetworks.  Here is a compelling rationale for the 3,000physician-hospital organizations and integrated networks.PSNs would give physicians and hospitals a new managed carevehicle to compete for control of the premium.  The PSNconcept may help level the playing field between providersand payers.There could be thousands of PSNs competing for certificationby the Health Care Financing Administration to enrolldirectly 37 million Medicare beneficiaries.  New competitorswould  potentially include an estimated 3,000 physician-hospital organizations, hundreds of large physician groupsand dozens of regional integrated delivery systems.Becoming a PSN could be risky business. PSNs may need moreexperienced partners, such as HMOs and insurers, to controlcosts and manage the network.  Managing risk will be themake-or-break challenge of provider-sponsored networks and,outside of California, most providers have little or noexperience in capitation.  Providers may turn to HMOs andinsurers for cost management, quality control andinformation systems, under a variety of PSN-HMOarrangements, including those in which providers:*  "Rent" the HMO/insurer to manage the network, a techniquecalled administrative services only, in which managed careplans often contract with self-funded employer health plans.*  Utilize an independent third-party administrator to linkthe provider network contractually, manage contracting andcontrol utilization and quality.*   Form strategic business relationships with theHMO/insurer for management services on a profit-sharingbasis(but no equity-sharing).*  Joint venture with shared HMO/insurer equity in the PSN,where providers develop the healthcare delivery network andthe HMO/insurer supplies the fiscal and management services.Phase Four:  "War of the networks"On a national basis, a number of metropolitan areas aremoving into "Stage Four," with more than 25% HMOpenetration, according to InterStudy.  And not just inCalifornia -- the trend is national.  Markets likeBaltimore, Boston, Denver, Honolulu, Louisville, Nashville,Philadelphia, and Salt Lake City are headed into a "BermudaTriangle" of competition, caught in price wars between BlueCross Blue Shield-sponsored managed care plans, nationalcommercial carriers including Aetna and Prudential, andindependent HMOs such as U.S. Healthcare and UnitedHealthCare, according to InterStudy.Network-level warfare is heating up, and the stakes are huge-- control of hundreds of thousands of covered lives andstrategic relationships with leading HMOs, insurers andemployers.  The new playing field is regional or statewide,and the players are multi-hospital networks with thousandsof physicians.  In recent months, announcements of networkaffiliations and acquisitions are arriving non-stop:*  In Northern California, Sacramento-based Sutter HealthSystem is creating a new $2.1 billion network with 700,000covered lives by merging its 17 hospitals, seven medicalgroups, ambulatory care sites and HMOs with CaliforniaHealth System, which operates four hospitals in the BayArea.*  In New Orleans, Santa Monica-based Tenet Healthcare Corp. has established an eight-hospital regional IDN thatwill include more than 2,400 affiliated physicians, threespeciality facilities and outpatient centers in a three-parish market.  Tenet will compete head-to-head withColumbia/HCA, which is negotiating to acquire Woman'sHospital in Baton Rouge.Hospital budget strains comes with Medicare cutsFalling HMO payments and Medicare budget cuts will putAmerica's hospitals and physicians on a tight budget.Providers must continue aggressive cost reductions if theyare to maintain a positive bottom line.  Hospitals arebarely coping with lower Medicare payments, managed carediscounts and utilization declines. There is some good news-- hospital closings fell in 1994.  Only 40 acute carehospitals closed their doors, down from 62 in 1993,according to the American Hospital Association.  That wasthe fewest number of closed facilities since 1983.Futurist Jeff Goldsmith, president of Health Futures,Bannockburn, Ill., describes hospitals as "out of position"to manage the shifting of managed care risk.  They arevulnerable to payers who control enrollees "upstream" on thedollar flow, according to Goldsmith.  The challenge forhospital profitability isto keep operating margins in "plus territory" despitemanaged care pressures and declining government payments.According to a recent study by the Center for HealthcareIndustry Performance Studies, hospitals' total profitmargins in 1994 averaged 3.9%, the same as in 1993.  Goodnews from hospitals in high-penetration HMO markets --margins improved to 3.7%, from 2.8% in 1993.  CHIPS co-founder William O. Cleverly gives credit to cost cutting,reduced labor costs and better strategic positioning tothose hospitals in heavy managed care markets.  But theywill have to keep it up.  The lessons from the West Coastare very clear -- the more HMO penetration, the lower thehospital use rate.  For providers, the winds of change in1996 will be blowing from the West.Contact Coile at (805)286-1085.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTHCARE SYSTEMS STRATEGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HOSPITAL'S ELECTRONIC NURSING STATION GIVES DOCS OFF-SITEVIEW OF PATIENTSThe Medical-Oriented Operating Network, an electronicpatient monitoring system, is letting Helen Ellis MemorialHospital, Tarpon Springs, Fla., keep a watchful eye onoutpatients and the hospital's performance.MOON, developed by Unitron Medical Communications,Clearwater, Fla., allows caregivers to collect patient dataand send them directly to an electronic nursing stationlocated in the hospital, where physicians have instantaccess to information about their patients' status.Patients can also access the system to update informationsuch as blood sugar levels or temperature, says CarolAuhlman, R.N., Unitron's director of network clinicaloperations.MOON functions as a medical on-line system that links allpatient information beyond the hospital.  Patient files inthe system include clinical information, and cost andquality data are recorded in the database.  Records can onlybe accessed by qualified caregivers involved in a patient'streatment.The nursing station, called an "E-station," is locateddirectly inside the physicians' entrance at the hospital, sodoctors can "look in" on their patients' progress as soon asthey arrive.  The can also access the database from theiroffices or homes.The network sends out an immediate alarm if it detects acritical variance in the patient's condition, and "quickerintervention means less deterioration," says Linda Chic,R.N. who works in the E-station.Unitron also has access to the database, and uses the datafor a variety of studies to inform administrators at HelenEllis about the hospital's performance.For more details, call Unitron at (813)524-7800 or HelenEllis Memorial at (813)942-5000.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-12IA086-000615-B040-57http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015644 text/html 91919HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:54:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMTContent-length: 91732Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh17.html Sample Issue Copyright HMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AMERINET REJECTS OWENS & MINOR'S 1% PRICE INCREASE (1256 words) "THE JUICE ISN'T WORTH THE SQUEEZE;" SYRINGE AND NEEDLE PRICES HOLD STEADY (1133 words) WHEN DOES BIG BECOME TOO BIG? (624 words) ============= INDIANA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER GOES STOCKLESS--AGAIN, THIS TIME WITH BAXTER (558 words) WEST JERSEY HEALTH SYSTEM GETS $1.4 MILLION ESI SOFTWARE PACKAGE (69 words) DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT PURCHASES DOWN IN 1995 FOR THE SECOND YEAR IN A ROW (325 words) CATHOLIC HEALTH CARE POWERHOUSE FORMED; MATERIALS MANAGEMENT IMPACT UNKNOWN (446 words) LONG ISLAND COLLEGE HOSPITAL RETROFITS AND UPGRADES WILL SAVE $4.4 MILLION (235 words) GENE BURTON & ASSOCIATES OPENS OFFICE IN PLACERVILLE, CALIF. (76 words) CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS JOIN TO STUDY WAYS TO DRIVE COSTS FROM THEIR SYSTEMS (161 words) EGG CRATES ARE OUT, SAVINGS ARE IN AT THE UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA MED. CENTER (460 words) SACRED HEART MEDICAL CENTER PUTS A NEW TWIST ON CUTTING SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT COST (659 words) HOAG HOPES NEW COMPUTED RADIOGRAPHY SYSTEM DEVELOPS SIGNIFICANT SAVINGS (219 words) ST. ALEXIUS WINS BAR CODING AWARD (122 words) AS IF THERE ISN'T ANYTHING ELSE TO WORRY ABOUT (200 words) VHA SIGNS NEW PURCHASING CONTRACTS ON WIDE RANGE OF MED-SURG PRODUCTS (809 words) VA GETS $10 MILLION SETTLEMENT FROM U.S. SURGICAL ON DISCOUNT ISSUE (89 words) DEPT. OF DEFENSE AWARDS TWO PRIME VENDOR DEALS TO OWENS & MINOR (221 words) SHARED SERVICES INKS CONTRACT FOR IOLS, PHACO EQUIPMENT WITH CHIRON/IOLAB (391 words) AMERINET TO BUY CONSULTING FIRM KOWALSKI- DICKOW ASSOCIATES (174 words) AMERINET ANNUAL REPORT SHOWS SIGNIFICANT GAINS FOR GPO, IN SPITE OF LOSS OF MEMBERS FOR VECTOR HEALTHSYSTEMS (672 words) PROVIDER CRITICISM OF MEDICAL-SURGICAL SUPPLY DISTRIBUTORS IS BASED ON INCORRECT PERCEPTIONS AND EXPECTATIONS (821 words) IMS DRUG INDEXES CONTINUE SEVEN-QUARTER SLIDE (142 words) UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH PARES $500,000 FROM ITS OPERATING ROOM MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES BUDGET (870 words) MANUFACTURING ACTIVITY CONTRACTS FOR FOURTH STRAIGHT MONTH; PURCHASING MANAGERS' NOVEMBER INDEX DRIFTS DOWN TO 46.5% (172 words) PRODUCER PRICE INDEX RISES 0.1% IN NOVEMBER; MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY 0.3% (73 words) LARGE HOSPITALS AND INTEGRATED SYSTEMS ARE ASKING: ARE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATIONS REALLY NECESSARY? (698 words) OWENS SHOULD OWN UP TO ITS PROBLEMS (149 words) Hospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successful (101 words) Sharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials management (27 words) Bruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., in (33 words) David W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at Rush (29 words) John A. Moreno was appointed director of materials management (29 words) Rick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materials (48 words) HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY: (39 words) PROFILES IN HEALTHCARE MARKETING: (35 words) HEALTH CARE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT: (61 words) CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AMERINET REJECTS OWENS & MINOR'S 1% PRICEINCREASEBy Richard HaughOwens & Minor Inc.'s attempt to pass on a 1% across-the-boardprice increase didn't work--at least not with AmeriNet Inc., St.Louis. "We chose not to take prices [to our members] up 1%," saidGreg Mosley, vice president of AmeriNet's ValuNet division.Owens' Sept. 15, 1995, announcement of the price increase("Hospitals frustrated by Owens' spotty distribution performance,"HMM, October 1995, p. 1) didn't sit well with AmeriNet, andMosley said the group suggested to Owens that the two sit downand look at alternatives. With $2.76 billion of contracted purchasesin 1995--$1.1 billion of which was in medical-surgical supplies--AmeriNet was in a position to make such a call, and Owens listened.Mosley said AmeriNet and Owens "arrived at an understanding"with the Richmond, Va.-based distributor that allows Owens toassess fees for various services it provides to AmeriNet's 4,500-plus member facilities, while retaining a modified cost-plusstructure.Tom Sherry, Owens' vice president of sales and marketing, said thenew contract, while an immediate reaction to AmeriNet's displeasurewith the 1% price increase, is more an interim step on the road fromtraditional cost-plus pricing to a full risk-sharing arrangement. "Theproblem is that a lot of hospitals are not ready for full activity-basedcosting, and this interim contract is an attempt to address thatconcern," he said.The New Activity FeesIn a Dec. 1, 1995, memo to purchasing and materials managementdirectors, Mosley outlined the changes it is making to its contractwith Owens, effective Dec. 1, 1995. While the new contract makeschanges in the cost-plus tier structure, more notably the new contractcalls for the addition of these eight activity-based fees:+ 0.25% addition to distribution fees for each delivery in excess oftwo per week.+ $1.25 per mile charge to a facility for any delivery in excess of100 miles from the distribution center.+ 1% added charge for electronic order entry if the order is less than50% of items ordered.+ 0.5% added charge for electronic order entry if the order is lessthan 90% of items ordered.+ 3.5% service fee for "non-traditional" vendor products.+ $0.10 per label charge for patient charge labeling.+ 2% PAL service charge.+ $0.85 per line item surcharge during any month in which theaverage line order is less than $150 per line.Sword Cuts Both WaysIn putting together the new agreement, Mosley said AmeriNet feltthat if Owens wanted to charge its member facilities activity fees,"then the sword cuts both ways." The result was provisions forAmeriNet facilities to charge Owens with penalty fees for notmeeting specific service levels:+ A required 96% fill rate on committed items (mutually agreedupon between Owens and the facility and ordered at least twice amonth). If the fill rate drops below 96% for any two consecutivemonths, Owens must pay the facility $200.+ Owens must pay a facility $200 if, "after proper notification toOwens," it is proved that Owens charged the facility incorrectpricing for two consecutive months and no response or adjustmentis made. In an apparent bow to Owens' efforts to get its balkycomputer system operating smoothly, this penalty doesn't go intoeffect until April 1.Too Early To Judge ReactionTwo weeks after distribution of the memo, it was still too early togauge member reaction, Mosley said, with responses predictablynegative from hospitals to be most heavily affected. Size doesn'tappear to be a factor; instead, the level of efficiency of operationshas more bearing--the more efficient, the less impact the fees willhave. In fact, Mosley said, those hospitals willing to modify theiroperations to be more efficient may actually see little impact from theagreement. Conversely, those facilities that don't could wind uppaying close to the equivalent of Owens' originally requested 1%price increase.The agreement is not cast in stone. "We certainly hope as time goesby this will work out for all the parties concerned," Mosley said.But if it doesn't, AmeriNet and Owens are ready to discussmodifications.AmeriNet's systemwide Dec. 1 move was apparently the first by amajor GPO to change from the traditional cost-plus onlyarrangement to introducing service fees. Mosley said he thinks thereare limited programs in place with similar arrangements--in fact,Owens has a name for a program it has been marketing for sometime: Cost Track--but he doesn't think they are being used to anygreat extent. With the development of more sophisticated datacollection processes, though, that is likely to change. (At press timeHMM learned that VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, has modified itsAuthorized Distribution Agreement with Owens to also allow foractivity based fees, and Owens is working on an activity-based feeagreement with Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., Nashville, Tenn.)"I don't think we'll be unique in the industry as time goes by,"Mosley said. "The days of distributors giving its services away forfree just because a customer asks for them are gone."Sherry said he is unaware if Owens competitors, like BaxterHospital Supply Corp., McGaw Park, Ill., and General MedicalCorp., Richmond, Va., have similar contracts, but that they likelywill in the future. Indeed, a major topic of discussion at the Octobermeeting of the Health Industry Distributors Assn. was activity-basedfee programs.Industry Sentiment Changing?Industry sentiment against activity fees may be dissolving as playersrealize distributors can be squeezed only so far (see related story onpage 11). Margins are razor-thin now, leaving little room for error,as Owens itself proved when it ran into problems digesting its 1994acquisition of the former Stuart Medical Inc. When service levels fellwhile trying to assimilate Stuart's operational system into the Owensway of operating, the company quickly fell into financial purgatory,which triggered its attempt at a price increase.While that attempt is generally not succeeding (GPOs contacted byHMM either flatly stated that they wouldn't accept the increases, orhedged their answers, saying they are exploring various options;and industry sources have told HMM that Owens is backing off theincreases in one form or another for its major customers), fewdispute the fact that distributors need to boost their margins. PeteDeBusk, president of DeRoyal Industries Inc., Powell, Tenn.,summed it up: "The industry must sit up and take notice that therewill be further price increases, especially for distribution, and it's toour benefit to support distributors. We shouldn't take a hostileapproach to the needs of the distribution business."Health industry consultant William McFaul, of McFaul & LyonsInc., Trenton, N.J., said much of the resistance to activity fees iscoming from the materials management community, and he thinksthat resistance may be misplaced. He said materials managers needto concentrate on partnerships with their distributors. "This is agood thing," he said. "Materials managers need to do a costaccounting analysis. If it's only going to cost me a few thousanddollars to get the services I need or want, it's pocket change. For adistributor, though, that goes directly to the bottom line."While Owens takes the point on the charge into new pricingterritory--and the heat that goes with it--Sherry thinks eventuallycustomers will see "that this is not an Owens problem, but anindustry problem, and needs to be addressed."Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996"THE JUICE ISN'T WORTH THE SQUEEZE;" SYRINGE ANDNEEDLE PRICES HOLD STEADYIncreases in the prices hospitals and group purchasing organizationspay for needles and syringes have slowed to a virtual standstill, withaverage prices for syringes rising only 0.9% and average prices forneedles rising only 0.7%. Putting the brakes on price increasesreverses the trend of rapid price increases seen in last year's HMMprice survey of this high-volume, low-price commodity item, whenprices increased an average of 6.6% from the previous year.This year's study again included products manufactured by the twomarket leaders, Becton Dickinson & Co., Franklin Lakes, N.J., andSt. Louis-based Sherwood Medical Co. Sherwood is the maker ofthe popular Monoject line of needle and syringe products. Prices forTerumo Corp., Somerset, N.J., were requested, but only one pricewas supplied by hospitals or group purchasing executives.Last year's prediction by purchasing executives of stable prices in1995 proved true. And not one of the executives responding thisyear expects prices to rise any time soon. In fact, one executivethinks prices may drop slightly. "We are in a very competitivemarket, and the major players want to hold on to their share of themarket," this director of materials management of an 800-plus bedhospital on the East Coast said.Interestingly, while competition is cited as the reason costs are beingheld in check, one purchasing executive thinks most hospitalsremain loyal to their current supplier. "Changing needle and syringebrands is a hassle and the savings are insignificant. The juice is notworth the squeeze," this exec said.While competition is the most significant factor keeping the lid onprices, two respondents--both group purchasing organizations--citedthe rising cost of raw materials as exerting upward pressure oncosts.Use Probably Won't Rise Next YearMost hospitals and groups expect usage of these products to stay thesame or decrease in the next year, with about half of all respondentssaying they don't expect their volumes to change. Those looking fordecreases cite the rising popularity of needleless systems as thereason, saying safety considerations and a reduction in the numberof needle sticks are playing an increasingly important role. Onedirector echoed prevailing industry trends, saying the number ofhospitals represented by his group is falling.The respondents who think their use of needles and syringes willincrease tracks with their historical use; if use has been going up, itprobably will continue to rise, while if use has been flat, use willstay flat or fall.In a market dominated by commodity items, on which apparentlypricing has been driven to rock bottom, incentives offered bymanufacturers are apparently not a major factor. While mostresponding to the HMM survey said price discounts are availablebased on volume and compliance, few other goodies are beingdangled. One group purchasing organization has a conversionallowance available to offer to member hospitals if they convert to90% use of Sherwood products, and one Midwestern hospitalreceives a 3% rebate twice a year based on purchase volume.Syringe Prices Up 0.9%Prices for syringes included in the survey rose somewhat higherthan needle prices, and compared to HMM's survey of syringes andneedles in January 1995 the direction of prices reversed and startedto climb. The current average price for all syringes, regardless ofmanufacturer, was just shy of 13 cents at $0.1299 in 1995. Thatcompares with 1994's average prices for all syringes of $0.1287,for a 0.9% increase compared to last year's survey, which showedprices of syringes dropping 0.46% from 1993 levels.Of the 18 syringe models included in the survey, 14 increased inprice. The two syringes registering the largest price increase wereBecton Dickinson model 309540 1cc 25 x 5/8" needle, up 6.0% toan average price of $0.0721; and Monoject model 512936 12cc no-needle Luer lock, up 3.1% to an average price of $0.726.Of the 18 syringes in the survey, only three dropped in price.Becton Dickinson model 309570 3cc 25 x 5/8" needle fell 1.6% toan average price of $0.0491. And the Monoject model 516937 6ccsyringe no-needle Luer lock fell 1.2% to an average price of$0.0682.The last of the 18 syringes--Monoject model 535713 35cc syringesno needle luer lock--did not change in average price from last year.Needle Prices Up 0.7%Prices for needles included in the survey rose slightly less thansyringe prices, and compared to HMM's survey of syringes andneedles in January 1995, the rate of increase was slower than 1994.The current average price for all needles, regardless ofmanufacturer, was just shy of 3 cents, at $0.284. That compareswith 1994's average prices for all needles of $0.0282, for a 0.7%increase compared to last year's survey, which showed prices ofneedles rising from 1993 levels by 3.8%.Of the 10 needle models included in the survey, six increased inprice, all but one of them Monoject models. The one BectonDickinson needle, model 305145 23 x 1" needle, rose a whopping29.1%, climbing to $0.0373 each from 1994 levels of $0.0289each. Five Monoject models showed a uniform increase of 1.1%across all five numbers, rising to an average price last year of$0.0277.Of the 10 needles in the survey, four dropped in price, all BectonDickinson models. Two showed price decreases of 6.9%: B-Dmodel 305195 18 x 1" needle, and model 305196 18 x 1.5" needle.Two others showed price decreases of 5.2%: B-D model 305175 20x 1", and model 305176 20 x 1.5" needle.Overall prices for Becton Dickinson syringes increased by 1.6%,while Monoject syringes increased by 0.8%. Overall B-D needleprices increased by 1.0%, while overall Monoject needles increasedby 1.1%. Becton Dickinson's syringe and needle product linesincreased an overall average of 1.5%, while for Monoject thesyringe and needle product lines increased an overall average of0.9%.Survey AnalysisHMM received responses from five major group purchasingorganizations representing 1,278 hospitals and more than 280,000beds. Four stand-alone hospitals representing more than 2,800 bedsalso were included in the responses.Most survey respondents reported that they are using sole-sourcecontracts for needles and syringes. Sole-source contracts providebetter pricing, local distribution and a guaranteed safety stock. Inrecent years, locking into a sole- source contract has brought with itrebates ranging from 2% to 3%.HMM's survey was conducted in early December 1995.In all, U.S. hospitals and other health care facilities spent anestimated $450 million in 1994 on disposable needles and syringes,according to figures furnished by the consulting firm of Frost &Sullivan, Mountain View, Calif.(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996WHEN DOES BIG BECOME TOO BIG?Hospitals and integrated systems will be the winners in the latestround of mergers, which saw SunHealth Alliance Inc., Charlotte,N.C., join the ranks of American Healthcare Systems (AmHS), SanDiego, and Premier Health Alliance Inc., Westchester, Ill.--themselves so recently merged they still don't have a name.The move created the largest health care network in the country. Itincludes 240 owned systems operating 650 hospitals with one-thirdof the country's beds (about 315,000), as well as another 1,000affiliate members in all 50 states. SunHealth adds more than 300not-for-profit hospitals and health care organizations stretchedacross the southeastern United States. Annual purchasing volumeadds up to more than $10 billion, and vaults the group past theNashville, Tenn.-based for-profit chain Columbia/HCA HealthcareCorp.While the new supergroup has not decided how purchasing andcontracting operations between the three former individual GPOswill be consolidated, one thing is predicted: Members that stay in theorganization will likely benefit from an estimated $400 million to$500 million in additional price concessions the new group isexpected to wring from suppliers.Premier and AmHS have committed to developing long-term, sole-source agreements with vendors and will demand high compliancefrom members to guarantee the purchasing volume vendors willexpect in exchange for low pricing. The addition of SunHealth'shospitals and $1.8 billion of purchasing certainly will help that goalalong.But voices in the purchasing wilderness are questioning just howmany more concessions suppliers can grant. In talking with GPOs,hospitals and consultants, HMM heard a similar sentiment: Pricesmay be as low as they'll go, and there isn't much room left fordickering. Suppliers and distributors can't get into the position of"losing a little bit of money on each transaction, but making it up involume," as one exec said.Without the lure of ever-lower prices, observers wonder, are thereother benefits to being big that will make it worthwhile to stay amember of the new megagroup?A senior executive of one group purchasing organization thinkshospitals and integrated systems are becoming concerned that beingtoo big, too national, could wind up hurting them. Addingcompeting hospitals to an already competitive marketplace coulddrive members to bail out of the new AmHS-Premier-SunHealth.Premier and AmHS executives downplay that, saying competitiveconflicts among members would be rare. (Before SunHealth joinedthe fray, AmHS and Premier hospitals competed head-to-head in 10major markets and a handful of smaller ones. SunHealth now addseight more markets with conflicts.) They have given members incompeting markets one year to work out their differences, or facehaving one of the members booted out.And, as integrated health providers evolve, many think theseproviders will increasingly shift their emphasis to receiving morecustomized service on a regional level, service a huge nationalorganization may have trouble delivering.Smaller GPOs around the country are gloating over that possibility.They think the confusion and possible member shakeout will letthem reap benefits. "There are a lot of unhappy (member) campersout there," one GPO executive vice president said. Anotherpredicted groups will waste no time whispering in the ears of thosediscontented campers, extolling the virtues of their own smallerorganizations.This is not lost on VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, stung by the apparentdefection of SunHealth when it thought it was well along the path toits own merger with the group. In a statement released in responseto the merger, VHA said it will be ready. "As local marketsconsolidate and managed care networks continue to develop, weanticipate that many current members of other alliances will alignwith our members and ultimately join VHA," the statement said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDIANA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER GOESSTOCKLESS--AGAIN, THIS TIME WITH BAXTERIf at first you don't succeed...After signing a just-in-time agreement in November 1993 with theold Stuart Medical Inc., the 610-bed two-hospital Indiana UniversityMedical Center (IUMC), Indianapolis, saw Stuart purchased byOwens & Minor Inc., Richmond, Va. The hospital system thenattempted a less-than-successful move to stockless with Owens inAugust 1994. In April 1995 IUMC signed on with the ValueLinkprogram of Baxter Healthcare Corp., McGaw Park, Ill. The thirdtime seems to be the charm, said IUMC's director of pharmacy andmaterial services, Carol Birk.The switch to Baxter has allowed IUMC to close its 85,000-sq. ft.warehouse and convert it to record keeping support and formsstorage. At its Indianapolis warehouse, Baxter affixes patient chargebar codes as items are picked, and then ships in lowest unit ofmeasure at least once a day to the hospital.IUMC and Baxter are working on plans to consolidate into theavailable hospital warehouse space a number of functions, includingtransport, linen handling and purchasing. Baxter is also working on100% freight consolidation at its warehouse, where it now handles1,500 parcels each week. Birk said since going stockless withBaxter, the distributor has lost only one package, worth about $300.The distributor supports a core list of 2,900 line items at itswarehouse and maintains an inventory of $2.8 million to $3 millionfor IUMC. The hospital's material services unit purchases about$19.4 million annually, about $18 million of that through Baxter.Going stockless and eliminating central distribution operations at thehospital allowed IUMC to cut its central distribution inventory levelsto current levels of about $20,000 from $400,000 to $500,000.Under the new program, Baxter also took over several otherdistribution operations. As a springboard to distribution within thehospital, Baxter employees now operate the receiving dock and login each shipment. Supplies are then distributed to 856 ship-tolocations at IUMC. At any one time the two hospitals have a total of$129,000 of material on site, about $55,000 of which is on casecarts, divided among 300 to 400 line items, kept as backup stock insatellite areas at each of the two hospitals. In addition, Baxterhandles distribution of linens, which Birk said results in significantsavings by eliminating double handling and removing the "train"operation of moving linens.By transferring operations to Baxter, IUMC was able to reduce staffby 150 employees, 13 of whom Baxter hired for its operation. Thehospital has transferred supply stocking duties at the ship-tolocations to pharmacy technicians. "We now have total integration,"Birk said. "Pharmacy managers are responsible for all materialsfunctions."To facilitate the stockless program, IUMC is starting to implementhandheld devices to maintain par levels. While the technology wasavailable to make the jump directly to the handhelds and EDI whenBaxter took over, because of the reduction in staff and requisitetraining of new people, IUMC is making the transition using a papersystem.IUMC's savings with the stockless program have been significant.Reducing excess inventories created a one-time savings of $2million, while reducing FTEs produced on-going savings of $2.2million, even after paying the cost of additional Baxter employees.IUMC next plans to look to Baxter's Procedure Based DeliverySystem to reduce costs in the hospital system's operating rooms.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996WEST JERSEY HEALTH SYSTEM GETS $1.4 MILLION ESISOFTWARE PACKAGEWest Jersey Health System, a 740-bed multi-hospital integratedsystem in Camden, N.J., contracted to purchase $1.4 million ofsoftware from Enterprise Systems Inc. (ESI), Wheeling, Ill. WestJersey's agreement includes four main components of ESI'ssoftware: NOVA(TM), a materials management system;ORBIT(TM), a surgical services systems; TITAN(TM), a financialmanagement system; and TouchScan(TM), a resource managementpoint-of-use system. West Jersey expects the software to be phasedin by mid-1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT PURCHASES DOWN IN 1995 FORTHE SECOND YEAR IN A ROWConsolidation and uncertainty continue to put the brakes on hospitalpurchases of big-ticket diagnostic imaging equipment. For thesecond year in a row, hospitals have used the time they spend onconsolidation efforts to take a breather and reassessed their assetmanagement programs--without spending much money.In its fifth annual study on purchasing trends for diagnostic imagingequipment, Comdisco Inc., Rosemont, Ill., reported all types ofimaging equipment are showing an increase in average age,indicating sluggish purchasing activity. Comdisco MedicalEquipment Group's president, Kenneth Halverson, isn't surprised."As hospitals come together in a network, they have criticaltechnology asset management problems to address," he said. "Theyneed to assess what equipment they have, where it's located andhow it fits strategically in the new organization. There are almostcertainly going to be redundancies."Conclusions of the report:+ MRI systems were hardest hit. Average age of installed MRIs is5.5 years, up from 3.1 in 1992. Seventy percent of MRIs are morethan three years old, compared with 35% in 1992.+ Radiography/fluoroscopy is the oldest technology, with anaverage age of 10.1 years, up from 7.9 years in 1992. Almost 66%of these systems are more than seven years old, and 20% are morethan 15 years old.+ Seventy-five percent of CT scanners are more than three yearsold, up from 64% in 1994.+ Cardiac catheterization labs are installed in 31% of hospitals, upfrom 20% in 1993.+ Eighty-four percent of nuclear medicine devices are more thanthree years old.Comdisco predicted the drought in purchasing could be ending,though. It said the company is entering 1996 with a record backlogof orders.The Comdisco report analyzed information on the penetration,distribution and age of diagnostic equipment at more than 3,600U.S. hospitals. The hospitals were surveyed about ultrasound,MRI, computed tomography, cardiac catheterization, angiographysuites, radiography- fluoroscopy and nuclear medicine.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CATHOLIC HEALTH CARE POWERHOUSE FORMED;MATERIALS MANAGEMENT IMPACT UNKNOWNWhile the merger of three Catholic health care systems into a newumbrella system called Catholic Health Initiatives (CHI), to beheadquartered in Denver, will make it the country's largest Catholicsystem, the effect on materials management and purchasing won'tbe known until early 1996.The new system's formation, first reported in HMM in September1995 ("Colorado Catholic hospitals under new regional umbrella,"HMM, September 1995, p. 19), will combine 11 religiouscongregations in 21 states and bring together 63 acute care hospitalsrepresenting 10,400 beds, as well as more than 50 alternate sitefacilities. CHI will have projected annual revenues in excess of $4billion. That pulls CHI well ahead of what was formerly thecountry's largest Catholic system, St. Louis-based Daughters ofCharity, which had 1995 revenues of $3.2 billion.CHI results from the merger of Sisters of Charity Health CareSystems, Cincinnati; Catholic Health Corp., Omaha, Neb.; andFranciscan Health System, Aston, Pa. CHI will be divided into fiveoperating regions, with headquarters in Denver. CHI's RockyMountain Region office also will be in Denver.An office headed by John DiCola, currently vice president ofstrategic development for Sisters of Charity Health Care Systems,will provide for the nationwide system centralized services likepurchasing and materials management functions, as well as benefits,insurance educational programs, financial services and consulting.Other services could be added in the future. The division will becalled CHI Service Organization and be located in Cincinnati.It is not certain how the materials management functions of the threesystems will be integrated. Franciscan Health System's materialsmanagement operations are headed by George Hersch, while Sistersof Charity's vice president of materials management is Paul DeSalvo. Catholic Health Corp. does not have centralized materialsmanagement, but handles the function at each hospital.Consolidation of materials functions is almost certain, but CHIspokespersons said it is not yet clear what the new structure will be.No one would speculate officially on the future of materialsmanagement staffers, other than to say there is more than enoughwork in the new system to go around for everyone involved--andthen some.It's unlikely the merger will affect purchasing and contracting, sincenational contracts are negotiated through the Catholic MaterialsManagement Alliance, St. Louis. As one executive of the newsystem said, even with the size of CHI, systems (includingDaughters of Charity) need the leverage of CMMA to cut the bestdeals. What could be affected, though, is the myriad of regionaldeals the three players will have--such as services contracts, backoffice functions, sterilization services, natural gas and products thatare proprietary to a region.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LONG ISLAND COLLEGE HOSPITAL RETROFITS ANDUPGRADES WILL SAVE $4.4 MILLIONFresh from a seven-year contract that saved it $923,000 in its firstyear and $6.8 million over the life of the contract, the Long IslandCollege Hospital in Brooklyn, N.Y., is entering a second seven-year agreement with Honeywell Inc., Minneapolis, that isguaranteed to save an additional $4.4 million.The 601-bed facility launched the second phase of the agreement infall 1995. It calls for Honeywell to retrofit lighting in the hospitaland install energy-efficient motors on air-handling units, as well asinstall a fire alarm system, a 300-ton chiller plant, an HVAC systemin laboratory buildings, and a boiler plant retrofit. Also included inthe contract is a new building automation system that will integratethe operating room, blood bank data, materials management andbilling systems. Long Island expects the new system will reduceinventory costs and result in faster, more accurate billinginformation.Over the seven-year life of the contract, Honeywell guarantees LongIsland operational savings of $4.4 million, which the hospital willuse to pay Honeywell for the equipment and work. If actual savingsdon't meet that level, Honeywell will pay the hospital the difference.At the end of the contract Long Island will own all of the equipment,and savings that had been repaying Honeywell will be the hospital'sto keep.The first phase, completed in June 1994, involved updatingmechanical and control systems throughout the hospital.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996GENE BURTON & ASSOCIATES OPENS OFFICE INPLACERVILLE, CALIF.In an effort to expand its West Coast market and be closer toexisting West Coast clients, Gene Burton & Associates (GB&A),Nashville, Tenn., has opened an office in Placerville, Calif. Theoffice will be staffed by Pat Dulaney-Schuetz, a GB&A medicalequipment planning associate.GB&A, founded in 1988, provides equipment planning andconsulting service to health care networks and standaloneoperations. The firm also provides medical equipment andcommunication consulting, budgeting and reporting services.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS JOIN TO STUDY WAYS TO DRIVECOSTS FROM THEIR SYSTEMSA group of 18 children's hospitals, representing 4,003 beds, hasbanded together to develop a database of information designed toidentify areas for cost reduction. The effort, dubbed SynergisticAdvantages, began last spring when the group proposed nearly 20areas to examine in hospital operations. From those, four or fiveareas will be selected to pursue in more detail in 1996.The program draws participants from a number of areas at the 18hospitals, including nursing, pharmacy and materials management.The first phase of the study involves developing a database toprovide participants with benchmarking capabilities. Areas to beexamined include cath lab supply management, per diem andprocedure-based supply management, specialty bed utilization, linenmanagement, systems integration and electronic data interchange,and outsourcing.The hospitals are located around the country, and together accountfor about $150 million in annual medical-surgical supplypurchasing. The group is hoping to identify areas from which togenerate savings of 5% to 10%.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996EGG CRATES ARE OUT, SAVINGS ARE IN AT THEUNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA MED. CENTERThe University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha,Neb., replaced almost all of its conventional hospital mattressesNov. 1, 1995, with new pressure relief mattresses called DeCubes,manufactured by Comfortex Inc., Winona, Minn. The purchase ofthe 221 new mattresses for $78,600 will allow the 324-bed hospitalto virtually eliminate nearly $100,000 in annual purchases of foamoverlay ("egg crate") mattresses. In addition, the hospital will beable to significantly cut back the $176,000 it spent last year onspecialty bed rentals.The choice of the new mattresses was driven by simple economics,said Mickey Bradshaw, manager of materials support services forUNMC. Pressure ulcers contribute to more than 60,000 deaths eachyear and cost the health care system more than $9 billion annually,much of it not reimbursable by Medicare and other insuranceorganizations. Industry estimates are that between 3% and 11% ofpatients admitted to a hospital or nursing home develop pressureulcers. The cost of treating those sores ranges from $5,000 to$40,000 per patient. To address pressure sores, UNMC had beenusing the disposable egg crates and, in more serious cases, specialtybeds rented from KCI International Inc., San Antonio, Texas.Last year UNMC spent $211,000 on specialty bed rentals, althoughit received $35,000 back from KCI under an arrangement thatcapped the hospital's expenditures at $176,000. Bradshaw said thehospital developed new protocols for determining when a patientneeds a specialty bed and when the patient can be removed from thebed, and what kinds of beds need to be used for specific cases. Thenew protocols are expected to cut spending on bed rental by morethan half, to $60,000 to $80,000.A second area of cost reduction was eliminating the use of egg cratemattresses and geomats throughout the hospital, except for the laborand delivery area. In 1995 the hospital spent $97,572 on thedisposable mattresses. The $78,600 it spent to buy the DeCubemattresses will eliminate most of that annual expense, Bradshawsaid. "The tens of thousands of dollars we won't be spending onegg crates easily justifies the DeCube purchase," he said.The new mattresses have a high-density foam surface and a matrixof removable sections that makes it possible to selectively treatpressure ulcers. Besides the mattresses, the DeCube deal includedaccessories like straps needed to hold the items on the bed.UNMC considered putting out an RFP to a number of suppliers, butdecided to take advantage of a contract held by its group purchasingorganization, University HealthSystem Consortium, Oak Brook, Ill.Bradshaw said clinicians and nurses who work with the mattressesare enthusiastic about them, and UNMC didn't feel it was worth thetime or effort to solicit bids from numerous vendors.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996SACRED HEART MEDICAL CENTER PUTS A NEW TWISTON CUTTING SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT COSTAt Sacred Heart Medical Center, Eugene, Ore., it's sort of acapitated agreement, but with a twist.Steve Howard, director of materials management for the 432-bedhospital, was part of an employee task force searching for costsavings in the hospital's $27 million to $30 million annualpurchasing budget for capital equipment and medical-surgicalsupplies. Sacred Heart is part of Bellevue, Wash.-basedPeaceHealth, a not-for-profit organization sponsored by the Sistersof St. Joseph of Peace, which owns five hospitals and managesanother 15.Howard said instead of soliciting the lowest pricing from vendorsand cutting a sole- or dual-source agreement for items likepacemakers and orthopedic implants, the hospital took a differenttack.Looking at orthopedic implants, the task force gathered data fromIMS America Inc., Plymouth Meeting, Pa., reviewed its ownpricing levels and floated a traditional RFP on the devices. Based onthat information, the group set a cap on what it would pay forvarious components. The caveat was that if a vendor didn't agree tosell for the capped price, the hospital wouldn't use that vendor.For example, on one top-of-the-line implant, Sacred Heart cappedthe price at $4,400. Any of the hospital's surgeons could specifywhich manufacturer they wanted to supply the device, but if thatsupplier wouldn't agree to that price, the surgeon would have to findanother supplier. The orthopedic implant program, launched inAugust 1995, is expected to save the hospital $300,000, Howardsaid.Sacred Heart next turned to pacemakers and applied the sameconcept. Howard said the hospital developed a list of five vendors touse for the pacemaker program, and approached each about it. Theywere not happy with the concept, he said, and two didn't want tooperate under the new program--at least, not until they were told thatthe physicians would stop specifying their brand of implant. Seeingpotential sales and profits evaporate brought them around, Howardsaid.The same procedure brought similar results to the cath lab. Whilejust a couple of years ago the hospital was paying $600 to $650 fora PTCA catheter, Howard said, now the price is $400, and hepredicted that by the end of January it will be $300."We're in a situation where competition, not commitment, is the truedriver of price," Howard said. Instead of trying to force surgeons tostandardize on one manufacturer, and then trying to drive price aslow as possible with one manufacturer with a carrot-and-stickapproach, making both parties unhappy in the process, Howardsaid, the new system allows marketplace competition to work.Getting the cooperation of the physicians was key to the success ofthe program. From the beginning the task force insisted oninvolving physicians and giving them all the information theyneeded or requested. Even when docs agree to standardize on onesupplier, there can still be residual resentment, Howard said. Now,the physicians are free to choose their supplier, and it is up to thesupplier to decide whether it wants to sell devices for the cappedprice."I don't know anyone who's ever been successful telling doctorswhat to do," he said, "so we had to take a different approach."The task force so far has reduced costs by nearly $2 million,including $1 million in capital expenditures and $950,000 in annualsupply costs. A new contract for pacemakers saved more than$300,000 of that $2 million, while standardizing cardiac catheterprocedures and ancillary products netted $125,000 in savings. Anadditional $125,000 was saved from changes in heart valves andother related supplies. Some of the capital savings included$600,000 for new computer systems and $300,000 by reviewingthe purchase of a specialized camera for one of the medical center'sdepartments."These are all bottom-line rather than soft savings," Howard said.He projected additional savings this year of $700,000 in med-surgsupplies and $300,000 in capital equipment.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996HOAG HOPES NEW COMPUTED RADIOGRAPHY SYSTEMDEVELOPS SIGNIFICANT SAVINGSHoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian, Newport Beach, Calif., isinstalling a $1.5 million computed radiography system that thehospital expects will produce significant savings.The 416-bed facility is installing an Ektascan Imagelink(TM) Model400 system manufactured by Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, N.Y.The system is the first step in the hospital's plan to create a digitalimaging network to serve both inpatient and outpatient needs. Thegradual switch from film to digital imaging is part of Hoag's long-term goal of storing all images and patient records digitally.The first of three phases in the project calls for four completedradiography systems to be operational by the spring of 1996. Onesite will be at Hoag Health Center-Costa Mesa, about 10 miles fromthe hospital. The other three sites will be in the hospital's intensivecare unit, critical care unit and emergency room.Phases two and three call for more computed radiography systemsas well as the inclusion of CT and MRI images on the digitalnetwork. The system will also interface with Hoag's radiologyinformation system, which stores patient information and examreports. When an image is retrieved for reference, the accompanyingreport will appear on the screen as well.No financial terms of the transaction were disclosed, and noprojections on savings were available.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ST. ALEXIUS WINS BAR CODING AWARDSt. Alexius Medical Center, Bismarck, N.D., was named the winnerof the 1995 Don Percival Award for its work in developing andimplementing bar code technology in the 313-bed hospital. Theaward was presented in November at the annual SCAN-TECHExhibition and Conference in Chicago, the trade show of theautomatic data collection and identification industry.St. Alexius instituted its bar code system in 1987 and has loweredits materials management operational costs, increased productivityand reduced inventory levels ("St. Alexius (N.D.) cuts inventory,costs, recovers lost charges with bar coding," HMM, March 1994,p. 5). The medical center has expanded bar coding across its entirehealth care system, and virtually every major department now usessome form of bar coding.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AS IF THERE ISN'T ANYTHING ELSE TO WORRY ABOUTMaterials management executives in Kaiser Permanente's NorthernCalifornia region are facing an uneasy working relationship withtheir staffs. The employees, members of Local 250 of the HealthCare Workers Union, voted in mid-November 1995 to reject aKaiser Northern California contract offer and authorize theirbargaining committee to call strikes of up to one day. Thenegotiations affected about 200 materials management workers, partof the larger 13,500-member union local.A union spokesman said the contract with Kaiser expired inOctober, and the employees have been working without a contractsince then. The spokesman said union members have not resorted todisruptive tactics like work slowdowns, which could impair hospitaloperations, but instead have relied on candlelight vigils, marchesand passing out leaflets. Relationships are strained, though, he said.The spokesman said materials management executives and Kaiserphysicians have generally been sympathetic to union concerns, butthe feeling is not echoed by Kaiser top management. He predictedthat, since union and management are not close to agreement onissues, union members will be working for a long time without acontract. He said registered nurses at Kaiser have been workingwithout a contract for more than six months.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996VHA SIGNS NEW PURCHASING CONTRACTS ON WIDERANGE OF MED-SURG PRODUCTSIn a flurry of year-end activity, VHA Inc., Irving, Texas, signedpurchasing contracts on a wide-ranging group of products. Salesunder the contracts have the potential of reaching nearly $160million and saving member organizations as much as $21 million.The contracts include:+ Becton Dickinson Vascular Access (B-D), Sandy, Utah, for I.V.start kits, catheters and safety products. VHA estimates the three-year sole source contract, which took effect Nov. 1, 1995, will saveparticipating members between 6% and 8% annually on theproducts. Discounts are on a sliding scale based on a member'svolume of purchases. Overall purchases by VHA members in 1995are estimated to be $39.1 million, with $26 million of that on I.V.catheters.As part of the contract, B-D is offering a guaranteed savings plan formembers who convert their business to Vialon Insyte Catheters fromTeflon catheters. B-D cited its study showing Vialon InsyteCatheters reduce I.V. restarts, reduce the incidence of phlebitis andincrease indwelling time. The company estimated that hospitalsusing the Vialon products will reduce catheter use by nearly 5%.To help hospitals defray conversion costs for switching, BectonDickinson agreed to rebate 3% of annual sales to an institution whenit converts to B-D's I.V. catheters.The catheters, safety equipment and I.V. start kits will also bemarketed through VHA's private label program, VHA PLUS(R). B-D will switch several versions of its I.V. start kits to the VHAPLUS(R) program, offering savings of 5% to 10% on the products.The agreement covers I.V. start kits with and without gloves,bandages, transparent dressings and ointments. B-D estimated totalsales for those products to VHA members at $5.2 million in 1995.+ Standard Textile, Cincinnati, for textiles and apparel. The contractis a sole-source arrangement with Standard, a change from VHA'sprevious dual-source contract that included Angelica UniformGroup, St. Louis. VHA estimates the five-year contract, whichtakes effect Jan. 1, will save participating members between $4million and $9 million annually on purchases. Discounts are on asliding scale based on a member's volume of purchases. VHAestimates overall purchases by members could total $50 million to$70 million annually. The contract covers flat goods, reusable anddisposable apparel, surgical linens and incontinence products.The contract includes direct discounts for each product segment anddiscounts based on utilization levels, and adoption of StandardTextile's linen management program.Standard is one of seven manufacturers participating in VHA'scommitted purchasing program. Members participating in thecommitted program will receive additional discounts under the newcontract above those spelled out for other VHA members. VHA saidits surveys show that 79% of its members purchase products fromStandard Textile.+ Bard Urological, Covington, Ga., adding urological specialtyitems to the acute care products that have been covered under VHA'scontract with Bard since 1988. VHA estimates the five-year sole-source contract, which took effect Jan. 1, will save participatingVHA members between $5.5 million and $9 million annually.Discounts are on a sliding scale based on a member's volume ofpurchases. VHA estimates overall purchases by members could total$48 million annually.The new contract includes a 19% discount from list price of theacute care items and a 15% discount from list on the specialty items.Members participating in the VHA committed program will receiveadditional discounts under the new contract above those spelled outfor other VHA members.Items covered under the contract include: acute care products--Foleycatheters, Foley catheter trays, drainage bags, urine meters, urethraltrays and midstreams; and specialty care products--stents, baskets,balloons, urethrals, filiforms and urolase.Bard controls 70% of the national market for acute care urologicalproducts, and VHA said its surveys show that 81% of its memberspurchase products from Bard. Bard is also one of VHA's sevenmanufacturers participating in the group's committed purchasingprogram.+ In another move, VHA announced the signing of a dual-sourcecontract for the supply of electronic information related topurchasing management. The move marks VHA's decision to stopmarketing its own software.The contract is with Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., andChoice Medical Inc., Louisville, Ky. Abbott's offering, calledQUIK LINK, and support services will be offered free to VHAorganizations. Choice Medical's software, called ECHO, is beingoffered at a discount.VHA's in-house EDI packages are called VHA-Net COM and VHA-Net CAP, and are used by 250 VHA members. Abbott's andChoice's packages will be marketed primarily to those members. Afew VHA members now use Abbott or Choice software.VHA said the advantages both products have over VHA's systemsis that users can transmit orders to more suppliers, and users canadd suppliers to the software more easily. Both programs alsosupport transactions using electronic data interchange (EDI).Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996VA GETS $10 MILLION SETTLEMENT FROM U.S.SURGICAL ON DISCOUNT ISSUEThe U.S. Veterans Administration (VA) will receive $10 millionfrom U.S. Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., to settle a dispute inwhich the VA alleged the company didn't offer the same discountson its products to the government as it did to other customers. TheWall Street Journal reported that the VA purchased about $56million of surgical devices from U.S. Surgical from 1989 to 1993,but paid higher prices than it should have. The settlement ends adispute that the VA and U.S. Surgical have been discussing since1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEPT. OF DEFENSE AWARDS TWO PRIME VENDOR DEALSTO OWENS & MINORThe U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has awarded two medical-surgical supply prime vendor contracts to Owens & Minor Inc.,Richmond, Va. The two are worth about $22 million in the firstyear.The first award is for one year, with four one-year option periods,and covers 12 DoD facilities in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama andFlorida. DoD estimates the value of the contract at $8 million thefirst year and $76 million over five years. The contract takes effectJan. 15.The second award is also for one year, with four one-year options.It covers 22 facilities in Florida and Georgia. DoD estimates thevalue of that contract at $14 million the first year and $91 millionover five years. The contract takes effect Jan. 8.The DoD divides its $800 million of med-surg business into 21regions. The two awards to Owens' means the distributor nowserves five of those 21 regions under a prime vendor arrangement.The other three regions, with Owens' annual sales volume fromeach, are: Lone Star region, covering Texas and Oklahoma--$27million; National Capital region, covering the District of Columbia--$21 million; and the Tidewater region, covering Virginia--$9.6million.Most of the supplies will be handled by traditional bulk distribution,but a few facilities will operated under Owens' enhanced distributionprogram.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996SHARED SERVICES INKS CONTRACT FOR IOLS, PHACOEQUIPMENT WITH CHIRON/IOLABShared Services Healthcare Inc., Atlanta, signed a sole-sourcecontract for California intraocular lens manufacturer Chiron/Iolab'sfull line of regular and specialty lenses, as well as kits and packs,that is expected to generate significant purchases and savings forSSH's 532 member facilities.Pricing for the regular and specialty lenses is a sliding scale basedon commitment, with increasingly discounted pricing for highervolumes to a commitment level of 75%. Facilities willing to commitmore than 75% of their annual volume can negotiate even betterpricing. Kits and packs are negotiated by each facility and also arebased on committed volume.The contract covers ancillary products in addition to the lenses,including Amvisc syringes and fluids. But perhaps the most enticingaddition to the offering is a separate contract for phacoemulsificationequipment. The surgical equipment is offered to SSH members atsignificant price discounts from list, and includes phaco accessorieslike remote control, tips and tubing. The equipment also is based ona tiered pricing structure, but because it is a separate contract, it canbe accessed without having to commit to purchases of IOLs.Anita Fredericks, director of SSH's purchasing program, said thegroup anticipates high usage of both contracts because of what shetermed aggressive pricing by Chiron/Iolab.Chiron has been aggressively pursuing market share in a soft marketdominated by a handful of manufacturers. The company is theproduct of the $95 million buyout in early 1995 of Iolab Corp.,Claremont, Calif., by Chiron Ophthalmics Inc., Irvine, Calif.Respondents to HMM's IOL price survey ("IOL prices continuesliding in the face of competition, vendor consolidation," HMM,December 1995, p.1) reported continuing price declines in the priceshospitals and group purchasing organizations are paying for IOLs.They noted that prices are soft and manufacturers are willing toconsider price reductions. Without exception, respondents citedcompetition as the major factor influencing IOL prices.The contract took effect Dec. 1, 1995, and runs for two years.SSH also awarded several other contracts recently:+ Chemistry analyzers to Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick,N.J., and Olympus America Inc., Lake Success, N.Y.+ Urinalysis systems and immunoassay systems to Miles Inc.Diagnostic Division, Tarrytown, N.Y.+ Pathology and cytology equipment to Shandon Lipshaw,Pittsburgh.+ Bone densitometers to Lunar Corp., based in Madison, Wis.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AMERINET TO BUY CONSULTING FIRM KOWALSKI-DICKOW ASSOCIATESGroup purchasing organization AmeriNet Inc., St. Louis, is buyingthe Milwaukee-based health care consulting firm of Kowalski-Dickow Associates.Reliable sources told HMM the purchase was to close before the endof December 1995, pending the outcome of due diligenceproceedings, although the sources said it is unlikely there will beany hitches in the process.No details on financial arrangements were available at press time,and there were no indications of whether Kowalski-Dickow wouldmove its offices or staff to St. Louis.Joseph Mulroy, president of AmeriNet, told HMM that the GPO andKowalski-Dickow have been discussing a deal, but that no decisionshave been made on the purchase. He said any further speculationwould be premature. Jamie Kowalski, president of Kowalski-Dickow, was out of town and unavailable for comment.Mulroy said the idea of adding a consulting service to AmeriNet'soperations is "just a new dimension for AmeriNet to assist membersto reduce supply costs and gain greater efficiencies in the use of theirproducts and staffing."Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AMERINET ANNUAL REPORT SHOWS SIGNIFICANTGAINS FOR GPO, IN SPITE OF LOSS OF MEMBERS FORVECTOR HEALTHSYSTEMSAmeriNet Inc., St. Louis, posted another record year in 1995,showing a 23.2% increase in contracted purchasing volume over1994. That gain came at a time when Vector Healthsystems,Providence, R.I., one of AmeriNet's three shareholderorganizations, incurred a 14% drop in member facilities,representing a 22% drop in beds. AmeriNet also returned more than$8 million to its members, up from 1994's $6 million.Contracted purchases in fiscal year 1995 (ending Sept. 30) totaled$2.76 billion, up 23.2% from 1994's $2.24 billion. Since its firstfull year of business in 1987, when the company had contract salesof $258 million, growth has been an astounding 1,070%.ValuCare Still GrowingAmeriNet's ValuCare division, a segment that doesn't negotiate itsown agreements, but instead draws its sales figures from thegroup's five other divisions on behalf of ValuCare, had contractparticipation in fiscal year 1995 of $361 million, 9.1% higher thanlast year's $331 million. While off the torrid pace of growth of theprevious year (1994 contracted sales were 42% higher than 1993's),AmeriNet officials are still pleased with the division's performance.They cite the fact that ValuCare represented 13% of AmeriNet's totalsupplier contract sales volume in 1995.Vector Membership DownAll of AmeriNet's value divisions performed well, in spite of thefact that AmeriNet's largest shareholder organization, VectorHealthsystems, suffered a significant drop in membership.(AmeriNet's other two shareholder organizations--IntermountainHealth Care, Salt Lake City, and Hospital Shared Services,Warrendale, Pa.--showed membership increases of 18.7% and43.4%, respectively.) The number of Vector member facilities fellby 262 to 1,603, a 14% drop from 1994's level of 1,865. Thenumber of beds those member facilities represented dropped an evenmore precipitous 22.3%, or 36,356 beds, to settle at 126,378, downfrom 1994's 162,734. AmeriNet's vice president of finance, NoelKnobloch, explained that when the SupportHealth group ofhospitals joined AmeriNet through the Vector system, the hospitalswere guaranteed membership in AmeriNet through the end of 1994,with the option of dropping out of AmeriNet then if they wanted. Atthat time a number of hospitals opted out, and Vector's membershipnumbers reflect the exodus.The defections didn't hurt Vector's performance, though. In fact,Vector showed the greatest gain in sales, jumping $298 million to$1.13 billion in contracted purchases in 1995 from 1994's level of$832 million, a 35.8% increase. Following next was HospitalShared Services (HSS), with $830 million in sales, a 20.6%increase, and Intermountain Health Care (IHC), with $800 millionin sales, an 11.1% increase.All Value Divisions Do WellEach of AmeriNet's purchasing divisions performed well in 1995.ValuHealth, the medical-surgical supply contracting division thataccounted for 40.7% of AmeriNet's total sales, posted revenues of$1.1 billion, a 17.6% increase over 1994's $935 million.ValuPharm, the pharmaceutical division contributing 34.8% of totalsales, rose by 28.9% in 1995 to $940 million, up 28.9% from1994's $729 million.Contract sales through ValuLab, the laboratory arm, increased26.8% to $260 million from the previous year's $205 million.ValuFood contract purchases rose 15.7% to $155 million, up from1994's level of $134 million. ValuQuip capital equipment purchasesincreased 27.6% to $250 million, up from the previous year's $196million.Membership Numbers UpMembership numbers are also heartening to AmeriNet executives.Even after factoring in the losses sustained by Vector, overallmembership was up. The number of member facilities increased 417to 4,537, a 10.1% increase. ValuCare facilities accounted for 390 ofthose 417 additional facilities, a whopping 93.5% of membergrowth.The total number of beds represented by new members, reflectingboth the SupportHealth losses and the nature of the alternate caremarket, declined to 306,334, down 3% from 1994's 315,704 beds.The number of member hospitals also increased in 1995, up 26 to1,695, a slight 1.6% increase over 1994's level of 1,669. Thenumber of beds represented by hospital members declined 5.6% to238,628 from 1994's 252,782.(Table omitted for online service. See print edition.)Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PROVIDER CRITICISM OF MEDICAL-SURGICAL SUPPLYDISTRIBUTORS IS BASED ON INCORRECT PERCEPTIONSAND EXPECTATIONSBy Christopher M. PancratzRecently, articles in some trade journals have questioned the servicecapabilities of medical-surgical distributors. While these articleshave focused on individual distributors, elements of the criticismhave industry overtones that are based on incorrect perceptions,most particularly the perception that service levels can continue toincrease while the compensation for those services is reduced.All service has a cost. When service expectations increase, costsincrease. To reduce cost in a service industry, unneeded andunnecessary service levels must be identified and removed.Service ExpectationsThe entire health care industry is focused on reducing cost and ismaking great strides. Distributors of medical-surgical products tohospitals have significantly reduced their operating expenses. To beable to continue reducing costs while meeting needed levels ofservice, providers and distributors together must set realisticexpectations that consider the volume of a product's usage and therelative criticality of that product. It does not make sense to investscarce resources in attempting to have a fill rate of 98% or more andsix-hour delivery on infrequently used, noncritical products.Manufacturers, too, need to be more involved in the serviceequation. It is extremely difficult for distributors to provide the highfill rates and short lead times included in today's contracts whenthey must replenish from suppliers with 40% or 60% rates andlonger lead times. Additional cost reductions are being delayedbecause the technology to drive them is dependent on the electronicscanning of product information that has not yet been bar coded onmany manufacturers' packages.One Size Still Doesn't Fit AllWhile many provider organizations and alliances are writingmultiregional and national contracts for distribution services,individual local provider sites are asking for flexibility in services.Proprietary organizations will, over time, be able to bring somestandardization to their systems. Today, however, most of thesefacilities, along with those purchasing distribution services throughcontracts negotiated by voluntary organizations, are askingdistributors to adapt contract specifications to local needs.Distribution continues to be a predominantly local function, greatlyinfluenced by local demographics, transportation and attitudes.Distribution capacity has shrunk. Recent industry consolidation hasreduced what many thought to be excess capacity from the system.In a drive for system standardization, large consolidating providerorganizations have focused on a few national and multiregionaldistributors, all of which are in the throes of their ownconsolidations.Local hospital materials managers may feel committed to theagreement in place but know that these few distributors are notalways "the only game in town," as one recent article suggested.Throughout the country, regional and local distributors are availableto provide backup or special services dictated by local needs. Manyof these distributors have the capabilities to provide all or most ofthe services required by the local facility and the contractingorganization.Value Of DistributionSome large consolidated provider organizations, again focused onstandardized service, have discussed establishing their owndistribution capabilities. In such a consideration, it is important tounderstand the basic functions performed by the distributor. ArthurAndersen Consulting recently published The Value of Distribution inthe Medical Products Chain, which details these functions. Storage,receiving, billing, credit and collection, customer service andreturns, transportation and information services are the basicfunctions they list and detail. These are the functions that must beperformed by someone for product to be moved from where it ismanufactured to where it is used. Each of these functions involvesresources and costs.It is important to determine who can perform these functions mostefficiently and economically.Shared And Realistic ExpectationsService costs! If needed services are to be provided and costsreduced, all supply chain partners must have shared and realisticexpectations of the service levels to be maintained. Manufacturersneed to continue to work to bring their service to a level thatsupports the distributors' service levels to the provider. Providersand distributors must insist that all products display an industrystandard bar code so investments in technology can bring the neededreturn.Provider groups and alliances need to permit and assist their localmember facilities to identify and utilize regional and localdistributors to supplement service requirements not covered in themaster agreement, or where additional capacity is required.Providers need to identify their cost of performing basic distributionfunctions without medical products distributors involved. Thencompare those costs with the distributors' cost to perform thosebasic services.Distributors have consistently been shown to be the most efficientand economic source of these services. By working with thesedistributors and their manufacturer partners to establish realisticexpectations of the service levels needed, providers ensure the levelof needed service at the best possible cost.Christopher M. Pancratz is executive director of physician/alternatecare and hospital market groups for the Health Industry DistributorsAssn. in Alexandria, Va.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMS DRUG INDEXES CONTINUE SEVEN-QUARTER SLIDEHospital Materials Management's pharmaceutical price indexdeclined by 0.82% in this year's third quarter compared with theoverall index's second quarter 1995 showing. It was the seventhconsecutive quarterly overall pharmaceutical price decrease, but theindex is up 1.02% from the third quarter 1994 level. None of thefive indices registered a quarter-to-quarter price increase.Psychotherapeutics led the falling prices, dropping 1.50% in thethird quarter. Like the overall index, it was the seventh straight pricedecline for this category of medications. Following close behindpsychotherapeutics was the price decrease experienced by anti-infective non-cephalosporins, which fell 1.38% in the third quarterfrom the second quarter.HMM obtains its indexes from IMS America Ltd., PlymouthMeeting, Pa. This quarter's index is updated to a base period of thethird quarter 1994.(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH PARES$500,000 FROM ITS OPERATING ROOM MATERIALS ANDSUPPLIES BUDGETThe University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston,Texas, has taken a knife to costs in its operating rooms and expectsto excise nearly $500,000 each year from materials and supplies foroperating rooms.In late 1994 UTMB administrators launched an initiative designed tosignificantly reduce costs systemwide at the 1,200-bed state teachinghospital. To that end a joint committee of hospital staffers anddoctors from a physicians' practice plan associated with the hospitalevaluated high-frequency, high-cost operating categories. Taskforces were formed to evaluate 14 different categories, and materialsmanagement personnel sat on 10 of the 14 task forces. The groupswere given eight weeks to present savings plans to the hospitals topexecutives.One of those areas was the operating room. In three meetings oversix weeks in early 1995, a hospital team of clinicians, materialsmanagement executives (headed by Joe Velasquez, the hospital'sdirector of materials management) and hospital administratorsexamined operating room procedures and established baselineinformation on utilization and costs. The team, co-chaired by ageneral surgeon and the hospital's executive director of nursing,identified nearly $500,000 in projected annual savings. The savingsdropped the operating room medical-surgical materials budget to$10.5 million per year, about a 5% savings.Variety Of Areas ExaminedSome decisions were straightforward, such as favoring the use ofnondisposable supplies over reusables, while others tackled morepotentially controversial issues such as the use of brown gloves vs.white gloves.UTMB has been standardized on gloves and sutures for severalyears with Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., and EthiconInc., Somerville, N.J., a division of J&J, so UTMB couldn't saveby renegotiating purchase contracts on the items. While UTMB is acorporate partner with J&J, the items studied by the task force aresupplied under a J&J contract UTMB has with SunHealth AllianceInc., Charlotte, N.C. (UTMB's also uses University HealthSystemConsortium, Oak Brook, Ill., for various group purchasingcontracts.)Ethicon and J&J assisted in the hospital's cost saving efforts byanalyzing inventory levels, studying product utilization, examiningcases of product duplication or instances where two product codescould be served adequately by one, and by revamping drapingprocedures. In some cases the companies took back unusedinventory.Where The Savings AreA number of areas were identified for savings:+ Sutures. The most significant savings are likely to come fromchanges in procedures after a thorough evaluation of operating roomlines of sutures. Velasquez thinks making all the changes, a few ofwhich have yet to be initiated, will save close to $185,000 and dropoperating room annual expenses on sutures to $980,000. A wastesuture and material study revealed $80,000 in savings, and deletingsuture codes that are used infrequently or not at all saved another$18,000. Ordering slow-moving sutures less frequently should cutanother $18,000 from the operating room budget, and deletingredundant codes--or codes that can be switched for other codes withno change in efficacy--saved another $5,000 per year. Makingchanges in the use of dyed and undyed Vicryl sutures bumped$11,000 out of the expense column, and changing from PS needlesto FS needles could save nearly $12,000. An additional $40,000 insavings could be realized as the hospital begins resterilizing openedbut unused suture packs.+ Instruments. Switching to reusable lap chole instruments canproduce significant savings, estimated at almost $125,000 per year.Reviewing the contents of custom packs could mean an additional$30,000 in savings, and changing vendors for hemostatic chemicalproducts could add another $39,000 in savings.+ Changing draping procedures should produce $70,000 in annualsavings.+ Limiting the availability of specialty gloves totes up another$20,000 in annual savings.Per Case Cost DropsResults of the cost-cutting initiative have been significant.Administrators say the hospital's cost per case has decreased,although analysis of exact figures hadn't been determined at presstime. Virginia Opipare, UTMB's Hospitals Administrator, said theresults are significant, though. The hospital's cost per case hasdecreased through enhanced efficiency and an overall reduction incosts, she said. The hospital monitors projected budgets and priorperformances, and UTMB is beating both of those targets, she said.Physicians were closely involved in the cost savings efforts, and forgood reason: In considering procedural changes in areas ofphysician preference, a team that included doctors stood a muchbetter chance of making changes work, since the surgeons on theteam are responsible for carrying the task force's decisions back totheir peers. Dana Fox Jenkins, UTMB's director of clinicalcontinuous process improvement, said a cultural change like thatdoesn't happen overnight. While many hospitals have a difficulttime getting physicians involved, they are an integral part ofUTMB's initiatives. They are key to controlling costs of operationsbecause they order and use the resources within the hospital, shesaid, and when they're part of the decision-making process thatarrives at the outcome, it simplifies implementation of newprocedures.To make the effort attractive for the docs, the hospital offers a"gains-sharing plan" under which the hospital and the physicians'practice plan share in the cost savings. No details on the agreementwere disclosed.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANUFACTURING ACTIVITY CONTRACTS FOR FOURTHSTRAIGHT MONTH; PURCHASING MANAGERS'NOVEMBER INDEX DRIFTS DOWN TO 46.5%The nation's economy continued to be pulled in two directions inNovember, with manufacturing contracting while the overalleconomy grew weakly, said the nation's purchasing executives. ThePurchasing Managers' Index dropped in November to May 1995levels, standing at 46.5%, down from October's 46.8%.The latest figures supplied by the National Assn. of PurchasingManagement show indexes for Production and Employment downin November from October levels, while New Orders, Backlogs ofOrders and Inventory indexes were up. Production fell in Novemberto 45.8% from October's 48.2%, while the Employment indexdipped to 44.1% from October's 45.2%. New Orders edged up to50.1% from October's 48.1%, Order Backlogs rose to 41.5% fromOctober's 40.5% and Inventories jumped to 43.2% from 40.7% inOctober.The manufacturing sector showed overall weakness, with mostreporting categories declining. Only four of the 20 industries trackedby NAPM reported improved performances in November overOctober, compared to eight reporting an improvement in Octobercompared to September.(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PRODUCER PRICE INDEX RISES 0.1% IN NOVEMBER;MEDICAL CARE COMMODITIES INCREASE BY 0.3%Analysis: Two selected unadjusted surgical and medical instrumentscomponents of the Producer Price Index showed either no change ora slight decrease in October, while two orthopedic appliance andsupply components increased.The trend for the previous 12 months differed slightly, though, asthree of the four categories showed increases, while one--surgicaland medical instruments--increased for the year while slipping forthe month.(Tables omitted for online service. See print edition.)Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LARGE HOSPITALS AND INTEGRATED SYSTEMS AREASKING: ARE GROUP PURCHASING ORGANIZATIONSREALLY NECESSARY?By William McFaulWith pressure mounting to reduce expenses, many larger hospitalsand recently formed integrated delivery networks (IDNs) have beenraising the question of whether or not participation in grouppurchasing organizations offers real benefits. As cost pressurescontinue to intensify and more IDNs form, the question will beraised frequently: Can we do better on our own?Frankly, in some instances high-volume purchasers can obtain betterpricing than most, if not all, GPOs, especially if they are able toachieve a level of generic acceptability on physician preference itemslike pacemakers, intraocular lenses and orthopedic implants. Inmany instances they can match or beat most GPO contracts for I.V.solutions, dressings, sutures and other items. Savings oncommodity items, however, are generally minimal and are usuallythe result of the losing supplier attempting to undermine groupsolidarity by shaving the group price.Prices are tied to the profit levels of suppliers. Pricing in the healthcare industry is related to volume and generic acceptability. One canvisualize pricing reduction as a balloon. If selected GPOs obtain thevery best prices they squeeze the balloon. Since suppliers mustmaintain acceptable profit levels, the balloon expands at the otherend. Those GPOs that can deliver volume and commit to change willfare much better in the long run than those that cannot.When it comes to using a group purchasing organization, the realissue should not be today's price on any given contract. If membersexpect to realize substantial expense reductions beyond price alone,the focus should be on the overall portfolio offered by the GPO, itsplans for the future, and the variety of truly beneficial services theGPO provides.Hospitals and IDNs would be well advised to ignore promptingfrom consultants who have a vested interest in trying to developstand-alone volume purchasing processes. While these consultantsreceive lucrative contracts and their clients realize short-termsavings, survival in managed care will depend on the hospital's orIDN's ability to become high-quality, lowest-cost providers in theirareas. The most effective strategy to achieve long-term success inpricing is to use volume purchasing by supporting a GPO andfinding one that offers long-term benefits.Potentially, suppliers are another source of attempts to underminethe GPO concept. While suppliers will not openly attempt toundermine group purchasing for fear of reprisal from GPOs, wecannot ignore the fact that group purchasing is to the supply industrywhat unions are to management. Simply, suppliers stand to benefitif group purchasing falters. Therefore, caution must be exercisedwhen suppliers attempt to break group cohesion or preventcommitment.High-volume hospitals and IDNs need to give the group purchasingindustry time to adjust to the rapid changes in health care.Undoubtedly those facilities that "jump ship" will miss the rewardswhen GPOs adjust their processes to obtain volume commitment,create an environment for generic acceptability and devise a processto reflect best pricing for their largest participants.Price reductions are but one means of expense reduction. Today toomany hospitals and IDNs are focusing only on price and inventoryreductions. Far greater savings can be found by addressingconsumption, utilization, clinical path processes that cover allaspects of expenses, consolidation of services and the developmentof true shared services. The last two avenues for expense reduction,consolidation of services and shared services, will yield enormousbenefits when GPOs evolve into facilitators for interfacing multipleIDNs from contiguous service areas.Real success in managing expenses will not come from short-termgains in price reductions when far greater expense reductions areavailable by redirecting energy into addressing the how, what,where, when, why, who and how many of all expenses. The futureof price reductions depends on volume, commitment, and genericacceptability. Support your GPO if you want to benefit from pricereductions. The major challenge for health care providers is thedevelopment and implementation of a comprehensive plan to shiftaway from merely managing materials and prices into themanagement of all expenses.William McFaul is the founder of and a principal in the Trenton,N.J.,-based health care consulting firm of McFaul & Lyons Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996OWENS SHOULD OWN UP TO ITS PROBLEMSTo the Editor:I read with unsympathetic interest a letter from Tom Sherry, vicepresident of sales and marketing for Owens & Minor, in yourDecember 1995 issue.Mr. Sherry's insinuation that they have valid reasons for theirperformance slip is unacceptable. As a purchasing director, I cannottell my customer, the patient and nursing staff, "Sorry, the suppliesdidn't arrive!" To add insult to injury, Mr. Sherry suggests thatOwens needs to "educate its customers based on product velocityand criticality of product." Thanks, but no thanks. Sounds likesetting yourself up, and more excuses for future failures. Educationcomes from someone who has and continues to understand whatthey do!Simply put, Owens & Minor messed up! Admit it and carry on. Ideal with companies that admit to mistakes and improve themselves.Dan Salmon, Director of PurchasingLewis County General HospitalLowville, N.Y.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996Hospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successfulHospital Materials Management. Have over 17 years successfulexperience as Director of Materials Management and Purchasing inacute care hospitals, including multi-hospital organizations.Expertise includes procurement, distribution, value analysis,systems development, standardization, process improvement, costmanagement and inventory management. Technical abilities arecomplemented by excellent management, communications andinterpersonal skills. Can be reached at 610-767-6455.Vice president for materials management. MBA in hospitaladministration with more than 10 years of progressiveresponsibilities and proven track record. Seeks senior executive-level position in materials management. Is also available forconsulting, specializing in non-salary expense reduction. LocationNew York-New Jersey. Call 201-569-1266.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996Sharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials managementSharon Belletynee was appointed director of materials managementat Norwegian American Hospital, Chicago. Previously she wasdirector of materials management at Glenoaks Medical Center,Glendale Heights, Ill.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996Bruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., inBruce Haywood has joined McFaul & Lyons Inc., Trenton, N.J., ina newly created position of regional manager, expense managementservices. Previously he was director of materials management atDetroit Medical Center, Detroit.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996David W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at RushDavid W. Hitchens was named purchasing manager at RushPrudential Health Plans, Chicago. Before, he was materials managerat the National Jewish Center for Immunology and RespiratoryMedicine, Denver.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996John A. Moreno was appointed director of materials managementJohn A. Moreno was appointed director of materials managementfor Doctors Hospital of Hyde Park, Chicago. Previous to that hewas director of purchasing at University of Chicago Hospitals.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996Rick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materialsRick Schlosser has been appointed vice president of materialsmanagement with Physician Sales & Service Inc., Jacksonville, Fla.Previously he was vice president of material management forAmerican Medical International, Dallas, before its merger withNational Medical Enterprises, Santa Monica, Calif., to becomeTenet Healthcare Corp., Santa Monica.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996HEALTH INDUSTRY TODAY:+ HIT beams into the market leaders in the $200 million-and-growing surgical laser market in its January issue. The newsletteralso analyzes Baxter's big shakeup and provides a recap ofNovember's Radiological Society of North America annual meeting.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PROFILES IN HEALTHCARE MARKETING:+ January-February's Profiles features Langhorne, Pa.-basedDelaware Valley Medical Center and its establishment of a managedgeropsychiatric unit--the Behavioral Health Center for Older Adults.This issue of Profiles also includes a cumulative index for 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightHMM HOSPITAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996HEALTH CARE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT:+ HCSM's January cover story highlights outsourcing, identifiesthe benefits and pitfalls, and looks at future trends. HCSM assertsthat although the majority of hospitals currently outsourcing haveflat price contracts, in the future that will be replaced by shared riskand performance based practices.For information on these and other publications, please call TheBusiness Word Inc. at 800-328-3211.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-13IA086-000615-B040-93http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh60.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015734 text/html 34258HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:55:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMTContent-length: 34071Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh60.html Sample Issue Copyright INFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNet February 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FDA to Draft New Approval Guidance For Medical Software Regulation (434 words) Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt Client-Server Environment (334 words) Health Groups Collaborate To Prove Telemedicine's Worth (232 words) Group Outlines Special License For MDs Doing Telemedicine (369 words) Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process (282 words) Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record (457 words) Automated Prepayment Screen Could Save Millions, GAO Says (290 words) DOWNLOAD (616 words) PRODUCT DEVELOPMENTS (604 words) MARKET SCANNER (631 words) SURFING THE 'NET Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews (202 words) CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996FDA to Draft New Approval Guidance For MedicalSoftware RegulationTo judge whether a software program needs premarketnotification or approval, the FDA may use criteria such asseriousness of the disease to be diagnosed or treated; time framefor use of the information; and concordance with accepted medicalpractice.The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will draft a new softwareregulation policy, following controversy in the information systemsindustry over the agency's efforts to clarify its 1989 draft policy(IMS 9/7/95, p. 2).Some industry representatives feel the FDA is on the right track.If the revised  policy creates a category for those products thatneed little or no regulation, it could mean an easier approvalprocess for vendors and more technology reaching the users quicker.While some stand-alone software products such as hospitalinformation systems and picture archiving and communication systemsdo not pose a threat to patients if they fail, they are medicaldevices under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and should beregulated as such, says Dr. Harvey Rudolph, acting deputy directorof the FDA Office of Science and Technology.Although the FDA guidance aims to identify products that do notrequire 510(k) premarket notification, the guidance created moreconfusion than clarification, Rudolph admits.FDA uses the concept of "competent human intervention" to determinewhether a product poses an immediate danger to patients if itfails. As long as a qualified person, such as a physician, hascontrol over system output, there is competent human intervention.The problem, Rudolph says, is manufacturers have interpretedcompetent human intervention too broadly.One system's experience: Base Ten Systems of Trenton, N.J.,originally submitted a premarket notification for its prenatalevaluation computer software program, Prenval. But the approvalprocess took several years because of FDA's inexperience atregulating software, contends Walter Brandes, company vicepresident.After Base Ten had submitted the request for notification, FDA saidthe company needed to go through the lengthier premarket approvalprocess. But FDA's peer reviewers, in looking over the company'spaperwork, downgraded the product to a 510(k), says Brandes.The agency wants to develop three levels of device review based oncriteria that determine the impact of product failure on thepatient. The criteria include:o         Seriousness of the disease to bediagnosed or treated; o         Time frame for use of theinformation; o         Concordance with accepted medicalpractice; o         Format of data and theirpresentation; o         Individualized vs. aggregatepatient care recommendations; and o         Clarity of the algorithm.The agency hopes to publish in three to six months a new draft inthe Federal Register.Contact Rudolph at (301) 443-2444.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Hospital Overhauls Information System To AdoptClient-Server EnvironmentHermann Hospital of Houston is reworking its information system,leaving its mainframe behind and moving to a client-server environmentthat makes information more accessible to the end-user.Tired of the lack of communication between the components of itsbudding integrated delivery system, one Texas hospital decided torework its entire information system.Hermann Hospital of Houston embarked on a three-year initiative tophase in a system to create an electronic medical record accessiblefrom all parts of its network, says CIO David Tucker.Phase one: pilot tests at five or six University of Texas clinicsassociated with the hospital. After phase one is complete, thehospital will focus on integrating other departments, such asnursing, into the network.The hospital operates in a mainframe environment, using theEnvision system developed by SMS of Malvern, Pa. Hermann is movingto a client-server environment that makes information moreaccessible to the end-user, Tucker says.The paperless, client-server system will eliminate the need forduplicate medical records scattered around the network.For example, if a patient goes into a clinic in the morning, thengoes to the Hermann emergency room that night, physicians in the ERhave no way of knowing about the encounter that morning and willdraw up a new chart, Tucker says.Hermann will implement the Health Network Architecture developed byCerner Corp. of Kansas City, Mo., to link its network. The computerized patient medical records will be stored usingCerner's Open Clinical Foundation Data Repository. Hermann also will implement Cerner's CareNet Care Management Systemand Open Management Foundation Data Repository.When implemented, the system will link about 2,000 devices,including workstations and printers, located at about 60 clinics inthe area. The system will run on a Digital Equipment Corp. (DEC)platform and will use Oracle.Hermann hopes to have the first pilot systems in place bySeptember.Tucker foresees complications common to new systems: Hermann staffhas never used the DEC platform or Oracle.Contact Tucker at (713) 704-3367.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Health Groups Collaborate To Prove Telemedicine's WorthA new telemedicine research center gives members access toresearch databases - and the opportunity to participate in projectsto prove the benefits of telemedicine.To help prove the clinical utility and cost- effectiveness oftelemedicine, an Oregon research  center launched a group tocooperate on telemedicine projects nationwide.The Telemedicine Research Center, a non-profit research corporationbased in Portland, Ore., organized the Clinical TelemedicineCooperative Group. The intent: advance telemedicine researchthrough a cooperative approach to clinical telemedicine trials,says Mary McDermott, client services manager.Health care facilities looking to launch their own telemedicineprograms but don't know where to start could benefit from theresearch of others.The group uses e-mail to communicate with members. Members also candownload evaluation tools and training materials based on otherongoing telemedicine projects.Members can access research, design and data management protocols,and other telemedicine information. Members also can conceive,develop and participate in telemedicine research studies.Members include East Carolina University, Iowa Health System,Midwest Rural Telemedicine Consortium, Oregon Health SciencesUniversity, and the U.S. Army Medical Research and MaterialsCommand's Medical Advanced Technology Management Office.In addition to the cooperative group, the center maintains a WorldWide Web home page that links users to other telemedicine Web sites(see Surfing the 'Net, p. 7).Contact McDermott at (503) 221-1620, or the research center attrc@telemed.org on the Internet.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Group Outlines Special License For MDs Doing TelemedicineThe interstate practice of telemedicine may get easier ifa proposal by the Federation of State Medical Boards becomes law.The Federation of State Medical Boards, based in Euless, Texas,drafted a model act calling for the establishment of a speciallicense limited to the interstate practice of medicine, such astelemedicine (IMS 11/2/95, p. 1).The group has presented the draft document for recommendation tostate medical boards.Findings: Physicians practicing medicine across state lines areeither unregulated or must be fully licensed in the state where thepatient is located.However, some states still feel that a full and unrestrictedlicense is necessary for the interstate practice of medicine, saysDr. James Winn, federation executive vice president.Model Act Is a Step in the Right DirectionWhile states don't have to adopt the guidance, the proposal doesmove toward breaking down the barriers to telemedicine, says TimHenderson, director of the Primary Care Resource Center at GeorgeWashington University's Intergovernmental Health Policy Project inWashington. There is a need for a joint effort to deal with thefast growth of telemedicine, he says.The creation of a nationwide licensure standard is so far off thatit is impossible to determine how the act  would affect legislativeefforts in the future, he notes. Henderson suggests seeing how theeffort works in a few states before trying broader implementation.The proposed act would require physicians engaging in telemedicineand any interstate practice of medicine to obtain a special licenseissued by the state medical board. The license would not allow thephysician to enter the state to practice medicine.The act would only require those physicians who regularly engage inthe practice of medicine across state lines to obtain a license,and would exempt physicians in the case of an emergency.The definitions of "regularly" and "emergency" would be determinedby the board in each state.The committee further recommends that every consideration forexpedient issuance of the limited medical license be given tophysicians holding a valid, unrestricted license in one state.The committee plans to meet again at the end of March to finalizethe document.Contact the federation at (817) 868-4000.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy ProcessA New York hospital used a 13-member committee to evaluateon-site demonstrations, interview counterparts at other userhospitals and rate vendor documentation.In its search for a new information system, a New York hospitalfound an alternative to the usual paper-intensive process ofsubmitting a request for proposal (RFP) to vendors.Brooks Memorial Hospital of Dunkirk, N.Y., first sent out a requestfor information to 13 vendors and narrowed the choice to seven.An RFP involves a great deal of paperwork on both sides and is notfilled with information that prospective buyers can really use,says Vince Ciotti of HIS Professionals of Boonton, N.J., Brooks'information systems consultant.Hospital CFO Ralph Webdale chaired a 13-member committee thatincluded physicians and representa-tives from nursing, billing,accounting and pharmacy departments. For one day a week, each of the seven vendors did on-site demos ineach department.Committee members independently rated each vendor's softwarepackage, then discussed the systems' strengths and weaknesses as agroup.A vital element of the review process was the telephone reference,Webdale says. Each committee member spoke to their counterparts athospitals that had installed the vendors' products, then rated anddiscussed each product based on the conversations.The final step was to rate the documentation of the top six vendorsbased on criteria such as ease-of-use.In the end, the committee came to a unanimous decision to buy aMeditech system.Tip: One of the criteria Ciotti uses to put together a list ofpotential vendors is location. Some hospitals have spent up to$100,000 flying vendors in for demos or for service, Ciotti says.Contact Ciotti at (201) 263-4795, or Webdale at (716) 366-1111.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic RecordThe system collects patient demographics data atregistration on an IBM AS/400  workstation linked to the centraldatabase and automatically updates the patient record. Billinginformation is sent in daily batches to the database. The systemruns on a Novell 4.0 network.To track patient utilization and improve allocation of resources,a multisite Iowa provider group decided to use a computerizedmedical record system.The Iowa Physicians Clinic Medical Foundation will installcomputerized medical record systems in about 15 sites around thestate, according to Dr. Mark Purtle, director of internal medicine.The group chose the MR 2000 computerized medical record programdeveloped by Healthcare Software Solutions, a subsidiary of BlueCross and Blue Shield of Iowa, based in Des Moines.The group has patient record systems up and running, although onlyin partial installation, in about half of its sites. While the MR 2000 includes modules for finance, health maintenance,drug formularies and drug interactions, the group uses the systemprimarily for demographics and patient encounter information.Registration System Collects DemographicsPatient demographics data is collected at registration on an IBMAS/400 workstation linked to the central database. The systemautomatically updates the patient record. Billing information issent in daily batches to the database.The system runs on a Novell 4.0 network.Instead of entering encounter notes directly into the record,physicians record notes, which are then transcribed and enteredinto the record. The system also includes a ICD-9 and CPT-4 coding module, butcoding is still not widespread among physicians, Purtle notes.All clinic sites can access records stored in the central database.However, each site maintains a server with its own records.Workstations are located at all physician offices, nurse stationsand registration desks. When the system is fully installed, therewill be workstations in every exam room.Caveat: The electronic medical record has not yet eliminated theneed for a paper record. The group may use a scanner to createelectronic images of the paper records.The group hopes to build a complete database of codes anddemographics that tracks encounters by provider and clinic site. Being able to track seasonal variations in utilization would enablethe group to better plan the number of physicians it needs duringcertain periods of the year or the type of physician it would needin a certain  community.According to Purtle, the implementation process has been slow. Thehold-up is due in part to physicians getting used to computers. Inaddition, the group is awaiting release of a Windows version of thesoftware before continuing implementation.The group hopes to have the system fully implemented at all itssites by the end of the year.Contact Purtle at (515) 241-4000. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996Automated Prepayment Screen Could Save Millions, GAO SaysHCFA says half of Medicare Part B contractors haveinstalled the screening tools, but Congress hasn't appropriated themoney to support the program. But GAO contends the tool could saveHCFA $150 million a year.HCFA could save millions of dollars by using automated prepaymentscreens for Medicare claims, according to a report released earlierthis month by the General Accounting Office.A simple safeguard, known as an auto-adjudicated prepayment screen,could save millions of dollars in unnecessary Medicare payments,GAO officials said at a Feb. 8 House Government Reform andOversight Human Resources and Intergovernmental RelationsSubcommittee hearing.Rep. Christopher Shays (R-Conn.), subcommittee chairman, said thereis very little reason why HCFA should not require the screens to beused whenever possible.While half of Medicare contractors have installed the screens, theydon't use them because of the limited funds appropriated byCongress for medical review, according to Gary Kavanagh, deputydirector of HCFA's Bureau of Program Operations. Another obstacle:lack of a nationwide standard payment policy, he added.HCFA has three model policies in place to examine whether thescreens work and is planning more by the summer, Kavanagh said.However, he expressed doubt that the screens would save a "wholelot of money."The GAO based its findings on claims for six common medicalprocedures submitted to the seven largest Medicare Part Bcontractors, and determined HCFA could save about $150 million onthose procedures alone.The six procedures, which account for almost $3 billion in Medicarepayments, are echocardiography, eye exams, chest X-rays,colonoscopy, YAG laser surgery and duplex scan of extracranialarteries.To order a copy of the report, GAO/HEHS-96-49, call (202) 512-6000.To place an order by fax, dial (301) 258-4066.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996DOWNLOAD         The U.S. Department of Justiceindicted a group of Michigan medical suppliers for allegedlydefrauding Medicare of $25 million through an electronic billingscheme. Through assorted companies, the suppliers allegedlyelectronically billed Medicare's fiscal intermediary Blue Cross andBlue Shield of Michigan for questionable supplies, including kitsfor catheters, incontinence and gastronomy tubes. The suppliersallegedly back-dated claims and billed Medicare separately forcomponents of kits as well as the kits themselves. When Blue Crossgot suspicious and subjected claims to prepayment review, thesuppliers allegedly switched to provider identification numbersthat seemed unrelated to their companies, and billed Medicarecarriers in Florida and Ohio.         The wide variation in theinformation systems capabilities of health plans affects howcompletely plans can report measures for the Health Plan EmployerData and Information Set, according to the Committee on PerformanceMeasurement of the National Committee for Quality Assurance. At arecent meeting of the committee, members concluded that the beststrategy is to design measures for HEDIS 3.0, set for release thissummer, that many plans can produce with current informationsystems, but that would provide users, over time, with informationthey need for measurement. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.         HCFA on Feb.5 issued a call forcomments on its proposed automated National Provider System forcollecting health care information. The system will be used inprogram operations and management to assign provider identificationnumbers, such as billing numbers for claims processing and payment.For a copy of the proposal, call (410) 786-1326. Send comments andrecommendations to OMB Human Resources and Housing Branch,Attention: Allison Eydt, New Executive Office Building, Room 10235,Washington, D.C. 20503.         A draft HHS budget proposal mayexpand rural telemedicine grants to rural primary care hospitalsand sole community hospitals.         The National Health Council ofWashington and Chicago-based America's House Call Network enteredinto a strategic alliance to disseminate health information toconsumers through the House Call network. The council will offermembers assistance in using the interactive services of thenetwork, including disease forums, chat rooms, health news andinteractive conferences. Contact the council at (202) 785-3910.         The Uniform Code Council of Dayton,Ohio, released a video and literature package that addresses theproduct identification needs of the health care industry."Application Identifiers: At the Heart of Health Care ProductIdentification" focuses on mapping data-structure requirements toindustry-defined business requirements. The video and accompanyingbrochure describe product identification and bar-coding forpharmaceutical and medical-surgical products. Contact the councilat (513) 435-3870.         A coalition of state education,military, health care and private sector groups has launched theTexas Distance Learning Assn. to address, in part, the importanceof telemedicine. Contact the association at (512) 280-2500.         A far greater percentage of ruralhealth care facilities than previously thought is usingtelemedicine to access specialists at large urban health centersfor patient care, according to a study on telemedicine by AbtAssociates Inc. of Cambridge, Mass. The study was funded by theOffice of Rural Health Policy and tallied the responses of 2,365facilities, or 95% of the nation's rural hospitals. According tothe study, 29% of facilities have adopted telemedicine programs,ranging from teleradiology to interactive video, or plan to by theend of the year; about 30% of telemedicine programs were createdwithin the last year and 30% between one and three years ago; ofthe facilities with telemedicine programs, 66% seek out specialtyconsultation, while 10% provide consultation services to others,with the remainder serving in both capacities; and the averagerural hospital that seeks consultations from specialists usingtelemedicine receives 15 teleconsultations each month. For moreinformation, contact Abt at (617) 492-7100.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996PRODUCT DEVELOPMENTS        Cisco Systems Inc. of San Jose,Calif., will use as its document management solution the NovaManagesystem from Novasoft Systems Inc. of Burlington, Mass. NovaManagewill serve as the core technology within Cisco's enterprisewideproject data management application, integrating with additionalCisco information systems. NovaManage is based on Novasoft'sCellular Document Management architecture. Cisco also plans tointegrate Novasoft's NovaWeb, which allows users to remotely accessbusiness-critical NovaManage documents from the system's Webclient. Novasoft's products are used in the pharmaceutical andmedical device industry. Contact Novasoft at (617) 221-0300.        Allscrips Pharmaceuticals Inc. ofVernon Hills, Ill., completed its merger with Chadds Ford,Pa.-based Physician Dispensing Systems Inc., developer of anon-line drug dispensing and information system. The merger willlink prescription dispensing with clinical, medication andinsurance data management in a single information system at thepoint of care. Allscrips' proprietary software for doctor's officesprovides on-line information about clinical profiles, druginteractions and other data to help guide physicians to the mostappropriate prescribing choices.  Allscrips will use PhysicianDispensing Systems' technology to link prescription informationto payer data and patients' personal medical information on-line.Contact Allscrips at (708) 680-3515.        Zenith Data Systems of Buffalo Grove,Ill., introduced MultiCruise, a mobile system that providessimultaneous, remote, real-time access to applications and data ona central Microsoft Windows NT server. Users can access and updatepatient information stored on the MultiCruise system from anywherein the medical facility using the CruisePAD, a wireless touchpad.MultiCruise allows the CruisePAD to remotely control multipleWindows-based sessions running on the MultiCruise server. Thesystem uses an organization's existing software and standardMS-DOS, Window 3.X, Windows 95 and Window NT-based applications.Contact Zenith at (708) 808-5000.        Phoenix-based National HealthEnhancement Systems Inc., a developer of medical call centers,partnered with Cognos, headquartered in both Ottawa, Canada, andBurlington, Mass. National Health Enhancement will incorporateCognos' data access and reporting tool, PowerPlay, in itsCentramax.M software products. Centramax.M is a configurablesoftware program that manages clinical and non-clinical call centerfunctions, including customer communication, database managementand triage/advice systems. Contact Cognos at (617) 229-6600, orNational Health at (602) 230-7575.        Interactive Buyers NetworkInternational of Ventura, Calif., created a global on-linemarketplace using its SOURCE interactive software. Users, such asProvidence St. Joseph Medical Center, can access competitivepricing from inside or outside their normal pool of vendors.Contact Interactive Buyers Network International at (800) 949-7353.        Aware Inc. of Bedford, Mass., andAccess Radiology Corp. of Waltham, Mass., will integrate Aware'smedical implementation of wavelet compression with Access's imagemanagement product line, Framewave. Access Framewave is a family ofdigital image acquisition and communication products using Aware'swavelet-based image compression to manage diagnostic qualitymedical images in wide-area applications. Framewave film digitizersand frame-grab devices use Aware's compression technology toeliminate the need for dedicated, broadband telecommunications inwide-area applications. Contact Aware at (617) 276-4000.        Informed Access Systems Inc. ofBoulder, Colo.,  received a U.S. patent for FirstHelp, a systemto manage consumer demand for medical services. FirstHelp is anautomated patient assessment and provider referral system that isused by health plans and health care providers to help guidepatients to an appropriate level and type of medical care basedupon their needs. The system is made up of two components: thepatient assessment component, an automated set of proprietarypatient assessment algorithms; and the provider informationcomponent, a proprietary relational database containing theinformation necessary to differentiate the providers participatingin a network and to manage the patient flow into their practices.Contact Informed Access at (303) 443-4600.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996MARKET SCANNER         The Northwest Academic ComputingConsortium of Bellevue, Wash., spun off its Internet service arm toform a for-profit company, NorthWestNet Inc. NorthWestNet providesInternet service to health care companies, such as the Group HealthCooperative of Puget Sound. The company is expanding its servicesto include frame relay connections, World Wide Web site, hostingand bulk Internet e-mail list services. Contact NorthWestNet at(206) 649-7400.         Hospital Cost Consultants Inc., asubsidiary of CIS Technologies Inc. of Tulsa, Okla., signed threeagreements to implement various applications of its 3-D financialsproduct line, which allows providers to proactively addressrevenue, cost and market share. The agreements are with Holy CrossHospital of Chicago, the University of Tennessee Medical Center atKnoxville, and St. Mary-Corwin Regional Medical Center in Pueblo,Colo. Holy Cross will purchase the AS/400-based cost-accountingsoftware application to provide cost management and strategicplanning. The University of Tennessee will implement theDistinction, Dividend and Domain managed care systems. St.Mary-Corwin will implement the most recent version of theDistinction: Contract Management System and an IBM, RS/6000 C-10Compact Server. Contact CIS at (918) 496-2451.         National Data Corp. of Atlantaacquired Cleveland-based Conceptual Systems Corp., a provider ofelectronic claims processing services and practice managementsystems for physicians, hospitals and other health care businesses.Conceptual processed more than 10 million health care transactionslast year, including insurance and benefits eligibilityverification, co-insurance billing, payment verification andelectronic data interchange services. Contact National Data at(404) 728-2000.         CyData Inc., a physician andhospital EDI services vendor based in Scottsdale, Ariz., receivednational clearinghouse accreditation from the ElectronicHealthcare Network Accreditation Commission. Contact CyData at(800) 336-4018.         The Associated Group, anIndianopolis-based insurance company, selected Unisys Corp. of BlueBell, Pa., to provide information systems management services. Thecontract has an estimated value of more than $100 million over itsfirst five years and includes the purchase by Unisys of informationtechnology assets from the insurer. Unisys will operate and managethe insurer's information systems data center facilities inIndianapolis, Cincinnati, and Louisville, Ky. Contact theAssociated Group at (317) 488-6248.         HCIA Inc. of Baltimore announced anet income per share for the fourth quarter, excluding anon-recurring charge, of $.18, an increase of 350% over 1994. Forthe year, the company had a net income per share of $.60. ContactHCIA at (410) 332-7515.         The Health Insurance Plan of NewYork will install the Managed Care System developed by CareWareSystems of Tampa, Fla. The plan will use the software to performprecertification of care, medical case management, utilizationreview and medical bill re-pricing for HIP's newly certifiedWorkers' Compensation Managed Care Organization, HIP-COMP. ThePC-based software uses Windows technology and allows users tocontrol the selection, delivery and costs of services appropriateto patient conditions. Contact CareWare at (800) 766-1736.         OSF Health Plans Inc. of Peoria,Ill., is installing the MEDSYTE decision support system developedby O'PIN Systems Inc. of Bloomington, Minn. The health plan willuse the system to guide utilization management and continuousquality improvement. The plan will also use O'PIN's HEDIS 2.5Reporting system to evaluate and trend plan performance foremployer groups. Contact O'PIN at (612) 883-2888.         DKD, a member of the ProviderDivision of the MEDSTAT Group of Ann Arbor, Mich., signed eight newcontracts for the installation of the  ASCENT Managed CareInformation and Quality Management Systems: Loyola UniversityMedical Center of Maywood, Ill.; University of Michigan MedicalCenter of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Parkland Memorial Hospital of Dallas;St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center of Syracuse, N.Y.; EnglewoodHospital of Englewood, N.J.; Health Management Associates Inc. ofNaples, Fla.; Ingalls Health System of Harvey, Ill.; and CopleyMemorial Hospital of Aurora, Ill. Contact MEDSTAT at (313)996-1180.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES via NewsNetFebruary 15, 1996SURFING THE 'NETTelemedicine Web Site Offers Product ReviewsThe Telemedicine Information Exchange World Wide Web site,maintained by the Telemedicine Research Center of Portland, Ore.,links users to a telemedicine products and services directory thatcatalogs articles on equipment reviews, evaluations or technicalspecs.Once you choose a browser, you will have a selection of threemenus: (1) starters; (2) hot items; and (3) searchable databases.From the starter menu, users can get the history and definition oftelemedicine, or read case studies on telemedicine in action andthe latest news, including legislative issues and success stories.Users can also offer feedback on the site.Under the hot items menu, users can explore the legal and ethicalissues surrounding telemedicine through the text of current statelegislation, peer-reviewed articles and hypertext links to otherInternet resources.The searchable databases include information on funding fortelemedicine projects, active projects, and upcoming meetings andconferences.The site also offers information on the Telemedicine ResearchCenter's Clinical Telemedicine Cooperative Group that bringstogether researchers nationwide (see story, p. 2).The site's home page lets you choose a text-only or a graphicbrowser, enabling users to sacrifice aesthetics for the sake ofspeed.The site is located at http://tie.telemed.org/ on the Web.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-14IA086-000615-B040-122http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh67.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015827 text/html 118342HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:55:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMTContent-length: 118154Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh67.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HISTORIC US GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENDS (426 words) HOECHST MARION ROUSSEL RESTRUCTURES IN 1996 (502 words) UK APPROVES FIRST PRIVATELY FUNDED HOSPITAL PROJECT (425 words) SWISS INSURANCE COMPANIES TAKE AIM AT PRIVATE HOSPITAL TREATMENT (395 words) FRENCH HEALTH INSURERS TO STUDY COST CONTAINMENT (229 words) BURE ACQUIRES PREVIA (234 words) FRENCH ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN HOSPITAL COMPANY (120 words) ARJO UNDER THE SPOTLIGHT (205 words) CANADIAN RED CROSS UNVEILS SELF-SUFFICIENT BLOOD STRATEGY (397 words) EU'S 4TH FRAMEWORK HEALTH TELEMATICS PROJECTS SET TO BEGIN (347 words) CONFERENCE REPORT HEALTH MINISTER OUTLINES POLICY ON IT IN HEALTHCARE (374 words) DIABCARD TRIAL IN BARCELONA (225 words) INFOMIX - A SUCCESS IN HUNGARIAN HEALTHCARE INFORMATICS (488 words) ALBERTA TESTS SMART CARD (253 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE MAKES PROFIT FROM PRIVATE PATIENTS (280 words) UK ANNOUNCES SPENDING ON HEALTH (287 words) STUDY SHOWS UK HOSPITAL INTENSIVE CARE NEEDS IMPROVEMENT (370 words) IRELAND TO PROMOTE EXPORT SALES (194 words) FRENCH HOSPITAL REFORM REMAINS TO BE DETERMINED (545 words) FRANCE SUPPORTS AIDS CAMPAIGN (315 words) FRANCE INCREASES PACE OF CHANGE (516 words) CONFERENCE REPORT EUROPEAN HEALTH MINISTERS SIGNAL TOUGHER ACTION ON ALCOHOL (323 words) GERMANY AHEAD OF SCHEDULE ON TRACKING DOCTORS' PRESCRIPTIONS (469 words) TRANSPLANT LAW FOR GERMANY AT LAST? (464 words) ITALY DRASTICALLY CUTS 1996 SPENDING FOR PHARMACEUTICALS (360 words) ITALIANS CONSULT TRAVEL AGENTS FIRST WHEN TAKEN ILL (279 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW AUSTRIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION OFFERS REFORM PROPOSALS (226 words) WHO CASH CRISIS DEEPENS (285 words) UNAIDS STARTS UP AMID DOUBTS (364 words) SPAIN FINDS 1996 FULL OF HEALTH SYSTEM PROBLEMS (380 words) NORWEGIAN DOCTORS FAVOUR PRIVATISATION (424 words) FDA FLOODED WITH RESPONSES TO PROPOSED CIGARETTE RULING (588 words) NEWS MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS RISE (78 words) ALBERTA WILL NOT CUT DOCTOR FEES (155 words) MEXICO PLANS TO EXTEND HEALTHCARE (162 words) JAPANESE GROUP TO FIGHT MALPRACTICE (172 words) JAPAN PROPOSES TO REDUCE PHARMACEUTICAL SPENDING (471 words) TAIWAN'S NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE IN JEOPARDY (313 words) MEDICAL BENEFITS COMPENSATION LEGISLATION PROPOSED (370 words) NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA AMEND MEDICAL PRACTITIONER LAWS (340 words) NEW ZEALAND ADDS MONEY TO CUT WAITING LISTS (347 words) SOUTH AFRICA HEALTH REFORMS TO CURTAIL DRUG SALES (224 words) HUNGARIAN DRUG COMPANIES HOLD STEADY IN SPITE OF COMPETITION (498 words) BRACCO PURCHASES INTEREST IN ESAOTE (72 words) BB MEDTECH FORMED TO INVEST IN MEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE COMPANIES (64 words) SUN LIFE AWARDED CANADA'S HEALTH INSURANCE BUSINESS (74 words) SWEDISH MEDICAL LABORATORIES MERG (48 words) SYNECTICS MEDICAL BUYS ALL SHARES IN DANTEC MEDICAL (97 words) MEDSTAT GROUP CONTRACT (47 words) FLORIDA HEALTH CENTRES SOLD TO HUMANA (55 words) AARP TO END ARRANGEMENT WITH PRUDENTIAL (71 words) HEALTHSOUTH TO PURCHASE ADVANTAGE HEALTH CORP (82 words) STERIS TO ACQUIRE AMSCO INTERNATIONAL (99 words) BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB TO ACQUIRE 77 PER CENT OF PHARMAVIT (65 words) MEDICAL DEVICES SECTOR SHOWS STRONG GROWTH POTENTIAL (682 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HISTORIC US GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENDSWASHINGTON, DC - The 21 day partial US federal government shutdownended 5 January 1996, when president Bill Clinton signed legislationthat temporarily brings back to work one-quarter of a million peoplefurloughed during a budget impasse. A compromise was reached with theRepublican party-controlled Congress agreeing to back-pay thefurloughed federal employees, as well as the nearly half million whowere working without full pay since 16 December 1995. The president andCongress had been at an impasse to agree on a seven year plan tobalance the budget by the year 2002 and which programmes and taxeswould be decreased to accomplish that goal.This furlough followed a one-week shutdown in November and is onlyresolved until the temporary legislation runs out on 26 January.Federal employees will not be secure in their jobs or funding of theprogrammes they run until departmental appropriation bills are passedand signed by the president. Although Clinton has put forth a balancedbudget, with figures validated by the Congressional Budget Office, theDemocratic and Republican parties remain far apart in their views aboutentitlement programmes and the role of the federal government vis-a-visthe states.While IHN predicted a collision course between the president and thecongress on Medicare and Medicaid (IHN 6, November, 1995, page 1), IHNdid not expect federal employees to be held hostage. These twoprogrammes, however, are major points of contention along with tax cutsand welfare reform. The table illustrates the differences in savingsfor the four programmes projected by the president and Congress at theconclusion of talks on 7 January.Programmes            Clinton savings       Republican savingsMedicare              $102 billion          $201 billionMedicaid              $52 billion           $117 billionTax cuts              $87 billion           $241 billionWelfare               $45 billion           $82 billionSources: Congressional Budget Office, White HouseWhile the Department of Health and Human Services is still without anapproved budget, the 5 January agreement did provide funding through 30September, the end of this fiscal year, for the National Institutes ofHealth (NIH) and the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention andseveral other health agencies. The Food and Drug Administration, by theway, was unaffected because it was under the Department ofAgriculture's previously appropriated budget.The shutdown has long-term rippling effects for the healthcare sector.For example, researchers at nearly 1,700 hospitals and universityresearch centres are unable to begin or continue projects funded by NIHgrants. Wendy Baldwin, NIH grants supervisor said, "It is going to takemonths to straighten out the backlog."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HOECHST MARION ROUSSEL RESTRUCTURES IN 1996FRANKFURT -- Hoechst Marion Roussel (HMR) recently announced its 1996plans for worldwide restructuring. HMR plans to abolish 8,000 jobs thisyear; about one-third of the losses will be in Europe (1,400 inGermany), 20 per cent in North America, and 25 per cent in the Asian,Pacific region. The company currently employs 43,000 people. About 40per cent of the job cuts will be in manufacturing and about half willbe administrative and sales staff."Hoechst is no longer a German company with an international business,but an international multi-cultural company with headquarters inGermany", claims HMR spokesman, Joachim Pietzsch, when describing thecurrent state of the company's affairs.  "The traditional Germanchemical company founded in 1863 in a village near Frankfurt is nowundergoing dramatic changes. In a few years drugs will be onlyconnected with Hoechst Marion Roussel instead of just Hoechst."Since Jurgen Dormann took over as managing director in April 1994, thecompany has concentrated on the three core areas of pharmaceuticals,plant protection and industrial chemistry. Major acquisitions andseveral co-operative arrangements have been made in these areas, whilecosmetic and chemical companies have been sold.In July 1995, Hoechst acquired the American pharmaceutical companyMarion Merrel Dow for $7.1 billion. This was the largest acquisitionever made by a German company. Several years ago, Hoechst purchased theFrench company Roussel and the restructuring marks an overhaul andintegration of its drug division.Increase profit margins by 30 per centThe restructuring, estimated to cost about DM1.1 billion ($758.6million), is expected to increase drug profit margins by 30 per centover three years. The plan calls for reducing the number of HMR's drugproduction sites to 40, about half of the current number. There will befour research centres: Frankfurt (Germany), Romainville (France),Sommerville (US) and Kawagoe (Japan). These centres will focus on themechanisms and therapeutic options for cardiovascular, metabolic,infectious and oncological diseases, as well as ailments of the bonesand central nervous and respiratory systems. A centre will be closed ineach of the following cities: Cincinatti (US), Strasbourg (France),Swindon (UK) and Gerenzano, Italy.Frankfurt will keep its dominant position, said director Karl-GerhardSeifert, who is responsible for HMR's pharmaceutical business. He willwork with a multi-cultural executive committee of 12 managers. A drugdevelopment centre will be established in Sommerville, New Jersey andthe centre will be responsible for marketing, business development anddrug submissions.The strategic aim is to register two new drugs per year. Drugsubmissions will be expedited by continuous data transfer between thecentres of HMR."We have 15 top projects", said Pietzsch. Three of them are in the areaof gene technology: Hirudin, Factor XIII and human insulin. In thepast, Hoechst was not a major player in gene therapy, but with HMRcentres on the US east coast and several co-operative arrangements withsmall, specialised biotechnology companies, HMR currently has a stronginvolvement in genome research.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UK APPROVES FIRST PRIVATELY FUNDED HOSPITAL PROJECTLONDON - A privately financed #35 million ($39.7 million) scheme toreconstruct hospitals in England's Buckinghamshire region has beenapproved by the government. The scheme is the first in which asubstantial sum of private finance is to be used to design and rebuildhospital facilities for the publicly-funded National Health Service(NHS).The Secretary of State for Health, Stephen Dorrell, said that theproject marked a turning point for the government's private financeinitiative (PFI) in the health service. He added that he was stronglyin favour of testing public and private sector solutions alongside eachother and adopting the approach which offered the best value.                  NHS capital spending: England                        (# million)                    Revised              ProvisionalPlan      Plan       Plans                          1995-1996 1995-1996 1997-1998    1998-1999Hospital and Comm-unity Health SvcsGovernment spending 1,806     1,543      1,495        1,430% real growth           -     -16.9        5.4         -6.5Receipts from land sales                250       310        300          290% real growth                  20.7       -5.6         -5.5PFI investment         47       165        200          300% real growth                   142       18.3         46.7Other NHSCapital spending       17        20         17           17% real growth                  17.8      -19.9         -2.2Total               2,120     2,038      2,012        1,036% real growth                  -6.5       -3.7         -1.0The contract, which involves a substantial amount of rebuilding at twoof the South Buckinghamshire NHS Trust's hospitals has been awarded tothe Healthcare Group consortium, comprising builders Taylor Woodrow,the motorway service station operator Granada and financiers, Nexus.Work is expected to begin in April and take two years to complete. MrDorrell said all clinical services would continue to be provided by theNHS, but maintenance would be the responsibility of the private sectorpartner.The project is expected to be the first of many large-scale privatesector schemes in the NHS, with the government expecting privateinvestment to rise from #47 million this year to #165 million in the1996-1997 year. Even with such a large increase in private investment,however, the total amount of funding available for capital projects isstill expected to fall.Mr Dorrell has announced that government expenditure on capitalprojects for hospitals and community health services is to be cut byalmost 17 per cent next year, to #1.54 billion. This is expected toresult in a fall of 6.5 per cent in overall funding available forcapital development in real terms in the 1996-1997 year, and a drop of3.7 per cent in the following year.The NHS Executive has so far approved 44 PFI schemes, with a totalcapital value of around #166 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SWISS INSURANCE COMPANIES TAKE AIM AT PRIVATE HOSPITAL TREATMENTGENEVA - A group of leading Swiss insurance companies has declared waron the high cost of health treatment in the country by introducing a"carrot and stick" approach to get patients to switch to cheaperprivate hospitals and clinics. The 13 companies belonging to COSAMA(Conference suisse des assurers maladie et accidents) have fired thefirst broadside in the Canton (state) of Vaud - where they control halfthe health insurance market.The insurance companies have drawn up a list of 11 hospitals andclinics and told clients their premiums will be cut by 10 per cent ifthey go to these places for treatment. If they choose otherestablishments, there will be a surcharge of 40 per cent on theirpremiums. Moreover, COSAMA has told the 11 hospitals and clinics to cuttheir tariffs by 10 per cent, arguing they will gain from getting morepatients at their competitors' expense.The move, however, has run into difficulties. All the establishmentsbelong to the GHRV (Groupement des hopitaux regionaux vaudois) and AVCP(Association vaudoise des cliniques privees), which have urged itsmembers to stick together; otherwise some hospitals and clinics will beforced to close. So far, however, only one of the clinics on theapproved list has agreed to COSAMA's proposal. While it remains to beseen who will win this battle, COSAMA has said it plans to extend thenew policy to other cantons in Switzerland.This action comes when the face of healthcare in Switzerland has beentransformed radically. From 1 January 1996, government subsidies toinsurance companies to hold down premiums were scrapped. One immediateresult has been a huge rise in insurance costs for most families.The companies claim that cutting the subsidies has cost them SFr1.9million ($1.54 million). In addition, they are now obliged to cover thecost of treatment for a variety of illnesses in the public sector,which they claim will cost another SFr1.7 billion. As a result,premiums are increasing typically by 40, even 50 per cent.Lower-income groups will receive subsidies towards their healthinsurance costs, but the responsibility for deciding who is eligiblehas been given to the cantons. There are, however, considerabledifferences in the way the cantons are making their selection. This hasled to demands in parliament for a SFr500 million handout to families.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FRENCH HEALTH INSURERS TO STUDY COST CONTAINMENTPARIS - The state-owned life insurer, Caisse Nationale de Prevoyance,is creating a unit to study cost containment. The unit will analysecosts and treatments to provide the insurer with typical pictures ofvarious diseases and conditions. The intention is to identify whichtreatments are useful and which are not, with a view to offeringclients cheaper but effective cover.The unit will also seek to improve cost effectiveness by verifying theefficacy of treatments and seeking the post-treatment opinion ofpatients. The unit is expected to develop methods that will save moremoney than they cost.According to the insurer, the legal requirements for data protectionand medical secrecy are to be respected by the unit. The study may faceresistance from patients who are accustomed to spending for and seekinghealthcare as they like. Moreover, physicians may not be pleased to seetheir income constrained.The company's director of collective insurances, Patrick Warin, notedthat health insurers were interested in containing healthcare costs,although those that provide supplementary insurance do not pay muchmore than 10 per cent of the total healthcare bill. Because theseinsurers pay the portion of the health bill not covered by thegovernment, they are often accused of encouraging overspending. Headded that insurers also need to contain costs, because governmentdecisions about reimbursement levels directly affect their business.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BURE ACQUIRES PREVIASTOCKHOLM - The Scandinavian venture capital company Bure Ab hascemented its position as Sweden's largest private healthcare servicesprovider in the aftermath of its $25 million acquisition of Previa, ina deal finalised on 14 December. Bure will, following the take-over,merge Previa with the group's other healthcare subsidiary Bygghalsan tocreate a new company with annual revenues in excess of $94 million andwith a 20 per cent share of the rapidly expanding market for privatehealthcare services in Sweden.The new company, Previa Halsan Ab, will specialise in providing pre-employment checks, routine and call-out medical services to companiesin the private and state sectors. Bure has drafted a five-yeardevelopment plan for Previa Halsan under which the company is expectedto increase revenues, through a process of mergers and acquisitions, to$160 million within three years.A similar growth pattern is planned for Bure's General HealthcareDivision, based in Stockholm, and forecast to double its annualrevenues to $806 million over the next three years.In November, Bure acquired a 70 per cent stake in Malardiagnostik Ab, acompany engaged in the operation of private healthcare clinics. Shareswere acquired from the Svrmland District Council. As part of the deal,Bure bought a minority 40 per cent holding in the Svrmland DistrictCouncil owned healthcare centre company Sormlandshalsan. The acquiredassets have annual revenues of $20 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FRENCH ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN HOSPITAL COMPANYCANBERRA - The Australian Treasurer and the country's ForeignInvestment Review Board have approved the purchase by the Frenchconglomerate, Compagnie des Eaux, of a major Australian hospital group.Australian Medical Enterprises owns nine hospitals in New South Walesand Western Australia and 60 per cent of private pathology services inthe latter state.Some disquiet has arisen among some Australian parliamentarians overwhether it is in the national interest that a foreign company, andparticularly a French company, should acquire such a large share of theAustralian health industry. The government was unmoved by thesearguments and rejected the suggestion that approval of the Frenchpurchase had weakened its stand on the French nuclear tests in thePacific.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ARJO UNDER THE SPOTLIGHTSTOCKHOLM - Deliberate errors made in the accounts of the Americansubsidiary of Swedish healthcare and medical equipment group Arjo, hasled to the firing of the US company's chief executive-officer, chieffinancial officer and senior sales personnel. According to an auditconducted by Arjo in November, the sales figures for Arjo Inc, based inMorton Grove, Illinois, were "grossly inflated" by over $6 million,approximating around 10 per cent of the company's total annualrevenues.The audit found that incorrectly invoiced goods were in actualityrelocated to a leasing company owned by Arjo Inc. The discovery hascaused Arjo to revise its profit estimate for 1994. In August, thecompany projected earnings for that year of around $32.5 million. Arjois estimating revenues of $240 million in 1995."The problems encountered with Arjo Inc will mean that we must invest$30 million to restructure the company and get it working the way wewant. This cost will wipe out our profit result for 1995. What we aredoing is cleaning up in Arjo. Order and morality are badly needed inthe company," said Carl Bennet, chief executive officer of Gettinge Ab,which acquired Arjo in a deal worth $130 million last November.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CANADIAN RED CROSS UNVEILS SELF-SUFFICIENT BLOOD STRATEGYVANCOUVER - The Canadian Red Cross has unveiled a strategy to makeCanada self-sufficient in blood plasma in l996. A new state- of-the-artblood collection facility in Thunder Bay Ontario will open as soon asit receives approval from US Food and Drug Administration and theCanadian Bureau of Biologics.The facility is a plasmapheresis centre, where blood is collected fromdonors and centrifuged at bedside into red corpuscle and plasmacomponents. The corpuscles are returned to the donor. The process takestwice as long as the normal 30 minutes for whole blood donation, butthe donor can donate as often as once a week.The Red Cross plans seven such centres across the country, eachenrolling 4,000 donors committed to donate 15 times a year. When thesystem is operational, by the end of l998, it will produce over 400,000litres of plasma annually, the total Canadian requirement.Previously, the Red Cross did plasmapheresis as well as whole bloodcollection at its l7 regional centres. But in July l995, the FDAblocked shipments of "source" plasma collected via plasmapheresisbecause of failure to meet US standards. Thus, the Red Cross had toincrease its use of recovered plasma, from whole blood, which isshipped to the US to meet the terms of an agreement the Red Crosssigned with Bayer Corp 10 years ago.The Canadian Red Cross is building, in partnership with Bayer, a C$300million ($217.4 million) plasma fractionation plant at Bedford, NovaScotia, with Red Cross money and Bayer technology. The joint (non-profit) venture is named the Canadian Red Cross Fractionation Corp(FraCo). Bayer has the right to purchase all surplus fractions and allof Factor VIII. This clotting factor, when purified, is valuable, worthabout C$1.5 million per gram.Critics wonder, in light of these facts, whether the traditionalCanadian system of free donation of blood can continue to provide thevolume needed.Melvyn Green, counsel for the Krever Commission which is inquiring intoblood collection, asked, "Is there not a risk that volunteer donors inCanada will be deterred from donating by the knowledge that their Giftof Life is in fact enriching a for-profit American corporation?" StevenVick, project director for FraCo, admits that if the collection centresdo not get sufficient volunteer donors, payment for plasma donationswill have to be considered.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EU'S 4TH FRAMEWORK HEALTH TELEMATICS PROJECTS SET TO BEGINBRUSSELS - This month work begins by the winners of the EuropeanUnion's Fourth Framework research and development programme. Some 70health sector projects have been selected by the European Commission'sTelematics Applications Programme. Competition was very intense as 235proposals were received in response to the call for proposals whichfirst appeared in December, 1994.Mr Jean-Claude Healy, head of the Health Telematics Unit within theTelecommunications, Information Market and Exploitation of Research(Directorate-General XIII) told IHN that there was an increase in thenumber of proposals received, the number of partners involved and thequality of the work offered. The amount of money requested was 10 timesthe Ecu77 million ($102.8 million) awarded during this first round.Although the winning proposals were known by the end of July 1995,negotiations, which always involved reducing budget requests, were notcompleted until the end of October.The Fourth Framework, 1994-1998, research and development (R&D)programme will provide Ecu12.3 billion for R&D projects in 13 areas ofinterest. The telematics area commanded Ecu843 million, of whichapproximately Ecu135 million  was for the healthcare sector. Mr Healystressed that the Fourth Framework was not an extension of the ThirdFramework's Advanced Informatics in Medicine (AIM) programme which ranfrom 1991-1994. The new work emphasises users, not technology. Projectsare to identify user needs and to deploy and implement technology tomeet those needs. In addition, this Framework is to support projectsfor all Europe, including Eastern countries.The selected projects fall into the following seven broad categories:* Multimedia patient records* Telematics assisted co-operative work for health professionals* Departmental systems and advanced imaging* Integration platforms, continuity of care, regional networks* Telediagnostic, teleconsultation and emergency telemedicine* Information for citizens and health sector professionals* Cohesion, dissemination and exploitation of results, education* For the complete list of projects and the co-ordinator's name,address, telephone, fax and E-Mail address, contact: Michel Richonnier,director Telematics Applications, European Commission DirectorateGeneral XIII, Rue de la Loi 200, Office BU 29 3/47 B1049 Brussels,Belgium.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HEALTH MINISTER OUTLINES POLICY ON IT IN HEALTHCAREAMSTERDAM - The Dutch minister of health, Dr Else Borst-Eilers, duringthe recent AMICE conference, outlined the government's policy oninformation technology (IT) in healthcare for the coming years. Thepolicy has one strategic objective - the integrated electronic patientrecord. The objective is not only to have every patient record of aspecific care-giver computerised, but to merge all care related dataconcerning one individual.The Dutch hope to build on the success it has achieved within theprimary healthcare sector, where 80 per cent of general practitioners(GPs) use automation and 50 per cent use an electronic patient record.Hospitals and specialists, however, need to improve their use ofinformation technology. While all hospitals have some computers,especially in their pharmacies and laboratories, most run legacysystems that obstruct full integration.The strategy is not to develop a huge data repository, but rather touse distributed database technology. Chip cards for both patients anddoctors are to be employed as keys to access data, while enhancing dataprotection and privacy. The Dutch IT policy is based on four pillars:* Integrated electronic care records that use common architecture andopen infrastructures, that will lead to business process redesign andimproved care processes.* Equip areas with sparse computerisation and educate managers andhealth professionals in computer use.* Assurance of data security, privacy, integrity and reliability, aswell as standards, to promote interconnectivity while enhancing theresponsibilities of trusted users.* International co-operation and sharing of information technologymethods and tools.The government believes that improvement in efficiencies will resultfrom using IT smartly, without reducing current standards of quality.Many believe that both quality and efficiency can and will increase. Itis expected that hospitals will be seeking to cut costs and will seeintegrated computerisation as a means to do so. Hospital administratorsare aware that they must become more efficient in order to survivereimbursement cuts and price caps on healthcare bills.The government will provide some research and development money forwork on the integrated patient file and seed money for improvingstandards and data protection. In addition, several Dutch projects arebeing funded by the European Commission's telematics programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DIABCARD TRIAL IN BARCELONABARCELONA - A pilot programme to test the viability of a new data cardfor diabetics has been initiated at Barcelona's Sant Pau Hospital. Some100 patients are participating in the programme, one of the first ofits kind in Europe.The card, called the Diabcard, contains a chip capable of storingrelevant information pertaining to a patient's condition, such asclinical history, current medications, diet restrictions, etc. Thedata's confidentiality is protected by an access code known only to thepatient, a family member and the doctor. Wide use of the card bydiabetics, who number 2.5 million in Spain, would not only benefitparticular patients and hospitals, but also would permit a detailedstudy of the demographics of the condition as well as the comparativecosts of treatment.The pilot test is part of the larger Diabcard project sponsored by theTelematics Applications programme of the European Commission. Phase Iof the project began in 1992 and it has won continued funding in thenew Fourth Framework. The Diabcard chip card uses an open architecture,making it easily integrated into existing information systems andnetworking environments. The chip can store up to eight kilobytes ofdata.* Information about the Diabcard project can be obtained from the co-ordinator, Rolf Engelbrecht, GSF-Forschunszentrum, MEDIS-Institut,Neuherberg, Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Oberschleissheim,Germany.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INFOMIX - A SUCCESS IN HUNGARIAN HEALTHCARE INFORMATICSBUDAPEST - Infomix, the software developer company, represents one ofthe rare success stories in Hungarian healthcare informatics. Thecompany started around 1988, as part of the since dissolved MicrosystemCorp, and was among the first to develop a user oriented applicationfor primary care. In 1995, the company had about 2,800 surgeries asregistered users and sales of over Ft120 million, ($886,132) a 20 percent growth from 1994.Primary care practices in Hungary became equipped with computers,almost exclusively with DOS based PCs, in the early 1990s. Althoughmore than 30 per cent of the about 6,000 physicians' offices own somesort of hardware (mostly outdated 286 or 386 based clones), only aportion of the doctors use the machines in everyday practice. Thenumber of those who use computers has been steadily growing as softwarebecame more user friendly and primary care practices became privatised.Automation in Hungary started in the late 1980s, when all practiceswere part of the local government owned and run healthcare service. Ina series of contracts, PC clones were bought and set up in primary caresurgeries. The Ministry of Welfare agreed to pay for developingsoftware application packages for patient documentation and capitationbased billing for the insurance fund. Although the software wasprovided free of charge to primary care physicians, the computerprogrammes were of little use. Designed by ministry clerks, withoutinput and feedback from the physicians, the three programmes developedwere of little use.At the same time, several profit-oriented software and hardwarecompanies began to develop application packages that fit end userneeds. More than 10 different programmes were on the market in theearly 1990s. A real market situation resulted, with different companiesoffering systems that varied from dBase applications to sophisticatedWindows based programmes. The successful systems offered maintenanceand support services with their software.Infomix was among the early successful companies. The first version ofits user friendly software was launched in 1988 and was bought by 65surgeries, each with multiple users. (In Hungary, it is typical thatgeneral practitioners share their surgeries, working in multipleshifts). An updated version was offered in 1990 and by 1993, the numberof running applications grew to 890. The 2,800 licensed users in 1995are served by a central developer and a maintenance group of full-timeemployees. Infomix has four regional centres in Hungary and a 22-unitdealer web that helps with distribution.The company has followed its success in primary care with thedevelopment of applications for polyclinics where 80 sites are equippedand for dental surgeries with 150 users. Infomix has developed a fewhospital applications and is presently working on software foroccupational health specialists and other providers. The hospitalmarket is one in which the company expects keen competition, as that isexpected to represent the next phase of computerisation within thehealth sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALBERTA TESTS SMART CARDVANCOUVER - A panel of doctors, health administrators and governmentofficials is completing work on a pilot project to provide "smart"medical record cards to residents of one of the Alberta's 17 healthcareregions some time this spring.The card would provide healthcare professionals instant access to apatient's medical history. "I feel [the project] is absolutely criticalfrom a business perspective," said Denis Herard, chairman of the HealthInformation Network Committee, as the panel is known.If adopted province-wide, Herard says, the card could cut 5 per centfrom the province's C$3.5 billion ($2.5 billion) a year of healthcarecharges. Duplication of expensive tests would be minimised, and use ofmultiple prescriptions for the same illness prevented.However, Herard admits the card poses some problems, especially inprotection of patient privacy. "Do you want to have 2.5 million healthhistories walking around the province in wallets and purses?" he asked.Herard favours a pass-key type of card, which would allow healthcareprofessionals to access patient records in a central computer system.However, some members of the panel prefer a card with the patientrecords directly encoded on it. Brian Edy, director of the AlbertaCivil Liberties Association says safeguards must be imposed in areassuch as histories of Aids tests and psychiatric treatment, to preventabuse of the system. The government says the use of "firewall"technology can prevent unauthorised personnel from accessing suchsensitive information. The pilot project has already been approved bythe provincial health department.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE MAKES PROFIT FROM PRIVATE PATIENTSLONDON - Britain's publicly-funded National Health Service (NHS) ismaking a healthy profit from treating private patients, a study by afirm of consultants has found. The study Are Pay-Beds Profitable? byNational Economic Research Associates, found that the NHS was making aprofit of around #290 ($460) for each private patient treated. Theauthors noted that even if hidden costs, such as the cost of trainingdoctors and nurses and unplanned admissions to intensive care weretaken into account, the hospitals would still make a profit of at least#235 per patient.National Economic Research Associates surveyed six NHS hospitals, whichtogether account for more than 10 per cent of dedicated private patientbeds in the NHS. The issue of whether the NHS makes money from privatepatients has long been a controversial one, with the owners ofindependent hospitals arguing that NHS hospitals are competing unfairlyby using NHS funds to subsidise private patient care. The authors ofthe report said that because NHS hospitals now had a 14 per cent shareof the private patient market, it was important to find out whether ornot their private patients were helping to reduce funding problems inthe NHS.David Cavers, the managing director of medical insurers NorwichHealthcare, commented that the NHS was beginning to represent realcompetition for private operators. "[Pay-beds at NHS Trust hospitals]are generally competitively priced so that from an insured customer'spoint of view, the premium saving which this can represent can be verysignificant."* A summary of the report Are Pay-Beds Profitable? is available fromNorwich Union Healthcare, Chilworth House, Templars Way, Eastleigh SO53RY, UK. Price: FreeBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UK ANNOUNCES SPENDING ON HEALTHLONDON - The government has announced that current spending on healthin England will rise #1.3 billion to #31.49 billion ($50 billion) inthe 1996-1997 year. The increase amounts to 1.6 per cent, or #500million in real terms. Current spending on hospital and communityhealth services is to rise by 1.1 per cent in real terms, to #23.18billion.The Secretary of State for Health, Stephen Dorrell, said four areaswould receive priority allocations next year: primary care, researchand development, education and training, and mental health services.Primary care allocations will increase by #9 million or 1.25 per centto support spending by family doctors on practice staff and computingcosts. In addition, almost #39 million will go to support the provisionof out-of-hours services by general practitioners. Mr Dorrell saidspending on family health services as a whole will increase by 3.9 percent in real terms.                  Current NHS spending: England                          (# million)Estimated                         Planned1995-1996           1996-1997     1997-1998   1998-199930,151              31,491        32,396      33,251Funding for research and development will increase by #27 million, to#436 million, to ensure that better healthcare solutions will be"widely disseminated and implemented". Support for education andtraining in the National Health Services (NHS) will rise by #68million, to #1,767 million. Mr Dorrell said that a new "mental healthfund" had also been set up to meet urgent priorities in the developmentof mental health services.The government has told health authorities that they must makeefficiency savings of three per cent, equivalent to #650 million, inthe 1996-1997 year. Mr Dorrell said this target includes plannedsavings of #130 million on management and administration costs at NHStrusts and health authorities.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STUDY SHOWS UK HOSPITAL INTENSIVE CARE NEEDS IMPROVEMENTLONDON - Britain must put more resources into improving standards ofintensive care, according to David Bennett, author of a study on ICUservices in the South West Thames Regional Health Authority. Bennett, areader in intensive care medicine at St George's Hospital MedicalSchool in London, looked at the outcomes for more than 10,000 patientswho were admitted to intensive care beds in the region.Dr Bennett claims that the state of intensive care in the UK comparesunfavourably to other European countries and the US. He says that anaverage of only one to two per cent of beds in Britain were forpatients in intensive care, compared to between four and six per centof beds in most other western countries. The UK spends only #5.90($9.3) per head of population on intensive care compared to #54 ($85)per capita spent by France.Higher mortality ratesThe two year study, Bennett says, showed that patients admitted tointensive care beds in the UK had higher mortality rates than those inthe US.The US spends an estimated #144 per head of population on intensivecare. Dr Bennett comments: "If you go to hospitals in the UnitedStates, it's very obvious [that they spend more]. The facilities arebetter and there are more of them. You don't have to do a scientificstudy to come to that conclusion."Bennett claims that even if the NHS were to increase the number of bedsavailable for seriously ill patients, there would still be too fewstaff with the training to care for them. He argues that a properlyorganised training programme and a formal career structure forintensivists must be developed in order to encourage more doctors intothe speciality.Not all seriously ill patients require intensive care, and Bennettproposes an intermediate level hospital unit. He believes that NationalHealth Service hospitals should introduce high dependency units forpatients who require more care than they would receive in a generalward, but less than that provided in intensive care. "We know thatwe're looking after a substantial number of patients in intensive carewho could be looked after somewhere else; if somewhere else existed."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IRELAND TO PROMOTE EXPORT SALESDUBLIN - Pharmaceuticals and healthcare are among the 10 sectors slatedfor growth by the new programme, "Opportunity Europe". Export salesfrom Irish companies to Europe are expected to increase 17 per cent to#1.45 billion ($230.2 billion) in 1996. If Irish companies takeadvantage of the programme, Board Trachtala believes that Irish exportscould reach #3.2 billion in Europe by the year 2001.Enda Kenny, minister for tourism and trade, said that Irish companieshave turned in an excellent performance on European markets in 1995,#1.25 billion, up 17 percent from 1994. "With continued growth forecastin all major European economies in 1996, Board Trachtala will bespending a record #10 million, its biggest ever promotional campaign inEuropean markets to assist Irish companies to win more business," saidMr Kenny.The Opportunity Europe programme includes: providing financialincentives for Irish companies to establish European sales offices;undertaking business lead projects to identify new business areas;sponsoring more than 40 trade and study missions and sales-supportprogrammes; flying 600 key European buyers to Ireland; and holdingabout 29 regional seminars and workshops in Ireland to brief companieson the European potential.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FRENCH HOSPITAL REFORM REMAINS TO BE DETERMINEDPARIS - The French government's plans for reforming the healthcaresystem have not yet fallen victim either to the social unrest thatswept the country in late November and early December or to theopposition of certain elements of the medical profession. While thegovernment was forced to back down on a number of its proposals forcurtailing the privileges and fringe benefits enjoyed by many publicsector employees, prime minister Alain Juppe is pressing ahead toreform the administration and financing of the social security systemin general and the health system in particular.Hospital reform is currently receiving attention. To advise thegovernment on the best ways and means of streamlining the hospitalsector, an ad hoc Hospital Reform Commission was set up in June, whichsubmitted an interim report in September and its final report at theend of November. The Commission proposals revolve around four mainprinciples: regionalisation of public supervision and funding ofhospitals; evaluation of hospital services (to maintain the mostefficient and eliminate the least cost-effective); setting ofobjectives embodied in contracts negotiated between regional agenciesand individual establishments; and more effective co-ordination betweenpublic and private hospitals.A specific criticism of the proposals as presently conceived is thatthey neither address the problems of the imbalance in funding amonghospitals nor the regional variations in both funding and the provisionof services. The oversupply of hospital facilities might be curtailedto some extent by the elimination of the least efficient services, butthere are no specific measures for eliminating inefficiencies, such asoverstaffing or excessive hospital stays.The fact is that some hospitals perform the same services as otherswith only one-quarter or one-third the number of staff, or keeppatients in hospital after operations only half the time that others dowithout any loss of quality.While most doctors' and healthcare professionals' unions support theseproposed reforms, other organisations are violently opposed to them.Moreover, it is clear that the government has no intention of simplyaccepting all the Commission's recommendations; instead, it is treatingits report essentially as a discussion document.Past mistakesMinisters have apparently learned from past mistakes and are nowseeking to secure a consensus amongst hospital doctors and staff for anagreed programme of reform, aware that it will only work if it has thesupport and co-operation of those who will have to put it intopractice. Herve Gaymard, the health minister, started negotiating withrepresentatives of hospital doctors and staff in December, intimatingfrom the outset that some of the Commission's proposals would not beimplemented, although it is not clear which changes the governmentthinks essential and which it regards as negotiable.This softening of the government's position was greeted with somesatisfaction by hospital doctors' organisations, which think theintroduction of a system of evaluation and certification of hospitalservices will result in the break-up of establishments. They havecalled on the government to reject the Commission's proposals andabandon plans for hospital reform altogether.Hospital doctors are not the only critics of reform; other hospitalstaff are also concerned, since there could be adverse consequences onemployment as a result of the closure of some services andestablishments.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FRANCE SUPPORTS AIDS CAMPAIGNPARIS - The French government will be spending well over FFr5 billion($982.3 million) on fighting Aids in 1996, of which hospital care forAids patients will absorb some FFr4.2 billion. State spending onresearch will top FFr500 million for the first time this year, whileFFr448 million has been allocated to a nation-wide Aids prevention andsupport programme (up from FFr386 million in 1995).Prevention remains the overriding priority of the government and willabsorb FFr264.2 million (59 per cent) of its FFr448-million campaignbudget this year, 14.5 per cent more than in 1995. The other componentsof the government programme are providing home care support (FFr38.4million), reducing risks for drug addicts (FFr50 million) and expandingthe network of free and anonymous HIV testing centres (FFr20.6million). Nearly half of public funding for Aids research in 1996(FFr231 million) is earmarked for the National Aids Research Agency,while the rest will go to a variety of public and privateestablishments.The cost of hospital care for HIV-infected people amounted to FFr3.93billion in 1995 and is expected to amount to FFr4.2 billion in 1996.That sum includes direct credits advanced to hospitals to finance theinstallation and operation of special facilities, services andmedicines for Aids patients. The government had allocated total creditsof just over FFr3 billion in 1995. A further FFr240 million is beingmade available in 1996 specifically to pay for biological testing ofthe "viral load" of Aids patients, which helps doctors track andpredict the development of the HIV virus.An estimated 28,000-30,000 people have died of Aids in France to date,and there are currently some 16,000-17,500 people suffering from thedisease. Altogether, 110,000 people are believed to be HIV-positive inFrance, of which around 63,500 receive some form of medical care,55,000 of them as in-patients or out-patients of hospitals and clinics.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FRANCE INCREASES PACE OF CHANGEPARIS - Having survived the wave of strikes in December, French primeminister Alain Juppe is forcing the pace of legislation to bring healthand social spending into line.His government has already drafted the first two orders designed tocontrol costs and boost revenues for the system. These were sent tointerested parties - such as medical unions and state health and socialsecurity funds - with only a few days to submit comments before an 8January deadline. The orders will be submitted to the president and areexpected to be approved by the Cabinet on the 17th or the 24th January.The legislation will be backdated to 1 January.One of the orders is designed to turn the social security regime aroundfrom a deficit of FFr64.5 billion ($12.9 billion) in 1994 to a surplusof FFr11.7 billion ($2.34 billion) by 1997. Family allowances will befrozen. In addition, doctors' fees in 1996 and 1997 will be set under ageneral regime negotiated by the doctors' unions and the health funds.Such actions are expected to save as much as FFr1 billion.At the same time, a decree published on 21 December has abolished someof the privileges of the doctors operating in "sector 1" (where feesare set). Until now a part of their social security contributions wereborne by the system. Making the physicians pay more should raise someFFr500 million.OppositionThese measures naturally face the opposition of the doctor's unions,although a significant number of doctors do not want to take on thegovernment over its reforms. Social affairs minister Jacques Barrot metwith the leaders of the four largest doctors' associations last week todiscuss spending limits and reimbursement issues, hoping to reach aconsensus.Mr Juppe's target for this year is to let health spending for privatemedical practices, outside hospitals, rise by 2.1 per cent. But sincethe spending last year rose by 7 per cent, instead of the agreed upon3.3 per cent, this year's increase starts from a fairly high base.Mr Juppe's plan also envisages making the pharmaceutical industry payFFr2.5 billion to the social security system. Quite how this might bedone has not been settled yet, but it is probable that companies willpay on three counts. Firstly, the tax on their promotion expenses willrise to 14 per cent from 9 per cent. Secondly, there will be a chargebased on the increase in sales in France; this will take into accountthose companies that contained their costs. Finally, there will be acharge of up to 1.5 per cent of turnover. Smallest companies may berelieved of payment requirements.The second government order concerns the new tax RDS (Remboursement dela dette sociale), which is to be levied at a rate of 0.5 per cent onall income, including most savings income and capital gains. It isestimated that this tax will raise FFr25 billion a year. It is intendedto raise the revenue needed to erase France's social security deficit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EUROPEAN HEALTH MINISTERS SIGNAL TOUGHER ACTION ON ALCOHOLPARIS - Health ministers from 50 European countries have signalledtougher action against the drinks industry by adopting a new EuropeanCharter on Alcohol. The Charter, adopted at a ministerial conferenceorganised by the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Paris in mid-December, is not mandatory on governments, and it remains to be seenwhat many of them will do to implement it. But there is no doubt itwill put the alcohol industry under further pressure and will placemore stringent restrictions in Europe's market.The document calls on WHO's European member states to draw upcomprehensive alcohol policies and to implement programmes such asinfluencing price through taxation, controlling advertising andstopping all ads aimed at young people.The alcohol industry was furious at the way the conference was handled,claiming it was deliberately stage managed in favour of groups callingfor new anti-alcohol measures. Only the Amsterdam Group, a coalition ofleading European drinks producers, was allowed to attend, as observers.Requests from other industry organisations to sit in were flatlyrejected by WHO.A WHO official, Claes Goos, strongly denied that either WHO or theCharter were "neo-prohibitionist" and that WHO was aiming for the"complete elimination of alcohol" in Europe. WHO officials believe thatthe Charter will give a significant political boost to the EuropeanAlcohol Action Plan, approved in 1992, which aims to achieve a 25 percent cut in alcohol consumption across Europe between 1980 and the year2000.There were signs at the conference that some governments are unlikelyto act quickly, despite endorsing the Charter. Mr John Bowis, the UKUnder-Secretary for Health said: "for most people, some [drink] isbetter than none". He was heckled by delegates when he also said: "Ifyou pretend that alcohol is bad, people won't accept the message ofmoderate drinking". The Italian and German representatives also voicedconcern over parts of the Charter.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GERMANY AHEAD OF SCHEDULE ON TRACKING DOCTORS' PRESCRIPTIONSFRANKFURT - Although pharmacists were given until the new year toreport medications and dosages ordered by individual physicians, theywere doing so by the end of October, according to Dr Otfried PSchaefer, Hessen Physicians Association (Kassenaerztliche vereinigung).These reports go to the insurance funds where each doctor's prescribingpattern is examined in relationship to those with similar specialties.If it is believed that a physician is over-prescribing, then the statephysicians association is alerted. The associations send warnings tothose doctors who are ordering over 25 per cent more than theircolleagues. If corrective action is not taken, the doctor will have topay for the excess drugs ordered.The smart cards that have been given to all Germans covered bystatutory insurance funds and the readers given to all physicians havefacilitated the reporting requirement. Moreover, pharmacists are givena small stipend for each bill sent (less than 1 cent). Privateinsurance companies will also distribute smart cards to their customersduring 1996.The statutory insurance companies paid a total of DM410 million ($282million) for developing the smart card project, issuing 72 millioninsurance memory chip cards to the insured and granting 160,000 doctorsand dentists money to purchase card readers. The government expectsthat these new cards and the requirement that physician associationsbill the insurance companies electronically will save DM2-3 billion ayear. However, Dr Schaefer claims that he is not aware of any cost-benefit analysis that has taken place.The smart card project is also credited with encouraging doctors tocomputerise their offices. At the end of September 1995, over 60 percent of all doctors in Germany were using computers for administrativework and for medical documentation. In some regions, close to 80 percent of doctors have computers. The use of computers is expected toaccelerate, as next month doctors will be required to place ICD-10diagnostic codes on all bills.Physicians are aware that such information will permit reviews of theirtreatment and prescribing patterns. While they are not pleased by thisprospect, they are further angered that they are expected to foot theentire bill so that such data are provided. Dr Schaefer told IHN thatover DM700 million for computerisation has been absorbed by the doctorsand another DM700 million will be spent before everyone is on-line.Efforts are being made to ensure that there is interoperability betweencomputers and the software doctors use. However, Dr Schaefer notes thatthe physicians have not been offered discounts or government allowancesto encourage them to follow the standards that have been worked aboutby the insurance companies and the physicians associations. Rather, thedoctors are being told the standards that they must follow in billingand reporting and compliance is expected.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRANSPLANT LAW FOR GERMANY AT LAST?BONN -- There is a good chance that in 1996 Germany will finally have alaw dealing with organ transplants. The health ministry has prepared aproposal that is supported by the Christian Democrat/Liberal majority,as well as most members of the Social Democrat opposition. The Germanstates have also been involved and are expected to give their consentto the proposed law.Germany is one of the few countries in Europe without a transplant law.Some 15 years ago, an unsuccessful attempt was made to introduce an"opting out" bill, which implied that everyone is an organ donor unlesshe/she specifically refuses to be one. Thereafter, the transplantcommunity derived a strict code of rules that included an "opting in"solution. The wishes of the deceased were to be followed, or if notapparent (for example, by a donor card), decisions by relatives.Passionate public discussionAlthough the proposed law follows current practise, it has stirred uppassionate public discussion and a great deal of media attention,especially about brain death as a secure sign of death. A group oftheologists and doctors claim that brain dead patients are not dead,but are dying. They feel that the process of dying must not bedisturbed by organ procurement, unless the dead person himself hadgiven consent to organ donation after brain death. Relatives should notbe able to give consent by proxy.The Green Party has proposed a law that contains this argument. At apublic hearing last summer in Bonn, however, transplant surgeons madeit clear that transplantation would be entirely given up, unless braindeath was legally acknowledged as death.Currently there are about 2,000 kidney transplants performed per yearin Germany, with 9,000 patients on the waiting list. About 500 liversand 500 hearts are transplanted each year, but twice as many are neededto help all waiting patients. For the past 26 years, Germany hasexchanged organs via Eurotransplant in Leiden (Netherlands) withAustria, Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg.It was hoped that a transplant law would provide legal security tothose involved in organ donation and serve to promote organtransplantation. So far the proposed legislation has proven to becounterproductive. Public discussion and the apprehensive attitudes ofdoctors and nurses have contributed to a decline in the number of organdonations in 1994. Figures for 1995 are to be published soon and areexpected to be slightly higher.In January, the transplant law will be introduced into the Bonnparliament, where further hearings and discussion will be held. It hasbeen agreed that party discipline will not be maintained and that eachmember can follow his/her own conscience in respect to the criticalpoints of brain death and consent by proxy.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ITALY DRASTICALLY CUTS 1996 SPENDING FOR PHARMACEUTICALSROME - In a surprise and hotly contested move, the Italian parliamenthas passed a law forcing further drastic reductions in state spendingon medicines for 1996. Parliament, while debating the government's 1996Finance Bill (IHN 6,November 1995, page 1) attached a late amendmentstipulating that, although the government will continue to reimbursethe full cost of medication for life-threatening and chronic illnessthrough the so-called Class A Medicines and one-half for lesserailments (Class B). The payment for both categories will be based onthe most economic medicine available for cures.Until now, reimbursement covered the varying prices of medicines andwas not pegged to the cheapest drug. The new law also stipulates thatdoctors prescribing medicines in the two categories are to informpatients that government reimbursement will be equivalent to the priceof the most economic medication.The parliament acted a few days after the Italian government wrote offthe cost overrun of L700 billion ($43.1 million) for subsidisedmedicine in 1995. The Finance Bill for 1995 had set a ceiling of L9,000billion for subsidised medicine, but it was apparent within months thatthe cap could not be maintained for the year. The government's self-imposed limit was also breached in 1994. Despite these overruns, and noexpectation that costs for medicines will be reduced, the governmenthas retained the L9,000 ceiling for 1996.Italy's slumping pharmaceutical industry registered a wave of protests.It claims that all Class A and B medicines that cost more than thecheapest ones will be forced into Class C, which does not receive anygovernmental reimbursement. This may render the drugs no longermarketable.Italy's pharmaceutical industry association, Farmindustria, threatenedto pull out of the National Health Service, without specifying how, orif, it could be achieved.In a minor compensation, prices of Class A and B medicines are expectedto increase between 2.6 and 5 per cent in 1996. It is also expectedthat Class C drugs, which are unregulated by the government, will havesimilar increases. The rise will be less than the rate of inflation,which is around 6 per cent annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ITALIANS CONSULT TRAVEL AGENTS FIRST WHEN TAKEN ILLROME - Increasing numbers of Italians are going abroad, particularly toneighbouring France, for healthcare services. Unavailability of someservices and perceptions that health services abroad are superior arereasons given by the estimated thousands who are called "healthrefugees" or "health migrants". The numbers give validity to claimsthat when some Italians fall seriously ill, they consult not only theirdoctors but also their travel agents.In 1993, the latest official Ministry of Health figures indicate thatthe National Health Service (NHS) owed L216 billion ($133 million) toits EU partners for services rendered to Italian citizens abroad. Thisincluded L204 billion to France, L10 billion to Belgium and L1.2billion to the UK. The amount for care abroad, however, has balloonedsince then. For example, the 1994 amount has been estimated as L481billion.A Ministry of Health study, based on 7,000 authorisations issuedbetween 1990 and 1993, indicates that some 2,300 persons went abroadfor cancer treatment, 1,500 for transplants, close to 1,000 forneurological care (including surgery) and 800 for treatments of heartdiseases. The exact number of "health migrants" is not known, but it isbelieved to be in the tens of thousands a year, including those who by-pass the NHS and bear the entire cost.The consensus is that the "health migrants" are forced to leave Italybecause waiting lists are too long, as adequate services are lacking.Scarcity of transplant organs is identified as a major problem inItaly; of some 3,500 needs a year, availability is put at 1,300. Inaddition, cardiac by-pass surgery waiting lists are from six to eightmonths in Milan, Rome and Naples.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AUSTRIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION OFFERS REFORM PROPOSALSVIENNA - the Austrian Medical Association (Arztekammer) has issued areport that passes a devastating judgement on the country's healthcareprogramme. The healthcare system is characterised by an overblownbureaucracy and expensive care, both of which are responsible for thesystem's financial crisis.The association argues that more out-patient care is needed along withreform of hospital financing. The healthcare programme should onlyapply to basic medical care, although persons with high, long-term andsocial problems should not be excluded from care. A cap related toincome should be applied and those who earn more than the cap should beable to choose among health insurers.Patients, except for the needy, should pay 20 per cent of theirhealthcare costs. High risk activities such as those associated withsports and leisure activities should be insured separately. In general,local medical care, rather than major healthcare centres, should beencouraged.Additionally, the association views healthcare facility administrationas a major problem in need of resolution. For example, Vienna's vastgeneral hospital (AKH) is operated by both the federal and citygovernments instead of having its own administration."We doctors have no control, we're not, as the public thinks, thecaptains, not even the first officers of the medical flagship AKH. Wedon't have the possibility to control the AKH", argues one universityprofessor.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WHO CASH CRISIS DEEPENSGENEVA - Some World Health Organisation (WHO) programmes are likely tobe transferred from Geneva and more job losses are expected, as theorganisation's cash crisis looks set to worsen this year.Between 140-150 posts at headquarters were eliminated in 1995 becauseof a $54 million shortfall in WHO's two year $842 million regularbudget. Another 50 posts are expected to be cut during 1996, and it isrumoured that a provisional "hit list" of posts to go has been drawn upalready.WHO's budget, suffering badly because of problems in getting the US topay its contributions, faces further uncertainty and possibly seriousbody blows. There are doubts, for example, about whether Russia andUkraine, two other big contributors, will pay anything this year.As well as cutting more posts, WHO officials have also launched anurgent study into relocating programmes or parts of programmes out ofheadquarters to places with a lower cost of living. The effect of thiswould be to change WHO radically - into a network, with just a smallkernel of people remaining in Geneva mainly to interact with other UNagencies.A full report on WHO's cash crisis will be given to its executive boardthis month. Director-general Dr Hiroshi Nakajima is expected to callfor a rethink in the way countries' contributions to WHO are assessed.At present, 20 contributors provide 80 per cent of its budget. He isalso likely to say that WHO must find new, long-term solutions forsupporting its programmes, including developing new partnerships withthe private sector.Meanwhile, morale remains low at WHO headquarters, where staff havebeen bitterly critical of Dr Nakajima's handling of the crisis.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNAIDS STARTS UP AMID DOUBTSGENEVA - The international community's latest effort to get to gripswith the global Aids epidemic, UNAids, started up on 1 January amiddoubts about its likely effectiveness or real value. UNAids is a jointventure among six United Nation (UN) agencies: the World HealthOrganisation (WHO); the UN Educational, Scientific and CulturalOrganisation; the UN Children's Fund; the UN Development Programme; theUN Population Fund; and the World Bank.Located in Geneva, UNAids replaces WHO's Global Programme on Aids(GPA), which attracted wide criticism for being over-staffed, wastingresources and achieving few concrete results. While UNAids will have amuch smaller staff than GPA and most of them will be working outsideGeneva, it will cover essentially the same ground: identifying `bestpractice' policies for prevention and care, providing technical supportto national governments, advocacy and co-ordination. It will also haveroughly the same budget as GPA, between $120-$140 million a year.UNAids will give about 50 per cent less funds to national Aidsprogrammes than GPA, however. Governments are supposed to make up thedifference, but this is thought doubtful.Although Dr Peter Piot was appointed the programme's executive directorin December 1994, staff have not yet been recruited. GPA staff, due tolose their jobs with its shut down, have been switched temporarily tothe UNAid's payroll. There is concern about relations between UNAidsand WHO, which is keeping a Division on Aids and Sexually TransmittedDiseases.Sceptics also question whether the new programme is really needed,especially in light of WHO's alleged failures. They point out that DrPiot has admitted that "there is an agenda here of UN reform that'salso behind this programme. We will show that it is possible in the UNwith a lean operation to be efficient and effective". Critics claimthat UNAids is an exercise in trying to show the UN in a better light.Supporters, however, argue that the UN and its agencies cannot washtheir hands of the Aids problem. They say that UNAids will bring someurgently needed streamlining and co-ordination of the UN's activitiesand will do so with fewer staff and more cost effectiveness.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SPAIN FINDS 1996 FULL OF HEALTH SYSTEM PROBLEMSMADRID - As 1996 begins, Spain's public health sector is faced with ahost of woes, including debt, fraud, internal dissension and the stillunresolved problems resulting from the two-month long physician'sstrike.Problems include:* Hospitals throughout the country are up to two years behind inpayments to various companies which supply them with goods andservices. The suppliers have threatened on numerous occasions to haltdeliveries and suspend services if the situation doesn't improve. Theservice supplier's association FENIN claims that the late payments area serious problem, especially for smaller suppliers, and has proposed 1February as the new deadline for the threatened stoppage of supplydelivery. The association also has plans to denounce the situationbefore the European Community.* The ministry of health has made public its concern at the steep riseover the last 10 years of absenteeism in the workplace due to illness.Workplace illness has tripled costs for the public health sector. In1995, it cost the government Pta466 billion ($3.72 billion) to pay fortemporary incapacities, up from Pta376 billion five years ago. Theministry attributes much of this increase to insufficient control ofdiagnoses by physicians, a charge strongly denied by the profession.* Spain's 4,500 substitute doctors, temporarily employed by thecountry's health system but without fixed contracts, are beginning toprotest against layoffs among their ranks due to the return to duty ofcontracted physicians who have been on long-term sabbaticals. Severalhundred of Madrid's 1,300 substitute doctors, many who have worked foryears without a contract, have begun small-scale protests at thelayoffs at several of the city's hospitals, and the national body whichrepresents them is in the process of deciding whether to support themwith widespread actions. The state health agency, Insalud,characterised the substitute physicians fears as exaggerated.* Still pending in negotiations between Insalud and the physiciansunion after an accord was reached to end last spring's strike areagreements on many important topics, among them: the amount of payincreases for 1997 and following years (salaries for 1996 had beenagreed on in the original negotiations); the increased role of doctorsin hospital management reform; the situation of substitute physicians;and new standards for university medical degrees.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NORWEGIAN DOCTORS FAVOUR PRIVATISATIONOSLO - Den norske Laegeforening (DnL) has formed a special workinggroup to promote the representative organisation's case for the phased-privatisation of out-patients centres attached to Norway's state runhospitals and clinics."Our case is that under a privatised structure, these out-patientcentres could achieve a higher level of product and give a better all-round service. As it stands, they are poorly managed with lowefficiency rates. Privatisation is essential if they are to reach theirfull potential," said DnL's chairman Hans Petter Aarseth. At issue areover 200 out-patient centres which generated annual revenues of $317million in 1994 and are forecast to show a 4 per cent rise in turnover,adjusted for inflation, in 1995."Privatisation would have the added-effect of improving workingconditions, reducing work-loads for doctors and nurses, while pavingthe way for better wages for medical personnel. Under the plan we areadvocating, doctors would work one to two days every week at out-patient centres, taking care of their own patients," said Mr Aarseth."These centres must move with the times. Why should qualified doctorswho has gone through eight years of medical training want to work for abasic annual salary of $29,000, when they could earn three times asmuch in private healthcare," said Mr Aarseth. Medical staff assigned tothe out-patient centres are, according to Mr Aarseth, "battle weary",and are fully behind the DnL's drive to lobby government action on theprivatisation issue. "Doctors are tired of struggling through outdatedsystems, while younger doctors and specialists do not want to work forstate-operated medical centres. Along with this we have lengtheningqueues of increasingly exasperated patients," he said.The DnL recently published a highly critical report detailing the lowperformance levels at state-managed out-patients centres. The reportfound that centres were "too bureaucratic", under-staffed and run in adisorganised fashion". The report concludes that state-run hospitalsare not designed or equipped to operate out-patients centres. "This isa conclusion we reach every day. These institutions are simply too bigand bureaucratic," said Mr Aarseth."A patient attending a state out-patient centre for a check-up inNorway is not met by a doctor, but by a huge bureaucracy, in which heor she will see a doctor unfamiliar with their case or condition.Records are often missing, and time is wasted as the relevant files arelocated. This is not something that happens only on rare occasions. Itis a routine event at state-managed centres," said Mr Aarseth.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FDA FLOODED WITH RESPONSES TO PROPOSED CIGARETTE RULINGROCKVILLE, MD - The US Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) DocketsManagement Branch was a site to behold on 2 January 1995, the last dayfor comments on FDA's proposed rule to restrict minors' exposure andaccess to tobacco advertisements and products. The branch had received59,992 comments on the proposed rule that appeared in the FederalRegister, 11 August 1995."We have filled three aisles and 3,688 files with the comments, notincluding the 32 cartons of comments received from tobacco companiesand their attorneys," a manager of the branch told IHN. "The totaltally will be far more than 60,000 comments and 4,000 files, as wehaven't received many documents that were postmarked 2 January," shecontinued. "I have been here over 20 years and this is the most that Ihave ever seen."The proposed rule and its supporting documents fill a folder. Studieshave been reproduced with lengthy footnotes to support the actionproposed by the FDA. The administration asserts that cigarettes are adrug delivery device and therefore is subject to the jurisdiction ofthe FDA. The rule claims that tobacco companies should be required tofund $150 million per year in advertising campaigns that warn childrenof the health dangers of smoking.Various restrictions are proposed on tobacco company advertising thatis accessible to minors. Additionally it proposes to ban cigarettesales from vending machines. The FDA estimates that the cost of therule to tobacco manufacturers will be $230 million annually over 15years, while the benefits are estimated to be between $2.9 billion to$4.3 billion, primarily in lives saved.Responses to the proposed rule were received from a variety of people.School children and groups opposed to cigarette smoking sent pages ofcomments. Form letters were received from owners of grocery stores,provided by the Retail Grocers Association, and from people whoattended health fairs. Civil libertarians opposed another area ofgovernment infringement of personal rights, and state legislators,especially from tobacco growing areas, were aghast at federal powerenhancement. In addition, 32 US senators wrote urging the FDA toabandon the proposal.The cigarette industry waited until the last day of comment to deliverits response. Five companies and the Tobacco Institute, assisted bymajor law firms, prepared a joint response to the ruling. In addition,they have challenged the ruling in court, claiming that the FDA hasexceeded its legal authority in proposing to regulate cigarettes. Theindustry asserts that neither the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act nor the1976 medical device amendments grant FDA statutory authority toregulate cigarettes.The Philip Morris Company's Philip Morris US unit, BAT Industries PLC'sBrown & Williamson unit, Brooke Group Ltd's Ligget Group unit, RJRNabisco Holdings Corporation's RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company unit andLoews Corporation's Lorillard Tobacco Company unit assert that nicotinedoes not fit the legal definition of a drug and its effects do not fitthe legal definition of addiction. Moreover, they claim that the FDAbased its rule on secret documents and confidential industry papers.The tobacco companies were assisted in preparing their response of 12volumes of 2,000 pages and appendices of 40,000 pages by lawyers fromsuch prestigious firms as Arnold & Porter, Wiley, Rein & Fielding,Covington & Burling and others.The industry's estimated costs of the ruling differs significantly fromthat of the FDA. It claims that the rule will cost manufacturersbetween $748 million to $1.5 billion in one-time costs and $1.25billion annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS RISEWASHINGTON, DC - Jury Verdict Research, Inc reports that the US medianmedical malpractice jury award in 1995 was $500,000, some 40 per centhigher than 1994. The number of $1 million awards increased to 35 percent of the verdicts. Responses from other groups indicate that 70 percent of malpractice claims filed against doctors do not result inpayment. Those that go to trial, however, result in 80 per cent decidedin favour of the defendant.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALBERTA WILL NOT CUT DOCTOR FEESVANCOUVER - The province of Alberta has dropped its demand for a C$50million cut in doctors' healthcare billings. In its final meetingbefore Christmas, the cabinet agreed to freeze doctors' fees at currentlevels for the next three years. The province presently pays doctorsC$736.7 million ($533.8 million) annually.The decision ends nine months of wrangling between the government andthe Alberta Medical Association. Ontario, however, appears headed for asimilar clash with the healthcare givers. Its controversial omnibusBill 26 would give the minister of health unilateral power to fund,shut or merge hospitals, as part of an arsenal of budget-tighteningmeasures.As well, the Bill would set up a provincial agency to inspect medicaland billing practices. It could terminate a doctor's right to practice,bypassing the Ontario Medical Association. So far the Bill is stillwielding its bumpy way through the legislature, with stiff oppositionfrom all affected groups.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEXICO PLANS TO EXTEND HEALTHCAREMEXICO CITY - Mexico's president, Ernesto Zedillo, unveiled plans toprovide healthcare services to remote areas and to expand service tothe country's poor. The stabilised economy and expected 1996 growthwill free resources to support the healthcare plan, claimed Zedillo."This package will be an essential component of the strategy with whichwe propose to widen the coverage of health services to the most distantparts of the country, to those places which until now have not hadthese essential services," Zedillo said in a speech to Mexican nurses.The government plans to implement a 12 point plan that will havedoctors and other health providers man health brigades and mobilehealth units.Additionally, the government plans to improve health services to theneedy. These efforts will include: expanding vaccination programmes;increasing access to family planning methods; improving basic homehygiene, monitoring child nutrition; increasing care to pregnant women;and enhancing prevention and treatment of illnesses associated withpoverty.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996JAPANESE GROUP TO FIGHT MALPRACTICETOKYO - A new group, Society for the Study of Medical Safety, wasfounded in Japan on 9 December 1995. Its aim is to identify dangerousmedical practices, learn from Western medical systems and exchangeinformation through seminars. The group's founders include lawyers,medical professionals and citizen groups."Through these activities, we hope in the near future to draw upguidelines and make suggestions to medical circles on how medicalworkers can avoid accidents", the Society's founder, lawyer YoshioKato, stated in an interview with a leading daily, The Japan Times.Plaintiffs win only about one-third of the 400 to 500 malpractice suitsfiled in Japan each year, and Kato blames these low figures on the lackof transparency of Japan's medical system. "Under the legal system,patients or their families who have almost no access to medicalinformation are obliged to prove malpractice that often occurs behindthe closed doors of operating rooms." This task is exacerbated by atendency among healthcare workers to cover up malpractice, he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996JAPAN PROPOSES TO REDUCE PHARMACEUTICAL SPENDINGTOKYO - The Japanese government continues to look for ways to controldrug spending, as it prepares for its biennial evaluation andreconstruction of the National Health Insurance (NHI) Drug Price List.The Central Social Insurance Medical Council (CSIMC), responsible formaking recommendations to the government on healthcare prices, has metand made proposals for establishing the next drug price list, scheduledto be published in April, 1996.In Japan, ethical drugs are reimbursed according to the NHI Drug PriceList. The prices of drugs are calculated on a weighted average method.A price is set by adding a given percentage of the current price to theweighted average price of all packaged market prices by brand. Thensome adjustment amount is added to this price to set the new NHI drugprice.While this method sounds complicated, and itis, the outcome since 1981 has been a reduction in drug prices. Thetable below is illustrative.               NHI drug price reductions                                  Per centYear                              reduction1981                              18.61983                               4.91984                              16.61985                               6.01986                               5.11988                              10.21990                               9.21992                               8.11994                               6.6Source: Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers AssociationThe CSIMC made several proposals that could be implemented by April,such as setting the price lower for drugs whose market size hasexpanded. A suggestion that new methods for price calculation was alsosubmitted. In addition, a subcommittee of the CSIMC issued a report inNovember that included various suggestions to reduce drug spending. Thesuggestions ranged from debating the necessity of the drug price listto paying doctors and hospitals for dispensing prescription drugs on acapitation basis.Additionally, the bonus scheme for introducing innovative new drugs wasdiscussed. Currently, drugs that are entirely new or that clearly offersafer and more effective treatment can earn premiums of 10 to 30 percent on the drug price. Those drugs that are similar to an existingmedication but are scientifically proven to be either more effective orsafer can be permitted a premium from 1.5 to 4.5 per cent, the samerange percentage as orphan drugs.The proposals to contain costs by changing the scheme for new drugsthat were similar to products already on the market faced strongopposition from the pharmaceutical industry and was postponed. Theindustry was concerned that the effect of the proposals would diminishJapan's current drug market, valued at Y6 trillion ($62.8 billion), thesecond largest in the world, by 10 per cent. It seems, however, theloss will be less than Y100 billion.The recommendations concerning prescription drugs represent only aportion of the suggestions from the CSIMC to cut healthcare spending.It is expected that this year the Ministry of Health and Welfare willbegin to adopt many of the CSIMC proposals for cost containment.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TAIWAN'S NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE IN JEOPARDYTAIPEI - The dawn of the new year marked the one-year anniversary ofTaiwan's National Health Insurance Bureau (NHIB). In a speechcelebrating the occasion, NHIB general manager Yeh Ching-chuan warnedthat the plan was in jeopardy of going bankrupt within the next threeyears if proper changes are not made to increase efficiency anddecrease costs within the plan.Mr Yeh said the National Health Insurance Plan will be changed to boostefficiency and win public confidence. The government wants to contractsome of the administrative duties to the private sector to decreaseexpenses, while maintaining supervision over the entire plan.Another move will be to increase the costs for patients visitinghospital emergency rooms without first consulting a local doctor. This,Mr Yeh said, would deter people from visiting hospitals when they aresuffering from minor ailments.Tests and treatment involving high-tech equipment such as ultra-soundwill be charged to the patient as opposed to being covered under theplan. The bureau, however, plans to ease fees for those patientssuffering from serious chronic illnesses requiring regular treatment.The health plan has been under fire from the government's mainopposition party as well as large corporations that complain of theplan's convoluted regulations and the high premiums companies arerequired to pay per employee covered under the plan.A recent survey showed that only half the respondents were satisfiedwith the new health plan. About a third of those questioned said theywere "very unhappy" with the plan.Mr Yeh said it was possible to get the nation's insurance planoperating in a way that is acceptable to most people, and said thebureau would work to solve problems caused by human error, waste orcorruption. People will gradually warm to the idea of the new healthplan, he said, but it will take time.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEDICAL BENEFITS COMPENSATION LEGISLATION PROPOSEDCANBERRA - The Australian government has introduced legislation torecover taxpayer-funded Medicare or nursing home benefits payments forinjuries or diseases for which the injured persons are compensatedthrough common law remedies, workers compensation, third party orgeneral insurance. The practice is referred to as "double dipping".The scheme essentially revolves around insurers notifying the HealthInsurance Commission of a claim. The Commission then works out how muchit is owed for Medicare and nursing home benefits and after thesettlement of the insurance claim takes place, the insurer pays thatsum to the federal government. The insurer then pays the remainder ofthe insurance settlement to the claimant.Although in principle opposed to double dipping, the parliamentaryopposition parties have nonetheless opposed the amending bills on thefundamental point that the "cure for the double dipping problem firstproposed by the government is worse in fact than the disease".The opposition parties argue that the A$40 million ($29.9 million) orso per year that the government estimates it will save for the taxpayerwill be almost totally swallowed up by the cost of the administrativemachinery operated by the Health Insurance Commission, insurancecompanies and other compensation payers.The most contentious feature of the government proposed moves againstdouble dipping is the administration fee imposed on compensation payersto make the government reform self-funding. In reality, argues theopposition, this is an industry tax imposed on insurers, be theygeneral, third party, work cover or workers' compensation. In effect,it is shifting to these insurers the cost of what is effectively afunction of government - collecting the revenue.Furthermore, doctors, lawyers and insurers have all expressed concernsabout the proposed legislation. The Law Council, for example, believesthat the requirement for the Health Insurance Commission to be notifiedof the various stages of the claims process will just wreak havoc inthe areas of personal injury and workers' compensation. It alsoforesees complicated disputes about what benefits are associated withthe injury or condition for which compensation is being sought. TheInsurance Council of Australia says the burdens imposed by thesedisputes could cost claimants and insurers as much as A$30 millionannually.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA AMEND MEDICAL PRACTITIONER LAWSWELLINGTON/SYDNEY - New Zealand has completed a comprehensive overhaulof its laws on medical practitioners, while Australia has completedminor changes designed to prevent doctors from circumventing the ruleson claiming under its Medicare system. This includes tightening thedefinition of medical practitioner.The New Zealand legislation devolves more powers to the Medical Councilin deciding whether to register doctors and leaves it to the Council todecide whether it will recognise overseas medical training forregistration purposes. Doctors trained in the UK, Ireland, Canada,Australia and South Africa previously had a quasi-automatic right inlaw to registration in New Zealand. They will lose this, althoughAustralian-trained doctors will not in practice notice a change, asthere are already mutual recognition arrangements in place between theMedical Councils of Australia and New Zealand.The legislation also allows the Council to withhold or attachconditions to practising certificates where there are doubts about adoctor's competence. It gives the Council the right to require amedical practitioner to submit to a medical examination or otherwiseact if it has evidence that the practitioner is not physically ormentally fit to practice and substitutes vocational registration (ie,including GP's) for specialist registration.Australia's Human Services and Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No 2)1995 incorporated changes to the Health Insurance Act and the NationalHealth Act. The changes to the Health Insurance Act stop doctors whohave temporary registration or who are occupational trainees billingthe Medicare scheme for services provided "on behalf" of anotherpractitioner. This is a breach of their visa and registrationconditions but has been difficult to detect.The changes to the National Health Act increase patients' liability forco-payments amounts under Australia's universal healthcare scheme,Medicare. Previously out-of-hospital medical services were free oncepatients had totalled A$400 ($298.5) in co-payments in any one year.From 1 January 1996, this has become A$600. The co-payment amount isgenerally around 15 per cent of the cost of a consultation ortreatment. (All hospital treatment is free.)Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND ADDS MONEY TO CUT WAITING LISTSWELLINGTON - The New Zealand government has budgeted an additionalNZ$30 million ($20 million) to manage waiting list backlogs as aprelude to introduction of booking systems and a guaranteed maximumwait of six months for elective surgery. The money to cut waiting listsis for the year beginning 1 July 1996. It will be directed particularlyat ophthalmology, orthopaedics and urology.The policy objective is to have waiting lists for non-urgent surgical,medical or diagnostic procedures replaced by booking systems based onclinical priority by 1 July 1997. Patients will either be booked for aprocedure to occur within six months or be directed back to theirprimary care practitioner for continuing management.Management of waiting times is one of two priorities in policyguidelines for regional health authorities published at end-November1995. The other is mental health. Key issues in mental health aregreater availability of methadone treatment and implementation ofindividual service plans, including discharge plans for mental healthpatients.Additional funding has also been allocated to essential dental care forlow income groups, breast cancer control, tobacco control andreproductive and sexual health. In the year starting 1 July 1996, theregional health authorities will receive an additional NZ$22 million($14.5 million) for these programmes. Total funding is NZ$5.126 billion($3.3 billion).A review of tertiary services was published at the same time as thepolicy guidelines, indicating preferred options in terms of the numberof centres for bone marrow transplants, cardiac surgical services,liver and kidney transplants, neonatal intensive care, neurosurgicalservices, oncology services and spinal cord injury rehabilitationservices.The recommendations are based on the premise that the data on which therationale for concentration of tertiary services "is not strong enoughto conclude that bigger is necessarily better for tertiary services inNew Zealand". The Committee which reviewed tertiary services concludedthat it is possible to have a greater number of smaller tertiaryservice centres providing good quality patient care in a cost-effectiveway which is reasonably in close proximity to patients and theirfamilies.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SOUTH AFRICA HEALTH REFORMS TO CURTAIL DRUG SALESJOHANNESBURG - Health minister Nkosazana Zuma has drafted a healthreform plan that has infuriated drug companies. The reforms thatinclude controls on the sale, price and reimbursement for drugs arenecessary, Zuma claims, to address the inequities of the health systemthat resulted from apartheid.The plan, that is expected to be presented to the cabinet soon,includes such measures as: establishing a national committee to monitorand regulate drug prices; creating a national essential drug list thatwill restrict the number of drugs available in the public sector, withextension to the private arena at a future date; requiring that genericdrugs be substituted for brand name medications in the public andprivate sectors; and promoting parallel importation of drugs fromoutside the country, beginning with high volume essential drugs. Theproposals stem from a government commission report that claims if anessential drug list reduced the number of medications available from3,000 to 200-500, the country would save about R500 million.The South African drug industry, worth R5.5 billion ($1.5 billion),warns that such plans will have severe negative affects, discourageresearch and development and discourage international drug companyinvestments. The country's pharmaceutical manufacturers associationclaims that the measures are tantamount to nationalisation and thatprice controls have been ineffective and unworkable in other countriesthat have tried them.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HUNGARIAN DRUG COMPANIES HOLD STEADY IN SPITE OF COMPETITIONBUDAPEST - Hungarian pharmaceutical companies are getting a handle onfierce competition from multinational drug giants who have establisheda presence in the country since 1990. The companies that have performedbest on the ex-COMECON drug market have not increased their brand nameofferings, but have developed the marketing infrastructure to retaintheir strength.Drug sales in Hungary in 1995 were about $650 million, or about $64 perperson per year. Expenditures for medications account for 39 per centof the total healthcare costs, $166 per person annually. Government andinsurance officials agree that drug costs are unsustainable and havetried different techniques to limit the growth in drug sales.Between 1990 and 1994, the number of brand drugs offered to Hungarianshas increased by 65 per cent, almost all accountable to foreigncompanies. The country's liberal drug registration has resulted in amarket saturated with medications not significantly different from oneanother. For example, 29 different drugs containing paracetamol are onthe market and another 51 preparations are being considered forregistration.The Hungarian pharmaceutical companies are making efforts that seemsuccessful, in stabilising their position in the home market. Duringthe past few years, all the major firms have completed or areundergoing privatisation. With little experience in direct marketing,efforts have focused on developing a western style marketing structure,with concentrated marketing strategies aimed at physicians.Drug companies have been able to stay aloftDespite relative internal market losses, the Hungarian pharmaceuticalindustry has been able to stay aloft in contrast with heavy losses inother industries facing the international market. Pharmaceuticalcompanies were among the first shareholder businesses to appear on theBudapest Stock Exchange and their success is illustrated by thefollowing stocks on the market.* Richter, the biggest pharmaceutical company closed a favourable firsthalf year in 1995 by doubling its previous half year production toaround Ft4.7 billion ($347million). Stock prices rose between November1994 and November 1995 about 80 per cent which significantly exceededinflation (below 30 per cent during this time period).* Human Rt produces, among other products, Naksol, a preparation forthe treatment of burns. The company was introduced to the stock marketin July 1995 with initial prices about 115 per cent of its nominalvalue. In September, there was a corrective lowering of the stockprice.* Egis finished privatisation in August, when the last 28 per centowned by the State Privatising Agency was sold to Natwest. The initialoffering brought Ft1.5 billion, the largest in the history of the newBudapest Stock Market. The initial stock price of Ft2,625 gained 31 percent within five months to the current price Ft3,445.* Pharmavit, selling generic drugs and vitamins, had stock prices thatfluctuated between Ft3,750 and 6,000 throughout the autumn.Two other pharmaceutical companies, Alkaloida and Biogal, areundergoing a gradual privatisation process and are not yet on theregistered stock market.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRACCO PURCHASES INTEREST IN ESAOTEItaly's Bracco corp, specialising in diagnostic equipment and newtechnology for echography, has purchased 15 per cent interest in EsaoteBiomedica for $11 million. Esaote, also involved in diagnostics,expects 1995 sales of $17.2 million, an increase of $3 million from1994. Bracco sales in 1995 are expected to be L1,600 billion ($1billion) up from L1,142 billion in 1994. An overseas operation,particularly in the US, is planned for both companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BB MEDTECH FORMED TO INVEST IN MEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE COMPANIESBB Medtech AG, a holding company formed by Bellevue Asset Managementwas listed 21 December 1995 on the Zurich Bourse. BB Medtech was formed15 November to invest in medical and healthcare companies. Prior to itslisting, BB Medtech had 84 per cent of its assets investing in suchcompanies as Phycor Inc, Boston Scientific Corp, Columbia/HCAHealthcare, United HealthCare Corp and Healthsource Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SUN LIFE AWARDED CANADA'S HEALTH INSURANCE BUSINESSSun Life Assurance Co of Toronto has been awarded Canada's federalgovernment's health insurance business, covering over 230,000 civilservants (including the royal police and defence forces). Total personscovered, including dependents, and pensioners, is over one million.Total yearly premiums are estimated at C$230 million ($166.7 million).Mutual Life Assurance Co of Waterloo had the business since l960, andthe account is believed to represent two thirds of Mutual's totalhealth insurance business.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SWEDISH MEDICAL LABORATORIES MERGThree Swedish medical laboratories, Calab Medicinska Laboratories,Medilab Kliniska Laboratorier and St Gvrans Sjukhus Laboratorier, havemerged into a new company, CMS Medicinska Laboratorier. The newcompany, which will offer diagnostic services to private and state runhospitals, clinics and doctors, will have annual revenues of $41.1million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SYNECTICS MEDICAL BUYS ALL SHARES IN DANTEC MEDICALSynectics Medical Ab, a Swedish healthcare group headquartered inStockholm, has bought all shares in Dantec Medical a/s, a Danishmanufacturer of diagnostic laboratory test systems and kits used byprivate and public sector hospitals and clinics. In what constituted areverse take-over, Synectics Medical Ab paid seller Incentive Group $12million for Dantec, which had revenues of $37 million in 1994 and hasforecast a 10 per cent increase in sales volume for 1995. By contrast,Synectics Medical had revenues of $30 million in 1994, with salesexpected to increase by 6 per cent in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEDSTAT GROUP CONTRACTMedstat Group (Ann Arbor, MI) was awarded a three year, $3.8 millioncontract to conduct research and policy related tasks for the Office ofthe Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation's Division ofDisability, Aging and Long-Term Care within the US Department of Healthand Human Services.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FLORIDA HEALTH CENTRES SOLD TO HUMANACoastal Physicians Group Inc (Durham, NC) sold 47 South Florida healthcentres to Humana Inc (Louisville, KY) for $50 million. Humana, ahealth maintenance organisation, used Coastal's network of physiciansto provide care to more than 75,000 of its members in South Florida.The two companies have had a difficult relationship during the pastyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AARP TO END ARRANGEMENT WITH PRUDENTIALThe American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) announced that itwould end its exclusive arrangement with the Prudential InsuranceCompany of America at the end of 1997, when the current agreementexpires. Prudential has 5.6 million AARP members as customers, morethan one-third of the company's 15 million health insurance customers.While Prudential can still offer members insurance cover, AARP wantsother companies to also participate in its health insurance programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HEALTHSOUTH TO PURCHASE ADVANTAGE HEALTH CORPHealthSouth (Birmingham, AL) has agreed to purchase Advantage HealthCorp (Woburn, MA) in a stock swap valued at about $325 million. Thepurchase will add 150 rehabilitation hospitals and clinics toHealthSouth's 42 state network of out-patient and in-patientrehabilitation facilities, diagnostic centres and surgical clinics.With this acquisition, HealthSouth will operate more than 850facilities in 44 states. HealthSouth's revenue, not including theAdvantage purchase, is projected to top $2.2 billion in 1996. Advantagehas estimated 1995 revenue of $200 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STERIS TO ACQUIRE AMSCO INTERNATIONALSteris Corp (Mentor, OH) has agreed to acquire Amsco International Inc(Pittsburgh, PA) in a stock transaction valued at about $508 million.Steris's fiscal year (ending 31 March) sales are projected at less than$100 million, while Amsco expects 1995 sales of $450 million. Under theterms of the agreement Amsco shareholders would get 0.46 share ofSteris common stock for each share of Amsco. The transaction isexpected to be concluded by April, 1996. Steris believes that the buywill make it a major player in providing sterilisation and surgicalsupport equipment and services to the healthcare industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB TO ACQUIRE 77 PER CENT OF PHARMAVITBristol-Myers Squibb Co has entered into an agreement to acquire 77 percent of shares in Pharmavit Gyogyszer-es Elelmiszeripari ReszvemytarsasAG, one of Hungary's largest manufacturers of generic pharmaceuticals,over-the-counter medicines and nutritional products. The offer pricewas $62.35 per share. In the first half of 1995, Pharmavit posted a pre-tax profit of Ft299.6 million ($2.2 million) on consolidated salesrevenues of Ft2.23 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MEDICAL DEVICES SECTOR SHOWS STRONG GROWTH POTENTIALLONDON - Shares in Anagen, a small UK-based emerging immunodiagnosticcompany, jumped 19p to 79p following news that it has received US Foodand Drug Administration (FDA) clearance for its new assay to measuretestosterone. This brings to 16 the number of assays cleared by the FDAfor sale of its AuraFlex automated immunoassay system.AuraFlex, the company's lead product, is an automated in vitroimmunodiagnostic testing machine, designed by Anagen and built bycontractors. Confident of securing a marketing deal soon, the companyexpects sales to flow within the first half of 1996.Mervyn Sennett, chief executive and founder of Anagen, told IHN:"Bundling is a word that is beginning to be bounced around thediagnostics business at the moment. The big managed care units areintegrating with huge purchasing power; they want to do deals acrossthe board so that they have one supplier for a whole level of services.The large diagnostics companies are expanding their range so they havea larger package to offer."The $15 billion in vitro diagnostics testing market is crowded andgetting more crowded. Immunodiagnostics represent the fastest growingsegment with around $6 billion sales. Anagen is concentrating ondeveloping the essential high volume tests required by around a fifthof the immunodiagnostics market. "The market potential isconsiderable," said Sennett.Divestment and consolidation presents major growth opportunities forscale-minded diagnostics companies. DuPont Co, for instance, announcedthe sale of its Medical Product's in-vitro diagnostics business to DadeInternational, an independent company controlled by investment fundsmanaged by Bain Capital Inc, with shareholders including Goldman SachsCapital Partners and Dade management. The acquisition will create agroup with combined sales of $1 billion annually, creating one of theworld's leading diagnostics companies. In 1994, Dade had sales of $625million, with 4,000 staff worldwide. Products include cardiacimmunodiagnostics, laboratory controls and data management.Other deals concluded recently include Trinity Biotech's three-year $20million contract as Warner-Lambert's exclusive supplier of pregnancytests for the US over-the-counter (OTC) market. Abaxis secured a three-year non-exclusive distribution agreement with Baxter Healthcare Groupfor the latter to distribute Abaxis' Piccolo portable point-of-careblood analyser to medical providers in the US. The product allowsclinicians to perform routine blood tests on a few drops of whole bloodand provides test results in less than 14 minutes with the precisionand accuracy equivalent to a clinical laboratory.Medical device analysts raised their ratings on Ventritex to strong buyfrom buy, with shares up $1-1/2 to $19-1/2 on 12 December. Ventritex'sCadet implantable defibrillator for treating too-rapid heartbeat isexpected to be approved on schedule and likely to prove a strongchallenge to Medtronic's Jewel implantable defibrillator line. Oneanalyst rejected market rumours that the FDA might delay Cadet'sapproval as unwarranted. Shares in Medtronic, downgraded from strongbuy to buy by one Wall Street analyst, slipped $1-1/4 at $55-1/4.Bio-Vascular Inc, launched in the mid-80s and focused on medicalimaging and surgical tissues, posted a fiscal 1995 profit, its firstmove into the black. Last year it posted a loss of $0.26 per share onsales of $6.6 million. The company reported a non-recurring $1.5million revenue gain in the fourth quarter to end-October, relating toa licensing deal involving its VoxelGeo three-dimensional visualisationsoftware. The company's Per-Strip product, an air-tight, staple-linereinforcement used in lung volume reduction surgery to treat late-stageemphysema, accounts for more than half of the company's revenues and isexpected to boost sales growth further next year. Its Dura-Guard braintissue patch was approved by the FDA in July.In late-December Vita Signs, Inc announced it had received marketingapproval from the FDA for the company's Viringe vascular access flushdevice for both saline and heparin applications. It plans to beginmarketing the device in the US in March 1996, targeting the US homecare market through an exclusive relationship with a national allianceof home care dealers. Its own sales force will market the product to UShospitals. European marketing is planned for later in 1996.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-15IA086-000615-B040-139http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh75.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015843 text/html 35530HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:56:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMTContent-length: 35343Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh75.html Sample Issue Copyright MANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNet February 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Primary Care Substance Abuse Training Gives Plans Chances for Quick Payback (415 words) Managed Medicaid Plan's Providers Contend Program Owes Them Millions (508 words) Plan Builds Disorder Pathway As Cue for Patients, Providers (551 words) Breast Cancer Study Could Give Carve-Out Plans the Blues (251 words) Little-Fish CompCare Deals Could Trigger More Mergers (594 words) Group Captures Patient Views Using Electronic System (375 words) HHS Rejects Medicaid Waiver For Mental Health-Only Plan (295 words) Consider Employer Concerns In Outcome Measure Design (431 words) POLICY & REPORTS (645 words) Credentialing Service May Go Electronic (159 words) INDUSTRY NEWS (474 words) CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Primary Care Substance Abuse Training Gives PlansChances for Quick PaybackArming primary care physicians with the tools todiagnose substance abuse is one example of how quality improvementinitiatives actually lower costs.Better substance abuse training in primary care physician residencyprograms could improve dismal diagnosis rates, a panel ofclinicians and health administrators recommends.But managed care organizations shouldn't leave the job to graduatemedical education, one health plan administrator urges. Taking thelead in educating primary care physicians on substance abusetreatment can help health plans achieve a substantial and quickreturn on their investments.Arming primary care physicians with the tools to diagnose substanceabuse is one example of how quality improvement initiativesactually lower costs, says Dr. John Ludden, senior vice presidentfor medical affairs at Harvard Pilgrim Health Care of Brookline,Mass. "The patient feels better, the PCPs' lives are made moreorganized, the cost picture is better, and the employer wins."And substance abuse patients can be treated with greater successrates than people with many other chronic illnesses, says A. ThomasMcLellan, professor of psychiatry at the University ofPennsylvania.The competency model recommended by the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundationoffers health plans a starting point for education efforts, Luddenadds. "Those are things that ought to be expected of PCPs incurrently functioning organizations."Ludden and McLellan were members of a panel of 45 physicians,employers, academics, public officials and administrators thatcomposed the list of competencies that primary care physiciansshould learn in residency programs.Substance abuse education historically has been at the bottom ofmanaged care organizations' list of priorities, but that couldchange rapidly."What forces this up the priority list, especially in integratedMCOs that do behavioral health, is that it's one of those fewsituations where everyone wins," Ludden says.And enhancing a health plan's ability to identify and treatsubstance abuse patients will pay back quickly, probably in 18months or less, Ludden argues. "It's one of the very clear areaswhere employers understand the payback," he says. "They don't haveto be sold that anymore."Among the primary care physician competencies recommended by thefoundation:o        Screening patients for alcohol anddrug abuse;o        Using office-based therapy,including brief intervention techniques, counseling andpharmacotherapy;o        Referral to specialized treatmentand other community programs;o        Care of affected family members; ando        Recognizing and assisting colleagueswith substance abuse problems.Contact Joe Sutherland of the Macy Foundation at (301) 652-1558,and Ludden at (617) 730-4746.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Managed Medicaid Plan's Providers Contend ProgramOwes Them MillionsAbout 65 mental health agencies in Massachusetts maysue a Medicaid managed mental health contractor for $6 million to$9 million in unpaid claims, saying a billing catch-22 deprivedthem  of the money.A managed behavioral health firm has found itself caught underattack from providers who want payment for services rendered underthe Massachusetts managed mental health program.The providers may sue the state's Medicaid managed mental healthcare contractor, Mental Health Management of America, for breach ofcontract over $6 million to $9 million in allegedly unpaid claims.The state has promised to make sure money owed providers is paid.The providers say the contractor trapped them in a catch-22 toavoid paying claims for mental health and substance abusetreatment. The contractor required that claims be submitted within90 days of service and include preauthorization numbers, thenallegedly didn't furnish the numbers promptly enough for theproviders to meet the deadline."Claims processing was not [Mental Health Management's] strength,"acknowledges Bruce Bullen, commissioner of the state Division forMedical Assistance, which oversees Medicaid. For example, there wasa problem with a claims backlog."We'll make sure [Mental Health Management] is resonsible forcomplying with the contract," Bullen says. "But it doesn't meanwe'll pay all claims."He noted that Mental Health Management "performed in a superiorfashion in some areas, like quality management."John Kahn, a lawyer representing 65 mental health agenciesallegedly owed money by Mental Health Management,agreed that quality of care wasn't at issue.But Massachusetts canceled Mental Health Management's Medicaidmanaged care contract. The company's parent, First Health Services,did not have its contract to run New Mexico's certified Medicaidmanagement system renewed in 1994.Mental Health Management of America, owned by First FinancialManagement of Atlanta, got the Massachusetts managed care contractfor mental health and substance abuse treatment in 1992.In a letter to a Mental Health Management outside lawyer, Kahn asksthe contractor to process the providers' unpaid claims and suspendtroublesome edits related to prior approval, billing within 90days, a 365-day payment appeals process and claims identificationnumbers.Kahn says Mental Health Management hasn't met providers' demandsyet, but the two sides are scheduled to meet next week. At press time, Mental Health Management had not granted a requestfor comment to MBH.Mental Health Management broke new ground in providingcomprehensive managed mental health care to Medicaid, so there weregrowing pains, says Ron Preston, HCFA associate regionaladministrator. But that's not why Mental Health Management'scontract wasn't renewed past June. "Other applicants had more solidapplications," Preston says. Massachusetts Behavioral HealthPartners won the bid.Under the contract with Massachusetts, Mental Health Management waspaid $11.5 million in admini- strative expenses under arisk-bearing contract that allowed it to make up to $750,000 if itkept expenses in line or shell out up to $750,000 if it went overbudget. The first 92 cents of every dollar saved went to the state,and the remaining 8 cents to Mental Health  Management.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Plan Builds Disorder Pathway As Cue for Patients,ProvidersConfronting a relatively uncharted illness, a healthnetwork used its experience with past pathways to shape guidelinesfor treatment of dissociative identity disorder.Starting from scratch, Presbyterian Behavioral Health Network ofAlbuquerque, N.M., has designed a clinical pathway to guidepatients with dissociative identity disorder and the providers whotreat them down a standard route."With DID, there were no models and no clinical studies to workfrom," explains Selene Mahaffey, quality improvement specialist atPresbyterian. But Albuquerque's intensely competitive managed careenvironment puts a premium on controlling inpatient length of stayand proving treatment value.So Presbyterian built a DID pathway from the ground up, drawingfrom experiences that it gained in crafting protocols for bipolardisorder and alcohol  detoxification.Among lessons learned during those earlier efforts:o        Work very closely as a team whencreating treatment guidelines.o        Come to a consensus on whatconstitutes effective treatment.o        Dig up the latest research on atarget illness, concentrating especially on controlled clinicalstudies.o        Communicate constantly with staffmembers, making sure they understand the goals of the path and howto use it.Presbyterian kept the pathway design group small and focused,including only two outpatient therapists, two physicians, aninpatient mental health therapist and a quality improvementspecialist. The pathway came together in four 90-minute meetings.Complexity Keeps Goals FocusedIn tackling DID, the Presbyterian pathway creators confronted acomplex illness: Anxiety, depression and sleeplessness all areinvolved, and a large number of DID patients also have substanceabuse problems.The group settled on several goals, including lengths of stay of nomore than seven days and keeping patients from harming themselvesin medically serious ways. Dealing with past memory was deemed toodifficult to achieve in a seven-day stay.Without a trail of clinical studies, the clinical judgment ofnurses and physicians continues to play a large role in a patient'streatment, though the DID guideline identifies situations whenpatients should be taken off the path.The pathway rests in Presbyterian's existing computer system, andstandard order sets programmed into the network allow charge nursesto move patients along the path without having physicians sign offevery time. That's been a hit with the nursing staff, Mahaffeysays: "They feel there's plenty of room for their professionalinput."The pathway is also becoming a motivational tool for DID patients."Most of them like that it's very concrete - they know what thegoals are and what's going to happen every day," she says.The price tag for the pathway: A minimal consulting fee of lessthan $500 for the outpatient therapist's time. Using the existingcomputer system and doing planning work during regular staff hourscost Presbyterian nothing.Presbyterian's DID pathway has run into several serious obstacles,Mahaffey admits. "We had people who didn't believe in it as adisorder opposed to providers who specialize in it," she explains.And the lack of clinical studies stymied efforts to standardizedrug treatment."If we had the studies to fall back on, that would help handle thephysicians who are more creative in their prescriptions," Mahaffeysays. "We had to be honest about the differences in opinion andfocus on the things we could agree on."Contact Mahaffey at (505) 291-2522. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Breast Cancer Study Could Give Carve-Out Plans the BluesInvestigators hope to show that integrating mental andmedical health services will improve breast cancer treatmentoutcomes.A two-year clinical investigation uniting the AmericanPsychological Assn. and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusettscould be good news for cancer patients but bad news for the managedbehavioral health carve-out concept.The study's hypothesis: Integrating mental and medical healthservices would improve outcomes for women with breast cancer andsave payers money.The first of 120 women newly diagnosed with breast cancer willenter the study within the next two months. Those patients willthen participate in a 16-week group managed psychologicalintervention program conducted by Massachusetts Blues mental healthproviders.Mental health services won't be integrated into the medicaltreatment program of a comparison group of cancer patients.Instead, the group will follow the "existing standard of care," thestudy's creators explain, accessing psychological services on theirown from a list of behavioral health resources.Investigators will track immunological functioning, long-termcancer recurrence and mortality within the two groups. Preliminaryresults could come as early as this year.The association expects those results will clearly demonstrate thatthe early integration of psychological services into medicaltreatment will improve clinical outcomes. That could givescientific backing to the APA's argument that integrated deliverysystems should bring psychological services back into their menu ofprimary and specialty medical services.For information, call Jan Peterson of APA at (202) 336-5898, andSusan Leahy of the Massachusetts Blues at (617) 832-4823.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Little-Fish CompCare Deals Could Trigger More MergersThe refurbished national specialty care company has bigdreams for public sector mental health business, and that couldmean fewer independent players by year-end.On the heels of recent acquisitions of two regional managedbehavioral health companies, relatively unknown Comprehensive CareCorp. has nationwide ambitions in public sector managed mentalhealth care - ambitions that could accelerate consolidation in themanaged behavioral health arena.After nearly dropping completely from market screens in the early1990s with a failed push into hospital ownership and tax troubleswith federal authorities, Costa Mesa, Calif.-based CompCarereshuffled top leadership and restructured operations. CompCare hastargeted $2 billion in business in 1996, and acquisitions will becrucial to success.Late last year, CompCare's managed behavioral care subsidiary,Comprehensive Behavioral Care, purchased Health Management Servicesof Bloomfield Hills, Mich. The acquisition brought 350,000 coveredlives in the Midwest to CompCare, boosting total managed behavioralcare membership to 1.25 million, up from 400,000 a year earlier.This month, CompCare bought Philadelphia-based Mustard Seed, adding140,000 public sector covered lives in Pennsylvania to its managedmental health division (MBH 2/8/96, p. 7).Those moves expanded CompCare's managed behavioral care presenceout of the West and the South, and came on top of deals last fallwith HIP Health Plan of Pennsylvania and PCA Health Plans in PuertoRico.The Mustard Seed deal strengthens CompCare's position at thedoorstep of the New Jersey/New York public sector mental healthmarket. The company is reportedly eyeing a large piece of publicsector business in the metropolitan New York region.Mustard Seed, HMS Won't Be Last to GoBut industry observers wonder if the Medicaid managed mental healthcare pool is large enough for yet another national player."[CompCare's] growth isn't going to disrupt the structure of themarket," says Dr. Michael Freeman, president of the Portola Valley,Calif.-based Institute for Behavioral Healthcare. "They're just oneof several very focused organizations" in a market that willcontinue to grow for several years.Comprehensive Behavioral Care's numbers don't approach the morethan 15 million lives of Park Ridge, N.J.-based Merit BehavioralCare Corp., for instance, or the 20 million lives covered by ValueBehavioral Health of Falls Church, Va.Nevertheless, "There's an attitude [among the largest managedbehavioral health firms] of, 'We don't know who these people are,but we're going to keep an eye on them,'" says Suzanne Gelber,president of SGR Health and a senior research fellow at BrandeisUniversity's Institute for Health Policy. "They kind of came out ofnowhere."Mustard Seed won't be the last of the managed behavioral healthcare market's smaller players to look for larger friends, industryobservers predict."The small guys just have limited access to larger contracts,"explains Mustard Seed Vice President for Business DevelopmentRobert Bailey.CompCare CEO Chriss Street concurs. "The mental health market tendsto be very fractured, with lots of 'mom and pop' providers," Streetsays. "As the bar gets raised, those providers are going to beground out or bought out."Among smaller fish mentioned by some observers as potentialtakeover targets: Vista Health Plans of San Diego, with 470,000covered lives.But new acquisitions may not top the priority lists of big playerssuch as Value Behavioral Health and Magellan Health Services, whichare still digesting  previous purchases. "They now have to integrate their acquisitions, and that takes timeand effort," Freeman said.For more details, call Matt Lepo for CompCare at (818) 789-9000,Bailey at (215) 836-3205, Freeman at (415) 435-9821, and Gelber at(203) 761-0860. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Group Captures Patient Views Using Electronic SystemA computer-based patient functional assessment tool gavea behavioral health group practice a window into its own operationsand greater stature with payers.Using an electronic functional assessment tool, an Albuquerque,N.M., mental health group practice pairs clinicians' observationswith comprehensive patient-generated information - and thecombination has attracted the notice of payers.In the past, pencil and paper were Mesa Mental Health's standardtools for capturing patient perceptions of service quality,explains Gayle Zieman, chief clinical officer. Patient views ontheir functional levels slipped by completely, leaving cliniciannotes as the only word on functional status.Standardized measures were nonexistent.BEHAVIORisk, an electronic assessment tool created by ResponseHealthcare Information Management of East Greenwich, R.I., changedthat. Using a survey instrument that the behavioral healthorganization chooses, patients fill out a bubble-sheetquestionnaire, which is scanned into the organization's informationsystem.Mesa's customized survey questions cover a range of issues,including patient satisfaction, symptoms, functional levels andeven perceptions of physical health.What Mesa providers found surprised them, Zieman says. Most newpatients expected their treatment would last less than 10 sessions,lower than Mesa's  estimate.The system also covers areas providers had often overlooked. "Someof our clinicians never asked about chemical dependency," he says. The electronic patient survey does ask about chemical dependency,alerting providers when the condition could be present.The system's selling points: BEHAVIORisk uses Microsoft's Accessdatabase, software Mesa already had licensed. An open-architecturedesign allows the group practice to customize the software.The creation of a central database proved most attractive, Ziemansays. "The ability to export our data into an aggregate pool isvery important."Response is building a national data warehouse for patientsatisfaction information, functional improvement data and outcomesmeasures. The database cuts across care divisions, gathering information fromHMOs, group practices and hospitals as well as behavioral healthproviders.Response eventually plans to shape performance measures from thedata.The payoff: The ability to capture the patients' side of functionalassessment recently helped Mesa land a partnership deal with one ofAlbuquerque's major behavioral health payers to track the treatmentof depression in primary care settings.For details, call Zieman at (505) 291-5300, and James Spitzer ofResponse at (401) 885-6900. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996HHS Rejects Medicaid Waiver For Mental Health-Only PlanMontana may yet land a waiver for a com- prehensiveMedicaid managed care plan  that includes a special focus onmanaged mental health.While HHS recently shot down Montana's plans for a Medicaid managedmental health care-only demonstration, state officials say a lessambitious plan could earn a waiver by the fall.State officials last summer asked for a Sec. 1115 Medicaiddemonstration waiver to begin the Montana Mental Health AccessPlan. The program would have moved Medicaid mental health servicesinto a single, statewide managed care program extending coverage toresidents with incomes up to 200% of the federal poverty level.The demonstration would not have covered other health services fornewly eligible recipients.That exclusion killed the plan's chance for a Sec. 1115 waiver, HHSsaid in rejecting Montana's plan. Without a guarantee of basichealth services for the new group, HHS won't OK the project.But HHS Secretary Donna Shalala told Gov. Marc Racicot (R) thatfederal officials could fast-track an application for a Sec. 1915waiver or a revised Sec. 1115 waiver proposal that expands servicesto physical as well as mental health care.That's sent state officials back to the drawing board. Pushingahead with the planned extension of mental health benefits withoutfederal matching funds isn't an option, says Dan Anderson,administrator of the state's Division of Addictive and MentalDisorders.Alternate plans include pursuing a Sec. 1915 waiver to move currentMedicaid eligibles into a managed mental health plan and usingstate funds to cover target groups such as severely mentally illadults and adolescents.The state is also considering adding coverage of basic healthservices for newly eligible beneficiaries to its original Sec. 1115waiver application.For more information, contact Anderson at  (406) 444-3969.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Consider Employer Concerns In Outcome Measure DesignDon't jump into outcomes measurement without understandingthe basics, one expert says, and always keep an eye out formeasures payers want.Asking some basic questions before building a behavioral healthoutcomes measurement system can keep an organization's efforts ontrack and ensure the final product offers measures that payers willvalue.Robert Shomer, president and CEO of Encino, Calif.-based HawthorneCommunity Medical Group, cautions behavioral health organizationsto have the answers to the following questions before pushingahead:o        Why are you doing this? Know yourtarget audience before you begin crafting an outcomes measurementsystem. Is it for a report card? Will the results be used inmarketing? Does a payer want to see enrollee utilization trends?Are you benchmarking your performance against other players?o        Do you want to measure satisfactionor outcomes? Know the difference, Shomer warns. Patientsatisfaction surveys are effective at uncovering neededimprovements. But the reasons why patient satisfaction levels aredown or why interventions fall flat will elude you. Outcomesstudies give behavioral health groups the power to track causality.o        What level of precision do you want?Greater detail can mean greater expense. For some, an inexpensivepatient satisfaction survey using postcards that patients fill outat the office is enough.o        Do you have the in-house talent tobuild a system? If the pool of internal expertise is too shallow,groups can turn to consultants or existing proprietary systems.Don't dismiss a team effort with the psychiatry department of alocal university, Shomer says. They're extremely interested in theimpact of managed care, and they're more adept at real-world fieldwork than many behavioral care companies expect.Move Beyond Clinical Quality MeasuresBehavioral health groups shouldn't stop at clinical quality andpatient satisfaction measures. Anticipate the demands of employers,for whom greater employee productivity on the job and stability athome can be more important than clinical improvement, Shomer says.Studies tracking functional status at work and within the home canwin and keep contracts."The therapist may be content, but for the family and the job, thepatient is just as dysfunctional," he says. "Employers aren'tinterested in re-engineering employees' personalities - they wantpeople to be able to get back to work."Other key information payers want: medical cost offset data. "Ifyou can show that you're providing lots of access, and because ofthat patients don't end up in the hospital or in the primary carephysician's office inappropriately, that's extremely powerful,'Shomer says.For more information, contact Shomer at (818)  609-1761.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996POLICY & REPORTS       New developments in managed mentalhealth care will be among the topics at the Feb. 28 meeting inWashington of the National Committee on Vital and Health StatisticsSubcommittee on Mental Health. The subcommittee will also discussnew  research on alcohol abuse. Contact Gail Fisher of NCVHS at(301) 436-7050.       The Substance Abuse and MentalHealth Services Administration is seeking comments on itsrequirement that states asking for a substance abuse prevention andtreatment block grant for 1997 report on their efforts to stop thesale of tobacco to minors. SAMHSA estimates the additionalrequirement will add only 24 hours to the application process. Sendcomments to Deborah Trunzo,  SAMHSA Reports Clearance Officer,Room 16-105, Parklawn Building, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md.20857.       The first formal meeting betweenmanaged behavioral health care companies and mental health consumergroups ended with the creation of work groups and a promise to keeptalking. Nine executives of American Managed Behavioral HealthcareAssn. member firms met early this month with 10 representatives ofnational consumer organizations in a wide-ranging, two-daydiscussion. The result: Three work groups covering issues such asconsumer education and the use of practice guidelines will producereports on their findings. For details, call Clarke Ross of AMBHAat (202) 434-4565.       The Consumer Managed Care Network,a mental health consumer advocacy group, released its "Platform forAction," outlining the basics of a consumer-friendly managed caresystem. Among planks in the six-point platform: (1) servicedelivery in the least-restrictive community-based setting;  (2)"meaningful" consumer involvement in contract development, clinicalprotocols and provider credentialing; (3) prevention ofcost-shifting to public mental health systems; and (4) access toall quality assurance measurement findings. For more information,contact Laura Van Tosh, CMCN coordinator, at (703) 739-9333.       A report studying the relationshipbetween changes in Massachusetts' public mental health care systemand client deaths found that mortality rates among patients usingDepartment of Mental Health inpatient, case management orresidential services declined between the beginning of 1991 and theend of 1993. But investigators refused to link the drop inmortality rates to changes such as managed care, citinginsufficient data. Among recommendations in "Report onMassachusetts Department of Mental Health Service RecipientMortality (1991-1993)": DMH should integrate existing data onpatients treated in department inpatient, case management orresidential services; and create a comprehensive data system totrack mental health patients treated through outpatient therapy,clubhouses or emergency services.       Managed behavioral health care firmscould get their first peek at the National Committee for QualityAssurance's managed behavioral health care accreditation system asearly as April. NCQA says it will release the system for industrycomment this spring. For more information, contact Claire Sharda,assistant director of accreditation policy,  at (202) 955-3500.       A bill allowing managed careenrollees to see psychologists and other specialists without areferral is moving through the Indiana legislature. State Rep. JeffEspich (R) is sponsoring the legislation, H.B. 1289, which wouldallow specialists to treat managed care plan patients who had notgone through plan "gatekeepers." The Indiana House passed the bill,which has been sent to committee in the Senate. But powerfulopponents, including the state's Chamber of Commerce and theIndiana Manufacturers Assn., have lined up against the legislation.With the legislative session set to end in mid-March, however, theclock, not business groups, may snuff the bill's chances this year.Call Espich's office at (317) 232-9606.       More than four out of five employersoffered employee assistance programs in 1995, according to a surveyof 1,050 major U.S. businesses conducted by Hewitt Associates ofLincolnshire, Ill. In 1990, 73% of employers had EAPs in place.Five years later, the number had jumped to 84%, with most employerscontracting with an outside provider for EAP services. ContactMonica Gallagher of Hewitt Associates at (847) 295-5000.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996Credentialing Service May Go ElectronicAs early as June, managed care companies could begintapping into the American Managed Behavioral Healthcare Assn.'sprovider credential verification service.The National Behavioral Healthcare CredentialVerification Service should cut the cost and effort of checking outpotential network providers by offering behavioral health plans andproviders a clearinghouse for credential verification (MBH 1/11/96,p. 5).The association plans to sign a contractor by March andhave the system operational three months later, says DarcyGruttadaro, a consultant who helped develop the program.The service will verify a physician's license, proof ofresidency program, lack of major malpractice judgments and otherdocuments.Still uncertain is the cost of using the system.Proposed charges include a fee per verification  request, annualfees or provider recredentialing charges.The whole process could go on-line sometime down theroad, Gruttadaro predicts, with plans, providers and thecredentialing service linking together electronically.Contact Gruttadaro at (703) 519-8539.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH NEWS via NewsNetFebruary 22, 1996INDUSTRY NEWS       The popularity of specialty PPOs formental health and substance abuse benefits keeps growing, accordingto a survey by Foster Higgins of New York. Findings: 20% ofemployers offered behavioral care PPOs in 1995, up from 14% in1994. Call Stephanie Poe of Foster Higgins at (212) 574-9034 toobtain information on the study.       Universal Health Services of King ofPrussia, Pa., which operates 29 behavioral and acute carehospitals, posted a 24% increase in profits in 1995, to $35.5million. Revenues rose to $931.1 million, thanks in part to thepurchase of four hospitals in 1995, including a behavioral healthfacility. Call Universal at (610) 768-3300.       Losses continued at NewOrleans-based Ramsay Managed Care, which announced a net loss of$740,000 in the three months ended Dec. 31. Losses in the last sixmonths of 1995 totaled $1.5 million. The company blames significantmarketing and development costs in its managed behavioral healthbusiness as well as start-up costs in Ramsay's HMOs. Ramsay offersmanaged behavioral health services to 730,000 people in 13 states.Contact Ramsay at (504) 585-0508.       A terminated psychiatric facilitymanagement contract helped push earnings down at Integrated HealthServices of Owings Mills, Md. IHS predicted fourth quarter profitswould come in at 52 cents a share, below earlier estimates. IHSended a contract with Crestwood Hospitals to manage 23 psychiatricand long-term care facilities in California, blaming insufficientMedi-Cal rate increases for undermining the arrangement's financialviability. For more information, contact Susan Noonan at (212)696-4455, ext. 203.       Compass Information Services of Kingof Prussia, Pa., sold the exclusive pharmaceutical rights todistribute COMPASS, a mental health outcomes measurement system,to Bristol-Myers Squibb of Princeton, N.J. Bristol-Myers Squibbwill incorporate COMPASS into its disease management program. Morethan 4 million people are covered by mental health treatmentprograms using the COMPASS system. Call Patrick Donohue ofBristol- Myers Squibb at (609) 252-5685, and Kimberly Veitch ofCompass at (610) 992-7076.       The Chicago Transit Authority(CTA) tapped Green Spring Health Services of Columbia, Md., tomanage mental health and substance abuse benefits for 16,300 CTAemployees and retirees. The agreement, which began Feb. 1,includes a precertification program for the CTA's utilizationmanagement services. Green Spring's Illinois subsidiary managesbehavioral health for more than 1 million people. For moreinformation, contact Erin Somers of Green Spring at (410) 964-1593.       Mental Health Management of McLean,Va., will sell Oakview Treatment Center, which runs two in-patientfacilities. The unnamed buyer will pay $2.2 million for the center.Mental Health Management has been eager to shed its sevenfinancially troubled hospitals and concentrate on the acquisitionand management of non-physician mental health professionalpractices. Prior to the Oakview deal, the company found a buyer forfive of the facilities. Contact Mental Health Management at (703)749-4612.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-16IA086-000615-B040-154http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh28.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015900 text/html 25785HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMTContent-length: 25598Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh28.html Sample Issue Copyright HEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNet NOVEMBER 06, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Bush, Congress Negotiate On Medicaid Funding Rules (375 words) States Liberally Choosing Hospitals That Treat Many Poor Patients (170 words) Medicare/Medicaid (815 words) Health Care Costs (295 words) Managed Care (107 words) Industry News (330 words) Other Washington News (734 words) FINAL RULES (200 words) PROPOSED RULES (138 words) NOTICES (403 words) CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Bush, Congress Negotiate On Medicaid Funding RulesWith less than two months to go before a Jan. 1 deadline, Congressand the Bush Administration are trying to hammer out a compromiseon state Medicaid fundraising. In the balance is nearly $5.5 billion infederal Medicaid matching funds that go to states using taxes onhealth care providers or "voluntary" donations by providers to raisemoney. In September, HCFA published regulations that would wipeout most tax and donation programs as of Jan. 1. On Oct. 31, theagency published a final version of those rules that attempts to"clarify" the intent of the September proposal. The new plan wouldgive some states until July 1, 1992, to eliminate tax programs.Programs begun after Sept. 12, 1991, would not qualify for theadditional time and contribution programs must end by New Year'sday. The new rules are "too little, too late, and leave too manyquestions unanswered," says Senate Finance Committee ChairmanLloyd Bentsen (D-TX), who is pressing HCFA to withdraw them.Pressure also is coming from the House, where the Commerce HealthSubcommittee has voted 16-6 to approve a bill (H.R.3595) blockingthe rules until Sept. 30, 1992. To compound matters, HCFA proposednew regulations, also on Oct. 31, that would limit the number ofhospitals each state can designate as "disproportionate share." Suchfacilities receive higher reimbursement, often paid for with tax ordonation funds. While HCFA's hard line stance provoked anger onCapitol Hill, private negotiations are underway to iron out acompromise. HCFA wants to cap states' ability to raise fundsthrough taxes at 20 percent of total state Medicaid funding; theNational Governors' Assn. says the cap should be 60 percent. HCFAalso wants to limit the number of disproportionate share hospitals,some states have designated all of their facilities in that way --and to cap the amount that can be paid to such providers. NGA says itwill accept no limits on states' ability to choose hospitals for thatstatus but members of the Senate Finance Committee are said to besympathetic to some limits. In case the negotiations fail, the fullCommerce Committee plans a Nov. 7 vote on the moratorium bill andSen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY) has introduced a companion bill(S.1886).Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991States Liberally Choosing Hospitals That Treat Many Poor PatientsThe Bush Administration's charge that states are liberallydesignating hospitals as Medicaid "disproportionate share" facilitiesis borne out by a recent study by the Prospective PaymentAssessment Commission (ProPAC). "The trend among the stateMedicaid programs has been to provide more disproportionate sharepayments to more hospitals," ProPAC says. In New York, for example,ProPAC found all 260 general hospitals designated asdisproportionate share; in contrast, only one of Utah's 40 hospitalswas so designated. The move to upgrade more hospitals to thatstatus has accelerated as states have made use of provider taxes tosubsidize Medicaid. In Texas, for example, only a quarter of hospitalswere eligible in 1988; today, all hospitals in the state qualify. Andin Kentucky, the number of hospitals designated has tripled since1988. In an October report, ProPAC says HHS should develop policiesto ensure that Medicaid money goes to hospitals that need it themost. A disproportionate share hospital is supposed to have a highvolume of Medicaid and other low-income patients.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Medicare/MedicaidFlorida's Health Care Cost Containment Board wants the statelegislature to ban most referrals by doctors to facilities they own.The ban on referrals would cover doctor-owned laboratories,imaging, rehabilitation, and radiation therapy facilities. The broadproposal, which would include all types of patients, would go wellbeyond federal legislation aimed only at Medicare/Medicaid cases.The board, which has studied the effect of physician ownership onreferrals, also wants to require greater disclosure of doctors'investments in health care businesses. Thirteen states already limitphysician ownership; New Jersey and Michigan have the mostcomprehensive laws. Under Florida's proposal, doctors with a stakein nursing homes, hospitals, medical supply firms, home healthagencies, and ambulatory surgery centers would have to disclosetheir financial interests to patients. "Obviously, we feel that verystringent measures need to be taken to protect consumers in thestate," says board spokesman David Coley. The Florida Medical Assn.says the study is flawed and the referral ban would hurt ruralpatients.Arizona, Maryland, and New Jersey Medicaid programs paid hospitalsmore than the cost of treating Medicaid patients in 1989, says theProspective Payment Assessment Commission. Medicaid almostcovered costs in Indiana, Montana, and North Dakota. But Illinois andOregon paid less than half of costs -- 56 percent and 59 percent,respectively. From 1980 to 1989, states in the East North Central,West South Central, and Pacific regions of the U.S. cut Medicaidhospital rates an average of 20 percent. In 1989, the two stateswith all payer systems, Maryland and New Jersey, had two of thehighest Medicaid payments with costs at 104 and 102 percent,respectively.HHS says it will "aggressively" pursue fraud and abuse in the sale ofdurable medical equipment. On Nov. 1 the Department proposedregulations that would bar Medicare Part B carriers from shoppingneighboring states for the most lucrative Medicare payment, prohibitunbundling of DME charges, and reduce the number of Medicarecarriers from 33 to 4. The latter is intended to reduce variation inpayment decisions. The government also will ask Congress forauthority to levy fines on miscreant suppliers. Today, HCFA has onlyone choice: kick a supplier out of Medicare or allow its misbehaviorto continue. "We prefer to have an array of ways to deal with theproblem between benign neglect and the atom bomb," says HCFAAdministrator Gail Wilensky. Medicare pays about half of the annual$2 billion DME bill, says the National Assn. of Medical EquipmentSuppliers, which is supporting bills (H.R.2534, S.1736) to setcertification and accreditation standards similar to Medicare'sconditions of participation.A 6.5 percent reduction in Medicare physician fees is necessary to"account for changes in consumer and physician behavior" thatotherwise would increase Medicare spending, says HCFAAdministrator Gail Wilensky in a letter to Congress. The 19-pagemissive seeks to justify HCFA's plan to reduce fees under Medicare'snew fee schedule to offset behavioral changes. The American MedicalAssn. is pressing Congress to block that move before Jan. 1, claimingit would cost doctors $7 billion over five years. In a Nov. 1 letter toCongress, AMA says HCFA is presenting a "distorted view." Opponentsof the preemptive change argue that HCFA can recoup any lostrevenue by limiting future fee increases via the Medicare volumeperformance standard. But Wilensky says the VPS is "simplyinadequate" for that purpose. HCFA plans to issue final rules laterthis month; so far, Congress still seems unwilling to intervene.Meanwhile, family physicians are trying to hold off implementationof a new Medicare coding system for office visits. The new codesaren't tested and will confuse physicians, says the AmericanAcademy of Family Physicians.To boost medical services for Medicare patients in rural areas, HCFAwill give $9.8 million to seven states and 51 rural hospitals. Fundswill enable states and health care facilities to form networksthrough communication and transport systems to improve access toprimary care and emergency services in rural areas. The states areCalifornia, Colorado, Kansas, New York, North Carolina, South Dakota,and West Virginia.The Henry Kaiser Family Foundation is spending $5 million over thenext five years to study Medicaid. The foundation has designated a15-member panel to study problems with the state-federal programfor the poor under the leadership of New York State AssemblyMajority Leader James Tallon. The panel will examine theeffectiveness and costs of the program and address the role offederal and state government to recommend a future agenda. Kaiseralso has lined up an impressive staff, headed by Johns HopkinsUniversity assistant professor Diane Rowland, and includingGeorgetown University's Judith Feder, and RAND Corp.'s Steven Long.Commission members include: Parkland Memorial Hospital CEO RonAnderson, MD; former HHS Asst. Secretary for Health Edward Brandt,MD; California Health Commissioner Molly Coye, MD; and Hopkinsprofessor Karen Davis.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Health Care CostsThe rate of increase in community hospital expenses dipped to afive-year low for the first half of 1991, says the American HospitalAssn. The AHA panel survey of 2,000 hospitals found that a 9.3percent hike in total expenses, down from nearly 11.3 percent in1990. Moderate interest rates, a shallow climb in inflation, andgreater use of more part time workers helped hospitals hold theline, AHA says. The 3.4 percent hike in capital costs was less thanhalf of last year's 8.9 percent rate and dramatically down from 1982when it reached 27.4 percent.Congress should set federal standards for long term care insuranceif states don't strengthen consumer protection laws, says theGeneral Accounting Office. While some laws are stronger, manystates haven't adopted standards developed by the National Assn. ofInsurance Commissioners (NAIC), GAO's Janet Shikles told the HouseCommerce Consumer Protection Subcommittee Oct. 24. Prominentlymissing are guaranteed policy renewal and prohibitions againstexclusion of Alzheimer's patients. Insurers are doing a better job ofadopting standards, but they need to do better, GAO noted. Shiklesalso faulted NAIC, arguing that its model long term care insurancelaw should contain uniform definitions, improved methods fordetermining eligibility, and greater protection against abusivemarketing practices.Life and health insurers paid $1.2 billion in AIDS-related claims in1990, more than four times the level in 1986, reports the HealthInsurance Assn. of America and the American Council on LifeInsurance. The 1990 estimate brings the industry's total in AIDS-related claims to more than $3.5 billion since 1986. The latestestimated total for 1990 -- $1.2 billion -- is four times the $292.2million estimated for 1986. Private health insurers write checks forabout 40 percent of AIDS-related health care costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Managed CareMore than a third of psychiatric and substance abuse hospitaladmissions are unnecessary, says a new study. Researchers at BlueCross & Blue Shield of Michigan are recommending a prospectivepayment system for psych/substance abuse hospitalizations, alongwith aggressive preadmission review and case management.Researchers randomly selected 539 cases drawn from 61 hospitalsin southeastern Michigan covering services delivered in 1987 and1988. Nearly 40 percent of 425 mental illness admissions werejudged unnecessary, while nearly 60 percent of 114 substance abuseadmissions were so viewed. Authors speculate that psychiatristsare biased toward a "medical model" and insurers provide anadditional financial incentive for hospitalizing patients.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Industry NewsThe FDA would have additional tools to combat criminal fraud in thegeneric drug industry under a bill (H.R.2454) approved by the HouseOct. 31. FDA would be able to debar for at least one year firms andindividuals convicted or implicated in bribery, fraud, falsestatements, or other crimes that undermine the FDA approvalprocess. The bill also would establish penalties of as much as$250,000 per individual and $1 million per company and permit thetemporary denial of product approvals for up to 18 months. Another18 months would be tagged on for bribery and fraud. Companies undersuspicion could have their products suspended unless they couldprove their products were untainted. The bill also would revokeillegally obtained generic drug approvals and provide standbyinvestigational authority for the HHS Inspector General. A similarbill (S.1164) by Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-UT) is pending.Medical device manufacturers want to quash an insurance industryeffort to enlarge the government's medical technology assessmentsystem. Four health insurance groups have offered to chip in $1million to HHS' Office of Technology Assessment. Currently budgetedat about $1 million, the office evaluates an average of 20 types oftechnology each year. The extra money would double the reviews andmake the government a bigger player in technology dissemination.But the Health Industry Manufacturers Assn. says the plan wouldcreate a monolithic approach to technology assessment and could"kill promising technology and deter innovators from going forwardwith certain technologies." Insurers say the current technologyassessment process -- which draws on the expertise of some 80different organizations -- often is conflicting and leaves insurers inlimbo. Insurers are looking for "a solid assessment," says PrudentialInsurance VP Dan Dragalin, MD. The insurers want to start the neweffort in January, but HHS official J. Jarrett Clinton, MD, hasn'tdecided whether to accept the offer. Provider groups such as theAmerican Medical Assn. also are deciding whether to sign on withthe insurers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991Other Washington NewsThe long-awaited veto showdown over abortion counseling at familyplanning clinics is imminent. Congressional negotiators agreed to aone-year prohibition on implementation of regulations that banabortion counseling, a move President Bush has promised to veto.The legislative ban appears in a $207 billion fiscal 1992 funding billfor HHS and the Departments of Education and Labor (H.R.2707). Thatbill includes significant increases in spending on biomedicalresearch into cancer and Alzheimer's disease. The NationalInstitutes of Health (NIH) would receive $9 billion in FY92, including$1.9 billion for the National Cancer Institute and $387 million forthe National Aging Institute, of which $15 million would go towardAlzheimer's research. To stay under statutory spending limits,lawmakers agreed to defer spending $575 million of the NIH totaluntil the last day of the federal fiscal year. Congress took similaraction on several other program areas in the bill, which also couldprovoke Bush to wield his veto pen. If Bush does veto the bill, it willtake two thirds of both the House and Senate to override him; to dateBush never has been overridden. As part of the final bill, confereesupped funding for HHS' "Healthy Start" initiative to prevent infantmortality. The bill includes $75 million in FY92, triple the FY91total but well below the $138.7 million Bush requested. Of thattotal, $40 million would immediately go to 15 U.S. cities andcounties; another $25 million would be paid out on the last day ofFY92; and $10 million would go to community health centers (CHCs).The bill also hikes CHC funding from $478.2 million in FY91 to$527.2 million in FY92 and raises funding for the maternal and childhealth block grant to $650 million, compared with FY91's $587million. Some cities will also get more money to deal with AIDS.Other highlights: the Medicare contractor budget went from $1.5billion in FY91 to $1.7 billion in FY92, but $257 million of that is ina contingency reserve. Another $150 million is slated for statesurvey and certification programs with no requirement for "userfees."Hoping to achieve at least partial health care reform, a pair ofpowerful congressional Democrats are pressing efforts to reformthe dysfunctional small group health insurance market. House Ways& Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-IL) and SenateFinance Committee chief Lloyd Bentsen (D-TX) announced Oct. 24that they will push for action in 1992. While neither is forsakingcomprehensive reform, both think insurance changes can get WhiteHouse backing. "My hope is that this legislation will end afrustrating impasse," says Rostenkowski. Their bill would setminimum standards for small firms, ban medical underwriting, andforce renewal of policies. It also would limit how much premiumscould vary and would set parameters on how much insurers couldcharge business. Rostenkowski would require insurers to offerMedicare's benefit package plus new prevention coverage. Bentsenplans to design his own benefit package. Rostenkowski would haveHHS set and enforce standards, while Bentsen would leave it to stateinsurance commissioners. The most expensive element of the planwould hike the 25 percent tax deduction for the self-insured to 100percent. That would cost $7.5 billion over five years. Bentsen wantsit done immediately; Rostenkowski would phase it in.Funding for mental health and substance abuse research wouldincrease under a bill (H.R.3698) introduced Nov. 1 by Rep. HenryWaxman (D-CA). The measure also would retain the current structureof the Alcohol, Drug Abuse & Mental Health Administration(ADAMHA), despite an Administration proposal to shift researchprograms to the National Institutes of Health. Waxman, who chairsthe House Commerce Health Subcommittee, would authorize $525million for mental health research in fiscal 1992 compared to$483.8 million spent in FY91. His bill also would authorize $293million in FY92 for drug abuse research up from $265.2 million inFY91; and fund alcohol research at $160 million FY92, up from $143million in FY91. In August, the Senate approved an ADAMHA bill(S.1306) that would move the ADAMHA research components to NIH.Waxman's bill would create a new state-run community mentalhealth services block grant.Following are summaries of health-related regulations and noticesthat have appeared in the "Federal Register." To order individualcopies of the "Federal Register,"end $1.50 to: Superintendent ofDocuments, GPO, Washington DC 20402.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991FINAL RULESFinal rule expanding the Medicare swing-bed program to encompassrural hospitals with 50 to 99 beds and establishing requirements forswing-bed hospitals with more than 49 beds. Effective Nov. 21. FR10-22-91, p. 54539. HHS/HCFA, Thomas Hoyer, 301/966-4607.Final rule amending Medicare regulations on prepaid health care.Effective Nov. 18. FR 10-17-91, p. 51984. HHS/HCFA, Luisa Iglesias,202/245-0383.Final rule changing the existing CHAMPUS day limits and waivercriteria for acute inpatient psychiatric care, introducing new daylimits for residential treatment center care, and protecting againsteconomic interests in referrals to inpatient facilities by health careprofessionals. Effective Nov. 18. FR 10-18-91, p. 52193. DOD/OS,Stephen Knight, 703/697-8975.Final rule establishing a mandatory preadmission authorizationprogram for mental health services under CHAMPUS. Effective Nov.18. FR 10-18-91, p. 52198. DOD/OS, Stephen Knight, 703/697-8975.Final rule requiring each health care provider who administers aparticular vaccine set forth in the Vaccine Injury Table to provide acopy of the vaccine information pamphlets. Effective Apr. 15, 1992.FR 10-15-91, p. 51798. HHS/PHS, Walter Orenstein, 404/639-1880.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991PROPOSED RULESList of priority regulations being developed by HHS, the regulationidentification number, and, if available, the date of the last, or nextanticipated action. FR 10-21-91, p. 53262. HHS, Gloria Ellis,202/245-6824.Proposed rule establishing Medicare requirements for designatingcertain hospitals as Essential Access Community Hospitals (EACHs)or Rural Primary Care Hospitals (RPCHs), conditions that an RPCHmust meet to participate in Medicare, rules for Medicare paymentfor services furnished by EACHs and RPCHs. Comments due Dec. 24,1991. FR 10-24-91, p. 55382. HHS/HCFA, Thomas Hoyer, 301/966-4607.FDA is reopening the period for submission of comments on theproposed rule amending the tentative final monograph for over-the-counter topical acne drug products to Nov. 7. FR 10-17-91, p. 52008.HHS/FDA, William Gilbertson, 301/295-8000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHEALTH MANAGER'S UPDATE via NewsNetNOVEMBER 06, 1991NOTICESNotice providing the list of laboratories currently certified to meetstandards of Subpart C of Mandatory Guidelines for FederalWorkplace Drug Testing Programs. FR 10-22-91, p. 54582.HHS/ADAMHA, National Institute of Drug Abuse, Drug TestingSection, 301/443-6014.Notice announcing administrative hearing to reconsider the decisionto disapprove Minnesota State Plan Amendment, a list of Medicaidobstetrical and pediatric payment rates and data alleging at least 50percent of obstetrical and pediatric practitioners are full Medicaidparticipants. FR 10-23-91, p. 54876. HHS/HCFA, Docket Clerk,301/597-3013.HRSA is accepting applications for fiscal 1992 grants for programsfor physician assistants. Comments due Nov. 20. FR 10-21-91, p.52552. HHS/HRSA, Judy Bowen, 301/443-6960.HRSA announces the filing of the Maternal and Child Health ResearchGrants Review Committee annual report with the Library ofCongress. FR 10-25-91, p. 55330. HHS/HRSA, Gontran Lamberty,301/443-2190.OASH is accepting applications for a continuing cooperativeagreement with the Association of School of Public Health. FR 10-21-91, p. 52551. HHS/OASH, James Harrell, 202/245-7611.NIH is seeking agreements with companies for the marketing andcommercialization of cancer information products and services ofthe National Cancer Institute to community-based practicingoncologists via an Integrated Clinical Workstation. FR 10-24-91, p.55131. Robert Esterhay, 301/496-8880.Notice outlining the three sets of rates in connection with therecovery, from tortiously liable third persons, of the cost ofhospital medical care and treatment furnished by the U.S. FR 10-16-91, p. 51940. OMB, Richard Darman, 202/395-4840.OSAP is accepting grant applications for projects to enablecommunities to implement and systematically study approaches toprevent and reduce alcohol and other drug abuse through thedevelopment of partnerships of multiple agencies and organizationsat the local level. Deadline is Jan. 20, 1992. FR 10-17-91, p. 52307.HHS/ADAMHA, OSAP, 301/443-9438.HHS/OS, self-evaluation and recordkeeping required by regulationsimplementing Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (0990-0124). FR 10-18-91, p. 52271. HHS OS, Reports Clearance Officer,202/619-0511.Notice announcing an action taken by the NIH Director under the NIHGuidelines for Research involving Recombinant DNA Molecules fromMay 7, 1986. Effective Dec. 15. FR 10-15-91, p. 51784. HHS/NIH,Bernadine Healy, 301/496-2433.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-17IA086-000615-B040-183http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015920 text/html 40738HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMTContent-length: 40551Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh16.html Sample Issue Copyright MANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNet January 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTS (568 words) EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATION (855 words) PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FOR ER VISITS (182 words) AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHO (720 words) PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION (7 words) CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'S CLAIM (885 words) ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYS (243 words) FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENT (593 words) GAO: ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CARE (592 words) AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILL (624 words) ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATION (466 words) CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996PHYSICIANS SUE N.Y. HEALTH DEPARTMENT OVER HMO CONTRACTSA group of physicians, claiming that the New York StateDepartment of Health failed to review an HMO contract, hassued the department in an effort to force it to conduct therequired reviews.The 1,000-member League of Physicians and Surgeons, a NewYork City-based advocacy group, said in the suit that thestate agency should not have approved the contract offeredto physicians by ChoiceCare, a Melville, N.Y.-based HMO,because of a physician "gag rule" and a lack of appealrights in the contract.However, the underlying message in the lawsuit was that theagency must begin following the rules and review allcontracts presented to it, as required by state law, saysleague executive director Yvonne Archer."The Department of Health is supposed to approve each newgeneration of a contract and evaluate it for any negativeeffect" on physicians and/or patients, Archer says.  "Thatnever seems to get done, so we decided to force the issue.This puts them on notice that they'd better do what they'resupposed to do."The group particularly objected in its lawsuit to what ittermed a "gag rule" in the contract, which Archer saysprohibits physicians from discussing the health plan withpatients.  The group also objected to what it termed a lackof appeal rights for physicians in the contract."The gag rule is to keep patients in the dark so they don'tswitch plans," said Archer in an interview with Managed CareLaw Outlook.  "What we're talking about is doctors' abilityto freely express to patients any concerns" they might haveabout the managed care organization in question, Archersays.The league is seeking a judicial order that would force thehealth department to review contracts and would requireChoiceCare to remove or modify the clause that Archer termsa gag rule.Health department officials declined comment on the lawsuit.However, ChoiceCare Senior Vice President of Marketing JohnKaegi says the clause is not a gag rule at all.  "Itprotects the doctors as well as us," he says.The clause, about one paragraph long, states that ChoiceCareand its contracting physicians agree to protect the rightsof confidentiality of both parties, along with plan membersand patients, Kaegi says.After the suit was filed, "We considered removing it, but itwasn't necessary," Kaegi said in an interview.  "Everybodywho's looked at the thing says there's no way it can beinterpreted as a gag order."Instead of removing the phrase, the managed careorganization decided to provide additional education tophysicians about its meaning, in the form of verbal guidancefrom plan representatives in the field, Kaegi says.  On thesubject of appeal rights, Kaegi says the health plan has"two very distinct appeals processes," one for providers andone for members.  However, those procedures are spelled outin an addendum to the physician contract, which the league"apparently didn't have" when it filed the lawsuit, Kaegisays.Kaegi says ChoiceCare has no objection to health departmentreview of contracts.  "We would encourage the Department ofHealth to consider very carefully all language in allcontracts," he says.  "Certainly, the situation of their notreviewing all contracts is not our doing."For more information on the lawsuit against the New YorkDepartment of Health, call Archer at (212)768-0605 and Kaegiat (516)694-4000.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996EEOC, ERISA PLANS STRUGGLE OVER ADA INTERPRETATIONFederal officials' unpredictable interpretations of theAmericans with Disabilities Act are frustrating self-insuredemployers' efforts to design healthcare benefits packages,some industry observers say.  And the federal agencycrafting the final rules isn't likely to clear up theconfusion any time soon."We don't have any easy answers," Peggy Mastroianni,division director with the federal Equal EmploymentOpportunity Commission office of legal counsel, toldattendees at the ERISA Industry Committee quarterly meetingin December.  "We're just starting to develop final guidancein this area."  She offered no date for when those finalrules will come out.However, Stephanie Kanwit, vice president for health claimsand litigation at Aetna Life and Casualty Co., blasts theEEOC for its "attempt to micromanage the American healthcaresystem."Employers are suffering because the rules are notpredictable and provide a powerful disincentive to providinghealthcare benefits, she says."In the words of the statute, Congress believed that peoplewith disabilities are a discrete and insular minority.That's not what the EEOC is doing," Kanwit says.  EEOC'sinterpretation of the ADA ignores legislative history andignores legal interpretations of similar anti-discriminationstatutes, she says."I feel [the EEOC's] interpretation is counter-productive tothe goals of the agency," she says."I have to assume that Congress knew what it was doing whenit passed the ADA," Kanwit says.  "I have to assume that itdoes not automatically void ERISA.  The two can co-exist,but not in the way the EEOC believes."In the ADA, Congress failed to make clear whether the newlaw applied to employer-sponsored health plans, Mastroiannisays.  "What we have tried to do is to provide rules forevaluating benefits when trying to cut costs," she says.The EEOC issued interim guidance in 1993 that indicated theADA would apply if a coverage limitation applied to aspecific disability.  For example, Mastroianni says, ablanket pre-existing condition exclusion is not disability-based, nor are general exclusions of experimental drugs orlimits on pharmaceuticals or X-rays.In general, less-favorable treatment of mentalhealth/nervous conditions also is not disability-basedbecause it involves a wide variety of dissimilar conditions,she says.Coverage limits or exclusions that do not affect people withor without disabilities, or people with a wide variety ofdissimilar conditions, could become subject to the ADA, shesays."What is the consequence of a disability-based distinction?"she asks.  "If it is [disability-based], the employer has toexplain why it is not a subterfuge to evade the purpose ofthe ADA.  In cases like this, the burden ought to be on theemployer."Case law leaves few clues for ERISA plans to follow,employers findThere has been very little relevant case law on the issue ofdisability-based discrimination within health plans,Mastroianni says, adding, "The law in this area is stilldeveloping."Employers are having a tough time determining how the ADAaffects their benefits packages, says Kevin Anderson,director of healthcare initiatives with General Motors Corp."With the passage of the ADA, the question is:  What is adisability under the ADA, and what does it apply to?"Anderson says."Our plan does include limitations on mental health andsubstance abuse -- limited in terms of the number of visitsreimbursed," Anderson says, adding that some interpretationsof the ADA would place General Motors in non-compliance withthe law.Another example in GM's benefits package involves speechtherapy, Anderson says.  The benefit applies only tochildren younger than age six, and he says the same questionapplies:  Does the ADA impact that benefit?A third example, Anderson says, is language denying coveragefor experimental procedures, including bone marrowtransplants for women suffering from breast cancer orpatients with AIDS.  In a recent court case, Henderson v.Bodine Aluminum, the federal 8th Circuit Court of Appeals,St. Louis, ordered an employer to cover an experimentalbreast cancer treatment after the plaintiff alleged that thedenial violated the ADA by denying benefits for breastcancer but not for other forms of cancer.  The appeals courtreturned the case to the district court for a full hearing.Mastroianni says her office didn't necessarily agree withthe decision in Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum."If it's okay to have a general exclusion of experimentaltreatments, then why do we have cases like this?" she asks."We're looking at it differently.  If we see in a case thatthe standards for [coverage of] high-dosage chemotherapy inbreast cancer are different than for other [cancers], thequestion then becomes whether exclusions for experimentaltreatment are being applied in a discriminatory way.""Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum is terrible law," Kanwit adds,noting that in the case, Karen Henderson ultimately wasincluded in the clinical trial for the experimentaltreatment, but ended up in the placebo group, not in thegroup receiving the actual treatment.For additional information on the ADA and ERISA plans,contact the ERISA Industry Committee at (202)789-1400.y  Henderson v. Bodine Aluminum, No. 95-2469 (8th Cir. June16, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT MCOS' ABILITY TO DENY PAYMENT FORER VISITSPennsylvania managed care plans would have to foot the billfor an enrollee's out-of-network emergency room care if a"reasonable person" would believe the symptoms indicated anemergency, under legislation recently introduced by twoKeystone State lawmakers.Acting in response to consumer and provider complaints aboutMCOs refusing to reimburse enrollees for certain emergencyroom services, state Sens. Roy Afflerbach (D-Lehigh-Northampton) and Jim Gerlach (R-Chester County) introducedcompanion legislation Jan. 4 that the two say will betterregulate and define Pennsylvania MCOs' responsibilities.Gerlach's S.B. 1356 contains the same language aslegislation introduced in the House by Rep. John A. Lawless(R-Audubon).  Both apply a "reasonable person" standard toenrollees who seek emergency care.  Regardless of the finaldiagnosis, if it is determined that a reasonable personexperiencing the symptoms described by an enrollee seekingcare would believe it to be an emergency, the patient wouldbe reimbursed.The bills will be assigned to committees after statelawmakers return to work Jan. 22.  For details, call Sen.Afflerbach's office at (717)787-1349 and Sen. Gerlach'soffice at (717)787-1398.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996AWP, PATIENT CHOICE BILLS ANTICIPATED IN OHIO, MICH., IDAHOAny willing provider legislation and its newer cousins,freedom of choice and patient protection acts, already havebeen introduced in at least 21 states, and it's likely thatthe proposals will spark spirited fights between billproponents and managed care forces in at least a few ofthose states, industry officials say.It's difficult to say where the AWP "hot spots" might be,says Herb Schultz, director of state advocacy for the GroupHealth Association of America/American Managed Care andReview Association.  The group is tracking 48 bills,including carryover legislation from 1995."We're at the beginning of it," he says.  "In the nextcouple of months we'll see where the trend is.  We expect,like last year, to see any willing provider, freedom ofchoice and other anti-managed care bills in many states."Schultz adds that the last couple of years have shown thatmanaged care forces are capable of defeating those billswhen they crop up.  "I'm confident we will be able, as anindustry, to bring information to state legislators thatthey need to see on this legislation," he says.Last year, any willing provider-type bills were introducedin more than 20 states, Schultz says.  However, only two ofthose became law:  In Texas, legislators approved apharmacy-only any willing provider bill but vetoed a highlyregulatory patient protection bill, and in Arkansas, a broadany willing provider bill was enacted.  Several insurers arechallenging the Arkansas law on the grounds that it violatesfederal law.Managed care foes moving away from AWP approach, tryingpatient protection tackThe trend appears to be moving away from any willingprovider bills toward broader patient protection measures,industry analysts say.More states are considering patient protection act-stylelegislation than "pure" any willing provider bills, says GuyD'Andrea, director of state services for GHAA/AMCRA."Patient protection act-type legislation touches on avariety of subject areas beyond provider participation," hesays.  "It usually focuses more on the process by whichplans make decisions on provider participation, oftenstopping short of requiring participation."However, "there's sometimes a very fine line between patientprotection acts and any willing provider legislation,"D'Andrea says.In addition, any willing provider bills that are introducedoften have a broader focus than they might have a few yearsago, D'Andrea says.  "In the past, they focused onpharmacy," he says.  "Now, it's more common to see an anywilling provider bill that just says 'any willing provider'[without specifying types of providers].  Obviously, themore providers you bring under the umbrella, the bigger theimpact on managed care."Although it's difficult to determine where any willingprovider-type legislation might make progress this year,managed care forces in several states already have geared upto fight it:y  The Association of HMOs in Michigan met last fall withstate Rep. John Jamian (R), who is interested in draftingpatient protection act legislation.  According to the group,Jamian assured managed care representatives that he did notwant to write an anti-managed care bill, and said thelegislation would not be a vehicle for an any willingprovider proposal.However, the lawmaker did express concern aboutauthorization for out-of-panel providers within managed careorganizations, the HMO group said.The legislation still is being written, according to aspokeswoman for the group.y  In Ohio, businesses, insurers, consumer and labororganizations have formed a coalition to defeat any willingprovider legislation (Managed Care Law Outlook, November1995).The group, which calls itself the Coalition for ManagedCare, will oppose legislative initiatives before the OhioGeneral Assembly this year.Several committees already are considering AWP bills,according to the group.y  In Idaho, the Idaho Medical Society has distributed adraft of a proposed patient protection act to industryleaders for comments.  The draft does not include AWPlanguage, but does have a requirement that all managed careentities, except those exempt from federal income tax underIRS code section 501(c)(3) or (4), offer enrollees a point-of-service option.For additional information, contact D'Andrea and Schultz at(202)778-3200.  Contact the Association of HMOs in Michiganat (517)371-3181.  Contact the Idaho Medical Association at(208)344-7888.  Contact the Ohio Coalition for Managed Careat (800)360-2065.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996PENDING ANY WILLING PROVIDER LEGISLATION(See original issue)Source:  GHAA/AMCRABack to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996CAPITALCARE TOLD TO RECONSIDER DENIAL OF AIDS PATIENT'SCLAIMManaged care organizations need to follow the rules spelledout in ERISA when making coverage decisions on patients'claims.  That's the message from a U.S. court of appeals'decision in Bernstein v. CapitalCare, a legal expert says.The Dec. 4 decision, from the U.S. Court of Appeals of the4th Circuit, Richmond, Va., said that CapitalCare, an HMOsubsidiary of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of the NationalCapital Area, Washington, D.C., had failed to take allmedical evidence into account when denying coverage for out-of-area hospital care for Jeffrey Bernstein, an AIDS patientfrom Washington, D.C.  The court also found that CapitalCarehad not followed procedures spelled out in ERISA for thedenial of coverage.The court remanded the case to the U.S. District Court forthe Eastern District of Virginia, Alexandria, withinstructions for CapitalCare to reconsider coverage forBernstein's care, this time considering all medicalevidence.  However, the court left it up to CapitalCarewhether to cover the hospital care in question.The case involved medical care Bernstein, who was anenrollee in CapitalCare, received in New York in May 1992.Bernstein was diagnosed as HIV-positive in 1986.  InFebruary 1992, while in New York, Bernstein was committed toa psychiatric facility and treated for dementia.  Upondischarge, Bernstein stayed at his brother Philip's home fora short time before returning with his brother to his home -- and to CapitalCare's service area -- in Washington.  Hethen went back to New York with his brother.Several days later, Bernstein began exhibiting stroke-likesymptoms and was taken to the emergency room in Manhattan'sNew York Hospital.  He was admitted to the hospital the nextday, and hospital records indicated his hospitalization wasfor CNS lymphoma, a form of brain cancer.  He wastransferred to a healthcare facility in Virginia in July1992 and died a day after arriving.CapitalCare denied coverage for Bernstein's secondhospitalization, citing his location outside the MCO'sservice area and its policy of not providing benefits whenthe need for care could have been foreseen.Bernstein's brother immediately protested the coveragedenial and later took the case to the district court, whichfound that "it was reasonably foreseen that [Bernstein]would need acute medical attention."  The court also foundthat it wasn't necessary for the patient to know thespecific illness for which he might be hospitalized.  Thecourt granted summary judgment to CapitalCare.The appeals court, however, found that CapitalCare deniedcare without following the requirements outlined in ERISA.In addition, the court said, that denial decision precededthe arrival of some of Bernstein's medical and hospitalrecords, meaning that clinicians at CapitalCare could nothave taken that information into account when denyingcoverage."The initial issue in this appeal is whether theadministrative record before CapitalCare at the time of thebenefit determination contained sufficient evidence to allowthe district court adequately to assess the reasonablenessof the plan's decision," the decision says.  "This thresholdinquiry ensures the plan beneficiary that he or she receivesprocedural fairness under the plan and that the planadministrator's decisions are principled and deliberate."Unfortunately, the information in the CapitalCareadministrative record did not meet that standard, the courtsaid."The administrative record before CapitalCare at the time itdenied benefits for Jeffrey's hospitalization fails toadequately document the administrator's decisional process,"the decision said.  "Indeed, CapitalCare's administrativerecord contained very little evidence at all."The court noted that, at the time of the initial denial, theadministrative record contained only four items, includingphone logs detailing calls from Bernstein's brother duringthe illness and information about Bernstein's stay at thepsychiatric facility."These documents provide little support for CapitalCare'sinitial determination that Jeffrey's need for care wasreasonably foreseeable," the court said.  "Furthermore, noone at CapitalCare had spoken to Jeffrey's physicians in NewYork to ascertain the complete circumstances of hishospitalization."CapitalCare maintains that it reviewed the denial afterreceiving Bernstein's medical records from New York;however, the appeals court said that the administrativerecord contains no documentation of this review.  Theappeals court returned the case to the district court withinstructions to tell CapitalCare to take another look at itsdenial.The case provides notice to managed care organizations thatthey must follow the procedures spelled out in ERISA beforedenying coverage, says attorney Charles Steele of Foley &Lardner in Washington.However, Steele notes that the court "didn't get into someof the meatier issues, such as the rights of people withAIDS to move."The appeals court did say that "One may presume that at somepoint in the progression of an AIDS patient's disease, theneed for hospitalization or acute medical care, because ofsome AIDS-related complication, would become foreseeable."But the court concluded that "such complex medicaldeterminations are peculiarly within the ken of medicalprofessionals, not federal judges.  Under a deferentialstandard of review, the district court's role is limited todetermining whether those findings are supported bysubstantial evidence."For more information, call Steele at (202)672-5300 orRichard Carter, of Huggins Carter & Coleman, at (703)684-3444.y  Bernstein v. CapitalCare, No. 94-2448 (4th Cir. 1994)Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996ERISA KEEPS A HOLD ON FEDERAL REFORM EFFORTS, REPORT SAYSThe Employee Retirement Income Security Act will continue tobe an important influence on private-sector health plans aslegislative initiatives, the healthcare market and legaldoctrine evolve, concludes a new report.The report, by the Washington, D.C.-based Employee BenefitResearch Institute, says that ERISA, which greatlyinfluenced debate on President Clinton's healthcare reformproposals, also is at the center of congressional proposalsfor health insurance reform.State versus federal regulation also is a central point ofcontention in the debate over Medicare reform, the reportsays."The health market has changed fundamentally since ERISA wasenacted in 1974, and the regulatory role of Washingtonversus the states is now being reexamined," says EBRIpresident Dallas Salisbury, who adds, "The outcome willaffect the health insurance of over 160 millionindividuals."The report includes three sections:  an overview of ERISAand health regulation by Peter Schmidt of Arnold and Porter;a section on multi-employer plans by Judy Mazo of the SegalCompany; and a section on ERISA and state health reformwritten by Kala Ladenheim of the Intergovernmental HealthPolicy Project.The report examines the following issues:y  ERISA's broad pre-emptive effect;y  The changing relationship between three categories ofstate health initiatives -- insurance mandates, medicalhigh-risk pools and uncompensated care pools; andy  ERISA's effect on the rise in the number of self-fundedplans.Copies of the study are available for $25.  Call (410)516-6946.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996FLA. COMP LAWYERS PUSH FOR PATIENT CHOICE AMENDMENTIf a group of workers' compensation lawyers in Florida hasits way, state residents will have the right to select thehealthcare provider of their choice for all care, not justworkers' comp.Meanwhile, another constitutional issue is erupting inFlorida:  a single-payer effort spearheaded by a groupcalled the Floridians for Health Security.The workers' comp lawyers group is pushing a proposed stateconstitutional amendment that would guarantee stateresidents the right to select the healthcare provider oftheir choice.The group, known as the Florida Workers' Advocates, hasreceived ballot approval from the state Division ofElections and has begun collecting signatures to place theamendment on the ballot via the citizen initiative process.If the group collects the necessary signatures, theinitiative will be placed on the Florida ballot in 1996.  Ifapproved, it would affect all managed care in the state --not just workers' comp managed care.The amendment reads:  "An individual's absolute right toselect his or her healthcare providers shall not be deniedor limited by law or contract."Opponents of the initiative -- which include businesses andinsurers -- say it would destroy the state's expandingmanaged care industry and would drive insurance rates up."We have the highest healthcare costs on the planet, andthis just makes it worse," says Jodi Chase, general counselfor Associated Industries of Florida."This is an attempt by workers' comp lawyers to make moremoney," she adds.Managed care companies and businesses are gearing up tofight the proposal, and could end up spending millions doingso if the initiative is included on the ballot in November.Florida Workers' Advocates first needs to gather 42,945signatures from registered voters in three congressionaldistricts.If that occurs, the measure comes before the attorneygeneral and the state supreme court.  If they approve it,the group then must collect and have verified an additional429,428 signatures from registered voters in at least 12congressional districts to place the initiative on the 1996ballot.Florida is in the process of becoming the first major statewhere managed care is mandatory in the workers' comp system.As a result, the market is heating up as the January 1997deadline for workers' comp managed care approaches.If the proposed amendment is approved, some observers say,it could eliminate the savings that otherwise would begained in workers' comp and in the Florida group healthmarket, which also is undergoing large growth in managedcare.Although it's not clear what chance the Florida Workers'Advocates have to place their initiative on the ballot,attorney Glen Wieland, president of the group, says a pollshows that Florida voters would approve it overwhelmingly.According to the poll, which surveyed 500 registered Floridavoters, 73% favor the amendment, 14% oppose it and 10% areundecided.The poll was conducted in mid-November by Hill ResearchConsultants, a Houston-based public opinion research firmthat has been involved in three successful referendumefforts in Florida.The single payer initiative, which according to FloridaAssociation of HMOs industry analyst Richard Dorff "has muchless impetus than the any willing provider initiative,"would create a statewide single payer system in Florida.The ballot initiative would "provide all persons the rightto comprehensive healthcare services from the healthcareprovider of their choice in a single-payer healthcaresystem."  It also contains any willing provider language.Call Wieland at (407)841-7698.  Contact Dorff at (904)386-2904.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996GAO:  ARIZ. POSTS SAVINGS WITH MEDICAID MANAGED CAREArizona's Medicaid cost-containment program has saved thefederal government and the state millions over the pastseveral years, showing that it's possible to control costsby fostering competition and monitoring plan performance, anew government report shows.The General Accounting Office report, "Arizona Medicaid:Competition Among Managed Care Plans Lowers Program Costs,"found that the state succeeded in containing costs bydeveloping a competitive Medicaid healthcare market in whichhealth plans that submit capitation rates higher than theircompetitors' rates risk losing Medicaid contracts."While other states' per capita costs for Medicaid havecontinued to grow, Arizona's capitation rates declined by11% in 1994," the report says.  "Reviews have also shownthat, since its inception, the per capita growth rate forArizona's program has been less than the national per capitagrowth rate for states with traditional Medicaid programs."Arizona's Medicaid program has been different from thestart.  The state never participated in the traditional fee-for-service Medicaid program, implementing instead in 1982 aprogram that mandates managed care for all beneficiaries andcapitates health plans.The program, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,features a competitive contract award process to purchasehealthcare services from private- or county-operatedhealthcare plans.  The capitation rate is set after abidding process in which health plans submit separate bidsfor each county they want to serve.Health plan contracts stipulate specific provider networks,which the state says ensures provider availability in bothurban and rural locations.  The state also monitors themedical and financial performance of contracting plans.The program has worked to control costs, the GAO reportfound.  It saved the federal government $37 million and thestate $15 million in acute care costs in 1991, according tothe latest study available on Arizona's cost-containmentperformance as compared to similar states with traditionalMedicaid programs.AHCCCS capitation rates fell, on average, by 11% from 1994to 1995, even though average spending per Medicaidbeneficiary was projected to rise nationally during the sameperiod.  The cost of serving beneficiaries in the AHCCCSprogram already was below the cost that would have beenincurred in a traditional Medicaid program.The GAO report concludes that a major factor in cost-containment was the competitive bidding process.  "Plans arenot assured of winning a contract; consequently, they havean incentive to submit the lowest bid for which they canprovide the required beneficiary services and still earn aprofit," the GAO report says.Twenty-one plans submitted 95 bids to provide Medicaidservices in Arizona's 15 counties for the 1995-1997 contractperiod.  AHCCCS awarded 42 contracts to 14 of the 21bidders, including both commercial and non-commercial healthplans, according to the report.Health plans serving Arizona Medicaid beneficiaries areexposed to greater risk than under previous contracts.AHCCCS health plans earned a combined $44 million in profitsin 1993, which represented about 5.4% of revenue, the reportsays.  However, the focus on cost and cost-containment "doesnot appear to harm access to appropriate care," the reportsays."Several indicators suggest that beneficiary satisfaction ishigh," the GAO says.  That may be because the program placesmore weight on access and quality factors than it does oncapitation rates, requires networks to meet certainstandards for primary care coverage and routinely monitorshealth plans' financial and operational performance, thereport says.Additionally, AHCCCS is set to implement a new qualitymanagement system emphasizing outcome-based clinicalmeasures, the report says.Contact the GAO at (202)512-6000.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996AMENDMENTS POSE THREAT TO 'TARGETED' HEALTH REFORM BILLBipartisan congressional legislation that would make healthinsurance more accessible and portable has fairly broadsupport and could come to the Senate floor soon, an industryanalyst says.  But that bill also could be sunk by severalpossible amendments, including one prohibiting lifetime capson benefits, the analyst says.The bill, S. 1028, was introduced by Senate Labor Committeechair Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kan.) and Ranking Member EdwardKennedy (D-Mass.) and is co-sponsored by 24 senators.The proposal would:y  Limit the use of pre-existing condition exclusions.  Forpeople who change jobs, otherwise applicable pre-existingcondition exclusions would be reduced by one month for eachmonth of prior qualifying coverage.y  Provide insurance market reforms such as guaranteedavailability and renewability.y  Provide limited federal pre-emption for fully-insuredpurchasing cooperatives.y  Clarify certain COBRA continuation coverage requirements.The legislation has a number of holds on it, and "the oddsare against it coming to the floor under unanimous consent,"said ERISA Industry Committee legislative analyst AnthonyKnettel at the group's quarterly meeting in December.  "Butthere has been discussion about Kennedy offering it as anamendment to another bill.  It could come up at any time inthat way."There are some substantial obstacles to the bill coming upon the Senate floor," Knettel says, adding, however, "It'sbeing taken seriously."  The problem isn't so much theproposal itself, Knettel says.  "What has caused a lot ofthe controversy are possible amendments to S. 1028."The most likely amendment is one that would prohibitlifetime caps on benefits, Knettel says.  That would have ahuge impact on employer-sponsored benefit plans, he warns."Even if the amendment is relatively narrow in scope, theconsequences for employer-sponsored plans are potentiallysignificant, depending on the caps used by particularplans," Knettel's group wrote in a paper on the subject.Since some employers can only afford to offer coverage if ithas a low lifetime cap -- for example, about $250,000 --"the effect would be devastating for some," according to theanalysis."Prohibiting the use of lifetime caps will force someemployers to drop coverage entirely, while others will beforced to use higher cost-sharing and/or a narrower scope ofcovered benefits to offset the increased plan costs," thegroup said.  "The most likely effect of the amendment willbe to extend coverage for a relative few and to reduce oreliminate coverage for many more."Another likely amendment would require parity in thetreatment of mental illness.  The most likely language wouldrequire parity for "serious mental illnesses," according tothe ERISA Industry Committee.  "That appears to mean, at aminimum, drawing a distinction between 'serious' mentalillnesses like schizophrenia or bipolar disorder andsituations like marriage counseling that are not treatmentof a specific mental illness.""It would require health plans to treat mental healthservices in a comparable or equal way" to other servicesoffered in benefits packages, Knettel says.  For example, ifa plan placed limits on inpatient days for mental healthtreatment, but did not have limits on other treatment,"there is some question whether this amendment would requireyou to equalize that."Knettel adds:  "The impact of this kind of amendment couldbe enormous in terms of bringing the scope of mental healthcoverage up to everything else, or bringing everything elsedown."The amendments eliminating lifetime caps and requiringparity are the most likely to be offered, Knettel says,although other proposals might also be proffered.Another possible amendment would require health plans toextend hospital maternity stays, likely to 48 hours for avaginal delivery and 96 hours for a Caesarean delivery.Contact Knettel at (202)789-1400.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE LAW OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996ORE. MCOS PREPARING TO FIGHT PLAN TO BAN CAPITATIONPredicting steep healthcare cost increases, Oregon HMOadministrators, employers and primary care physicians aregearing up to stop a ballot initiative that wouldeffectively end capitation in the Beaver State.The proposed referendum, which would ban capitation paymentsto providers, has garnered nearly one-third of the 76,000signatures it needs to be placed on the November ballot,according to Tom Mann, the initiative's campaign director.The language of the bill -- written by Salem ophthalmologistGordon Miller -- establishes five acceptable methods ofreimbursement for providers:  payment for work performed;hourly wage; prearranged salary/benefits; bonuses based onwork performed; and reimbursement for expenses.  All otherforms of reimbursement, including any newly developedpayment strategies, would be banned.Should the bill pass, HMO administrators predict premiumswill increase significantly.The bill would likely precipitate a 10% to 15% increase inpremium rates, says Providence Good Health Plans ExecutiveDirector Jack Friedman.  The state would see an even largerrise in the cost of serving its Medicare beneficiaries,where increases in Medicare supplemental and risk plan costscould go higher than 20%, he predicts.Oregon Blue Cross/Blue Shield Vice President of CorporateDevelopment Barney Speight expresses similar concern for thestate's recently restructured Medicaid program, which hasmoved 80% to 90% of its eligibles into managed care.But while Miller agrees that there may be an initial jump inpremium costs, he says the cost of comprehensive medicalcare will remain largely unaffected by changes in paystructure.The Oregon Medical Association hasn't taken sides yet.  Butbecause of the diversity of its membership, says OMAExecutive Director Robert Dernedde, it's unlikely that theassociation would support the initiative.Miller contends that capitation arrangements are immoral,saying they cause physicians to withhold care out offinancial interest.  "If you ever say anything different toa patient because of financial status, you have compromisedyour medical ethics," says Miller, who adds that in acapitated market, all doctors will have to meet the contractcosts of the least ethical physician."I've always been very deeply disturbed by thoseallegations," Speight says.  "[They] paint doctors totallyas economic entities."Proponents of the initiative are fairly confident that themeasure will receive enough signatures to make it on theNovember ballot, and even those most staunchly opposed tothe legislation seem to agree.That sets the stage for a sizable conflict come November,when a wide array of bill opponents could come out againstthe legislation."I believe there will be an opposition campaign," saysSpeight, who adds that employer groups and primary carephysicians would probably be part of a multi-disciplinarymovement against the measure.Call Tom Mann at (503)370-2318 and Providence Good HealthPlans at (503)215-7500.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-18IA086-000615-B041-16http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015936 text/html 29691HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:42 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:47 GMTContent-length: 29504Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh12.html Sample Issue Copyright MANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ORE. MCOS GEARING UP TO FIGHT PROPOSED END OF CAPITATION (539 words) PROJECTED HOSPITAL UTILIZATION RATES PER 100,000 COVERED LIVES (9 words) PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT ER PAYMENT DENIALS FOR MCOS (510 words) CONSUMERS GIVE FOR-PROFIT HMOS QUALITY EDGE, SURVEY FINDS (62 words) CONSUMER PROTECTION REGS "UNIFORM," GHAA/AMCRA SAYS (283 words) AWP FIGHT HEATS UP AS 1996 LEGISLATIVE SESSION OPENS (321 words) PSNS, PREMIUM BATTLES AHEAD FOR MCOS IN 1996, EXPERT SAYS (1235 words) REGIONAL NEWS CALIF. OFFICIALS OKAY CAREMARK'S PURCHASE OF CIGNA MEDICAL GROUP (58 words) FHP/CMG COLORADO DEAL EXTENDED UNTIL DECEMBER 1998 (64 words) PURCHASE OF THREE IPAS EXPANDS FPA'S GOLDEN STATE PRESENCE (56 words) INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INKS NEV. CONTRACT WITH SIERRA HEALTH SERVICES (59 words) COMPDENT EXPANDS MANAGED DENTAL PLAN WITH TEXAS FFS PLAN PURCHASE (46 words) WELLCARE GETS GREEN LIGHT FOR PLANNED BROOME COUNTY, N.Y., HMO (66 words) WELLPOINT TO BUY MASS MUTUAL'S HEALTH SUBSIDIARY IN $380 MILLION DEAL (55 words) CCN TEAMS WITH CHICAGO EMPLOYERS ON CARDIAC CARE PILOT PROGRAM (82 words) ARIZONA'S MEDICAID MANAGED CARE SAVING MILLIONS IN COSTS, GAO SAYS (142 words) CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ORE. MCOS GEARING UP TO FIGHT PROPOSED END OF CAPITATIONby David McGuireAn Oregon ballot initiative that would effectively endcapitation in the Beaver State has HMO administrators,employers and primary care physicians concerned about theirfutures and the future of the state's healthcare system.The proposed referendum, which would ban capitation paymentsto providers, has garnered nearly one-third of the 76,000signatures it needs to be placed on the November ballot,according to Tom Mann, the initiative's campaign director.The language of the bill -- written by Salem ophthalmologistGordon Miller -- establishes five acceptable methods ofreimbursement for providers:  payment for work performed;hourly wage; prearranged salary/benefits; bonuses based onwork performed; and reimbursement for expenses.  All otherforms of reimbursement, including any newly developedpayment strategies, would be banned.Should the bill pass, HMO administrators predict premiumswill increase significantly.The bill would likely precipitate a 10% to 15% increase inpremium rates, says Providence Good Health Plans ExecutiveDirector Jack Friedman.  The state would see an even largerrise in the cost of serving its Medicare beneficiaries,where increases in Medicare supplemental and risk plan costscould go higher than 20%, he predicts.Oregon Blue Cross/Blue Shield Vice President of CorporateDevelopment Barney Speight expresses similar concern for thestate's recently restructured Medicaid program, which hasmoved 80% to 90% of its eligibles into managed care.But while Miller agrees that there may be an initial jump inpremium costs, he says the cost of comprehensive medicalcare will remain largely unaffected by changes in paystructure."There is no question that if physicians are withholdingcare [because of capitation], premiums will be up," he says."But as for cost of service, it's a wash."The Oregon Medical Association hasn't taken sides yet.  Butbecause of the diversity of its membership, says OMAExecutive Director Robert Dernedde, it's unlikely that theassociation would support the initiative.Miller contends that capitation arrangements are immoral,saying they cause physicians to withhold care out offinancial interest."If you ever say anything different to a patient because offinancial status, you have compromised your medical ethics,"says Miller, who adds that in an increasingly capitatedmarket, all doctors will have to meet the contract costs ofthe least ethical physician."I've always been very deeply disturbed by thoseallegations," Speight says.  "[They] paint doctors totallyas economic entities."Any reimbursement system is flawed because it's dealingwith human motivations," he adds, who says there is "as muchevil on the fee-for-service side" as there is in capitatedarrangements.Proponents of the initiative are fairly confident that themeasure will receive enough signatures to make it on theNovember ballot, and even those most staunchly opposed tothe legislation seem to agree.That sets the stage for a sizable conflict come November,when a wide array of bill opponents could come out againstthe legislation."I believe there will be an opposition campaign," saysSpeight, who adds that employer groups and primary carephysicians would probably be part of a multi-disciplinarymovement against the measure.For more information, contact Tom Mann at (503)370-2318 andProvidence Good Health Plans at (503)215-7500.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PROJECTED HOSPITAL UTILIZATION RATES PER 100,000 COVEREDLIVES(See original issue)Source:  Chi Systems Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PA. BILLS WOULD RESTRICT ER PAYMENT DENIALS FOR MCOSPennsylvania managed care plans would have to foot the billfor an enrollee's out-of-network emergency room care if a"reasonable person" would believe the symptoms indicated anemergency, under legislation recently introduced by twoKeystone State lawmakers.Acting in response to consumer and provider complaints aboutMCOs refusing to reimburse enrollees for certain emergencyroom services, state Sens. Roy Afflerbach (D-Lehigh-Northampton) and Jim Gerlach (R-Chester County) introducedcompanion legislation Jan. 4 that the two say will betterregulate and define Pennsylvania MCOs' responsibilities.State MCOs have not taken a stand on the bills, but Gerlachsuspects positions will become clearer as the two pieces oflegislation gain momentum in the Senate."You shouldn't be sitting at home with chest pains saying,'Is this a heart attack or not,'" says Gerlach, adding thatwhile an MCO's ability to control costs is important, thelives of patients must take precedent.Gerlach's S.B. 1356 contains the same language aslegislation introduced in the House by Rep. John A. Lawless(R-Audubon).  Both apply a "reasonable person" standard toenrollees who seek emergency care.  Regardless of the finaldiagnosis, if it is determined that a reasonable personexperiencing the symptoms described by an enrollee seekingcare would believe it to be an emergency, the patient wouldbe reimbursed."The idea is to make a definition that is standard," saysGerlach spokeswoman Carol Hilty.  "We don't want to penalizeinsurance companies."Companion ER legislation's requirements even stricter onMCOsAfflerbach's S.B. 1357 would extend consumer protection abit further than Gerlach's proposal.  If passed, it wouldrequire plans to reimburse enrollees for services performedto the point when a patient's condition is stabilized.The bill adds that reimbursement may be refused only if itis found that the services charged for were not performed.MCOs may also deny payment for medical screeningexaminations in "cases when the plan enrollee reasonablyshould have known that an emergency did not exist."Under S.B. 1357, MCOs that require authorization for paymentwould have to maintain a 24-hour hotline for emergency roomproviders and enrollees to obtain approval for care.It also stipulates that a physician and a surgeon beavailable to mediate authorization disputes.If the emergency provider and hotline physician stilldisagree over treatment, the MCO would be required to takeover the care of the patient either by sending a doctor tothe location or arranging transfer to a plan hospital.Neither bill pleases the Pennsylvania Hospital Association,says its director of state legislation, Kathleen Mebus.Although the association supports the bills' premise, bothare "Band-Aid remedies" to a more serious problem, saysMebus."We have no utilization review standards in this state,"says Mebus, who believes that the proliferation of consumerprotection legislation in Pennsylvania only obscures thatfact.The bills will be assigned to committees after statelawmakers return to work Jan. 22.For more information, call Sen. Afflerbach's office at(717)787-1349 and Sen. Gerlach's office at (717)787-1398.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONSUMERS GIVE FOR-PROFIT HMOS QUALITY EDGE, SURVEY FINDSConsumers give for-profit HMOs the edge in efficiency, butbelieve not-for-profit HMOs are less costly, a studyreleased by the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation finds.According to the study, most Americans think that, whilefor-profit HMOs are generally more efficient and providebetter quality care, not-for-profit HMOs are more community-based and less costly.  For more information, call (202)347-5270.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONSUMER PROTECTION REGS "UNIFORM," GHAA/AMCRA SAYSDisputing a recent study critical of states' HMO consumerprotection regulations, the Group Health Association ofAmerica/American Managed Care and Review Association saysthere is a great deal of uniformity in the levels of HMOregulation and oversight from one state to another.A study by the Los Angeles-based Center for Health CareRights found wide disparities in the level of consumerprotection afforded HMO enrollees in various states (MCO,Dec. 29).  Study authors further indicated that in moststates the level of protection was insufficient.Not so, according to the newly merged GHAA/AMCRA, whichreleased a statement claiming problems with the survey'spremise and methodology.  "To a large extent, I think thereport is misleading," says GHAA/AMCRA Vice President GarryCarneal.  "More states are up to speed than not."GHAA/AMCRA says CHCR failed to take into account theoverlapping federal and private oversight measures thataffect HMOs.  By focusing solely on written statelegislation, says Carneal, CHCR reported much widerdisparities than actually exist."Fifty percent of HMOs have applied for National Committeeon Quality Assurance accreditation," says Carneal, who addsthat with the combination of federal and state HMO acts,HMOs are far more closely watched than fee-for-serviceinsurers.CHCR defends its study, however, asserting that despiteprivate accreditation and federal oversight, significantshortfalls in state legislation in the areas of qualityassurance, information disclosure and grievance proceduresare still very much an issue."[GHAA/AMCRA's] assertion is that healthcare is a nationallyregulated industry, and that's just not the case," says CHCRCounsel Peter Lee.For more information on the consumer protection study,contact CHCR at (213)383-4519.  For details, contactGHAA/AMCRAat (202)778-3200.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996AWP FIGHT HEATS UP AS 1996 LEGISLATIVE SESSION OPENSAny-willing-provider legislation and its newer cousins,freedom-of-choice and patient-protection acts, already havebeen introduced in at least 21 states, and it's likely thatthe proposals will spark spirited fights between billproponents and managed care forces in at least a few ofthose states, industry officials say.It's difficult to say where the AWP "hot spots" might be,says Herb Schultz, director of state advocacy for the GroupHealth Association of America/American Managed Care andReview Association.  The group is tracking 48 bills,including carry-over legislation from 1995.Despite the uncertainty, managed care forces in severalstates already have geared up to fight it:*  The Association of HMOs in Michigan met last fall withstate Rep. John Jamian (R), who is interested in draftingpatient protection act legislation.  According to the group,Jamian assured managed care representatives that he did notwant to write an anti-managed care bill, and said thelegislation would not be a vehicle for an any-willing-provider proposal.  However, the lawmaker did expressconcern about authorization for out-of-panel providerswithin managed care organizations, the HMO group said.  Thelegislation still is being written, according to aspokeswoman for the group.*  In Ohio, businesses, insurers, consumer and labororganizations have formed a coalition to defeat any-willing-provider legislation (Managed Care Law Outlook, November1995).  The group, which calls itself the "Coalition forManaged Care," will oppose legislative initiatives beforethe Ohio General Assembly this year.  Several committeesalready are considering AWP bills, according to the group.*  In Idaho, the Idaho Medical Society has distributed adraft of a proposed patient-protection act to industryleaders for comments.  The draft does not include AWPlanguage, but does have a requirement that all managed careentities, except those exempt from federal income tax underIRS code section 501(c)(3) or (4), offer a point-of-serviceoption to all enrollees.Call Schultz at (202)778-3200.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PSNS, PREMIUM BATTLES AHEAD FOR MCOS IN 1996, EXPERT SAYSby Russell C. Coile, Jr.What's in store for managed care organizations in 1996?  Thehealthcare market will begin changing dramatically as payersdemand even lower prices and provider-sponsored networksbattle established MCOs for Medicare dollars, predictsRussell C. Coile, Jr., president of the Health ForecastingGroup, Santa Clarita, Calif.Competition, capitation and consolidation are at theforefront of the forces that will drive health trends in1996.  It's all part of the re-engineering of the Americanhealthcare market, propelled by payers -- employers,business coalitions and government -- who are demanding andgetting lower prices and reduced expenditures from thehealthcare sector.The year ahead will be a war over the premium.  Price warsbetween HMOs and insurers are expanding on a national basis.The decline in HMO/insurance premiums is triggering a waveof health industry consolidations and deeply slashedprovider payments.  Angered by the cuts, physicians andhospitals are organizing their own provider-sponsorednetworks and fighting back.  The year ahead will be a battlebetween providers and payers to control more of theshrinking premium.Purchasers will win, providers will losePurchasers and government health programs are "winners,"delighted that national health inflation is coming down.Corporate health benefit costs rose only 2% from 1994 to1995, due to widespread switching by employers to managedcare.  Employer-sponsored health costs were one-third belowthe level of consumer inflation, according to thePhiladelphia-based Hay Group.Health plans and providers will be "losers," as pricecompetition starts a downward spiral for HMO profits andprovider payments.  For the first time in a decade, medicalcare prices slipped down to the level of overall consumerinflation, rising only 0.3% in October 1995, according tothe Wall Street Journal.Managed care and employer-driven price competition areslashing health costs.  As recently as 1988, the nation'shealthcare prices were soaring at an annual rate of 14%.Government payment cuts and private-sector competition arelooming for 1996.  The impact of those trends will rippleacross America's $1 trillion health system, affecting everyhospital, physician, health plan and consumer.Premium wars could turn uglyEconomic competition between providers and payers --HMOs/insurers -- over control of the premium could turn uglyin 1996.  All buyers -- employers, business coalitions andgovernment programs -- are driving cost competition amongHMOs and insurers.  In 1995, HMO prices fell by 1.2%.  Thedown cycle is not over.  Early signals for HMO pricesindicate that health plan premiums will range from noincreases to 2% to 3% rollbacks from 1995 price levels.In Northern California, which is an emerging "Stage Five"market including many metropolitan areas with more than 40%HMO enrollment, the average health plan premium has shrunk50% in a 10-year period, from $2,460 per enrollee for amanaged care plan in 1986 to $1,260 for HMO coverage in1995, according to Steve McDermott, CEO of PriMed Inc. andexecutive director of the Hill Medical Group, San Ramon,Calif.  PriMed manages more than 250,000 capitated livesthrough a network of 2,160 physicians.In 1986, hospitals got 41% of the premium, and physicianservices accounted for 33%.  Doctors increased their shareof premium to 37% in 1995, while the hospital componentshrank to 30%.  The big winner was the payer, whoseadministrative costs and profits grew from 14% in 1986 to21% today, according to McDermott.Newt Gingrich:  "Health reform czar"?Move over Hillary.  Newt Gingrich is the next "health reformczar" for the 1990s.  The Republican-driven federal budgetreconciliation act of 1996 would end the Great Societycommitment to healthcare for the poor and elderly, accordingto the Wall Street Journal.  House Speaker Newt Gingrich's(R-Ga.) deficit-reduction proposal is the most sweepingfederal health program reform legislation since 1983, whenCongress converted Medicare to a prepaid health plan.Wrenching cuts in Medicare and Medicaid spending may totalsome $440 billion in the next seven years.  Doctors couldsee their federal payments reduced by almost $30 billion,while hospitals could lose $120 billion or more.That strategy leans more toward Margaret Thatcher thanHillary Rodham Clinton.  Medicare and Medicaid would beprivatized, with incentives for conversion to HMOs.The result would be a multi-tiered health system in whichbeneficiaries choose health plans with different coverages,depending on their ability to pay extra for wider providerchoice or scope of benefits.Federal budget battles could lead to "unbundled" GOP healthreformsExtended wrangling between the White House and GOPCongressional majority could delay -- but probably not stop-- GOP-led health reform initiatives.  If Republicans cannotovercome Clinton vetoes, the GOP may take an "unbundled"approach to health reform, inserting pieces of their healthreform strategy into other legislation.  Key objectives forRepublican health reformers include:y  Placing spending limits on entitlement programs such asMedicare and Medicaid.y  Reducing Medicare and Medicaid spending and holding downfederal expenditures to 4% to 7% annual increases for thenext five to seven years.y  Conversion of Medicaid to a block-grant program managedby the states.y  Conversion of Medicare to a managed care program thatputs HMOs and provider-sponsored networks -- not government-- at risk for managing health costs.y  Caps on Medicare hospital and physician payments.y  Provider-sponsored networks to allow physicians andhospitals to enroll Medicare beneficiaries without an HMOlicense.y  Small-business insurance reforms to eliminate waitingperiods, pre-existing conditions and experience ratings.y  Malpractice reform that limits "pain-and-suffering" non-medical damages to $250,000 per case.y  Medical IRAs and medical savings accounts.y  Reducing subsidies for teaching hospitals and"disproportionate share" facilities.y  Protecting rural hospitals.Are PSNs unfair competition -- or MCO businessopportunities?The "silver lining" in the massive budget reconciliationbill is congressional support for provider-sponsorednetworks.  Here is a compelling rationale for the 3,000physician-hospital organizations and integrated networks.PSNs would give physicians and hospitals a new managed carevehicle to compete for control of the premium.  The PSNconcept may help level the playing field between providersand payers.There could be thousands of PSNs competing for certificationby the Health Care Financing Administration to enroll 37million Medicare beneficiaries.  New competitors wouldpotentially include an estimated 3,000 physician-hospitalorganizations, hundreds of large physician groups and dozensof regional integrated delivery systems.Becoming a PSN could be risky business.  PSNs may need moreexperienced partners, such as HMOs and insurers, to controlcosts and manage the network.  Managing risk will be themake-or-break challenge of provider-sponsored networks and,outside of California, most providers have little or noexperience in capitation.Providers may turn to HMOs and insurers for cost management,quality control and information systems under a variety ofPSN-HMO arrangements, including those in which providers:y  "Rent" the HMO/insurer to manage the network, a techniquecalled administrative services only, in which managed careplans often contract with self-funded employer health plans.y  Utilize an independent third-party administrator to linkthe provider network contractually, manage contracting andcontrol utilization and quality.y  Form strategic business relationships with theHMO/insurer for management services on a profit-sharingbasis (but no equity sharing).y  Joint venture with shared HMO/insurer equity in the PSN,where providers develop the healthcare delivery network andthe HMO/insurer supplies the fiscal and management services.Contact Coile at (805)286-1085.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CALIF. OFFICIALS OKAY CAREMARK'S PURCHASE OF CIGNA MEDICALGROUPFollowing approval by the California Department ofCorporations, Caremark's sub-sidiary, Friendly Hills, LaHabra, Calif., has finalized its purchase of CIGNA MedicalGroup, CIGNA HealthCare's Los Angeles-based staff-modeldelivery system.  The deal will expand the Friendly Hillssystem to cover about 400,000 HMO members in SouthernCalifornia.  For more information on the acquisition,contact CIGNAat (818)500-6948.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FHP/CMG COLORADO DEAL EXTENDED UNTIL DECEMBER 1998FHP Health Care, Englewood, Colo., and Columbine MedicalGroup of Colorado will extend their existing mutual contractfor three more years.  CMG is the exclusive Denver areaprovider of physician services to the Colorado region ofFHP.  CMG serves about 180,000 FHP HMO members in the areaand an additional 17,000 members of FHP's Senior Plan.  Forfurther information, call FHP at (303)714-3082.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PURCHASE OF THREE IPAS EXPANDS FPA'S GOLDEN STATE PRESENCEFPA Medical Management, a multi-state healthcare managementservices organization, has signed a definitive agreement topurchase three California IPAs affiliated with FoundationHealth Corporation and its HMO subsidiary, FoundationHealth.  The IPAs slated for purchase have about 450 primarycare physicians and 2,000 specialists in the Golden State.For more information, contact FPA at (619)295-7005.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INKS NEV. CONTRACT WITH SIERRAHEALTH SERVICESIntegrated Health Services of Maryland has entered anexclusive capitation contract to provide subacute care,long-term care and outpatient rehabilitation services tomembers of Health Plan Nevada, a subsidiary of Sierra HealthServices.  HPN is one of Nevada's largest HMOs, with morethan 112,000 commercial enrollees and 24,000 Medicaremanaged care plan enrollees.  For details, call (212)696-4455.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996COMPDENT EXPANDS MANAGED DENTAL PLAN WITH TEXAS FFS PLANPURCHASEManaged dental care company CompDent Corp., Atlanta, haspurchased Texas Dental Plans/Dental PlanInternational/Dental Plan Resources, a fee-for-servicedental referral company based in San Antonio.  With theacquisition, CompDent covers 1.8 million plan members in 23states.  For more information, call CompDent at (404)998-8936.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WELLCARE GETS GREEN LIGHT FOR PLANNED BROOME COUNTY, N.Y.,HMOWellCare of New York Inc., a subsidiary of the WellCareManagement Group Inc., has been approved by the New YorkDepartment of Health to operate an HMO in Broome County,including the city of Binghamton.  Serving more than 98,000members in New York, WellCare hopes to increase HMOsaturation in the county, which currently has only 13% HMOenrollment.  For details, call WellCare at (914)338-4110.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996WELLPOINT TO BUY MASS MUTUAL'S HEALTH SUBSIDIARY IN $380MILLION DEALManaged care giant WellPoint Health Networks Inc., WoodlandHills, Calif., has signed a definitive agreement to buyGroup Life and Health, a subsidiary of Massachusetts MutualLife Insurance Company, for about $380 million.  The dealwill create one of the nation's largest publicly heldmanaged care organizations, with nearly 4 million members.Call (818)703-4321.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CCN TEAMS WITH CHICAGO EMPLOYERS ON CARDIAC CARE PILOTPROGRAMIn an effort to reduce the incidence, severity and cost ofheart disease, Chicago area companies and hospitals areteaming with the Employers Healthcare Purchasing Initiativefor Quality and Value Health's Community Care Network, amanaged care organization, to launch a pilot program aimedat high-risk patients.  The key element of the CoordinatedCardiac Care Project is a free year-long counseling andsupport program for employees at risk for coronary arterydisease and other heart problems.  For more information,call (203)678-3472.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE OUTLOOK via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ARIZONA'S MEDICAID MANAGED CARE SAVING MILLIONS IN COSTS,GAO SAYSArizona's Medicaid cost-containment program has saved thefederal government and the state millions over the pastseveral years, showing that it's possible to control costsby fostering competition and monitoring plan performance, anew government report shows.The General Accounting Office report, "Arizona Medicaid:Competition Among Managed Care Plans Lowers Program Costs,"found that the state succeeded in containing costs bydeveloping a competitive Medicaid healthcare market in whichhealth plans that submit capitation rates higher than theircompetitors' rates risk losing Medicaid contracts.The program, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System,features a competitive contract award process to purchasehealthcare services from private- or county-operatedhealthcare plans.  The capitation rate is set after abidding process in which health plans submit separate bidsfor each county they want to serve.  For copies of thereport, call GAO at (202)512-6000.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-19IA086-000615-B041-38http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122015952 text/html 43458HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:57:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMTContent-length: 43271Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh62.html Sample Issue Copyright MANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNet February 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Mass. Blue Cross' Medicare HMO First to Get Hit by New HCFA Sanctions (214 words) Penn. Medicaid Program to Mandate 438,000 into Managed Care Plans (364 words) HMOs' Voluntary Compliance Squelches Colo. Maternity Bill (249 words) Medicare Adding Procedures To Bundled Payment Demo (224 words) Mayo's Jacksonville Clinic, Ga. IDS Seeking HMO Licenses (294 words) WellPoint, Trigon Struggle With Charitable Obligations (402 words) GHAA/AMCRA Changes Name, Courts PPOs, UR Firms (137 words) MANAGED CARE BRIEFS (306 words) MANAGED CARE STATS & FACTS Mortality, Hospital Costs Drop As Managed Care Spreads (162 words) 24 States Mandate or Regulate Workers' Comp Managed Care (136 words) Physician Practices Worth More In High Managed Care Markets (123 words) Success of IPA, Network HMOs Not Linked to Care Quality (202 words) State Employees Offered More HMOs in 1995 (175 words) Oxford Shines, HIP Stumbles, Says New York Public Advocate (243 words) California's HMOs Show Widely Varying Utilization (233 words) California's Nonprofit HMOs Have Highest Medical Loss Ratios (242 words) Maternity Stay Lengths Shrink For Women in Twin Cities (214 words) Medicare HMO Members Satisfied In Southern California (198 words) Studies in Brief (234 words) Medicare Managed Care Update (81 words) PROVIDER CONTRACTING & CAPITATION Admar PPO, Hancock POS Test Risk Pools, Bonuses to Boost Physician Performance (618 words) HMO Puts IDS at Full Risk For Plan's Medicare Population (467 words) CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Mass. Blue Cross' Medicare HMO First to Get Hit byNew HCFA SanctionsHCFA has slapped intermediate sanctions on Blue Cross and BlueShield of Massachusetts for "knowingly" including misleadingmarketing information in its Medicare HMO application, according toa HCFA source.In freezing the enrollment and marketing functions of Blue Cross'"Blue Care 65" HMO product, the action represents the first timeHCFA has levied intermediate sanctions on a Medicare risk-contractHMO.The sanctions are expected to take effect in March and stay inplace pending the outcome of a HCFA investigation, the agencysource told MCW. Blue Cross apparently claimed a number of non-contracted physicianswere in the Blue Care 65 provider network, the source says.But the insurer expects to have the problem rectified before thesanctions take effect, Evelyn Murphy, vice president for corporateaffairs for Blue Cross, told MCW.Murphy says Blue Cross itself brought the matter to HCFA'sattention after discovering that 25-30 documents had been "altered"in the insurer's application to the agency. Most of thenon-contracted MDs have since signed contracts with the Blues plan,she adds.Blue Cross recently got HCFA approval to offer a Medicare HMO inMassachusetts in 1996. In fact, the plan just started marketing itsproduct late last month to seniors throughout the state.Blue Care 65 is a zero-premium Medicare HMO. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Penn. Medicaid Program to Mandate 438,000 intoManaged Care PlansIn its first step toward a statewide program, Pennsylvania thismonth drafted a plan to mandate 438,000 Medicaid recipients intoHMOs in five counties surrounding Philadelphia.The initiative, dubbed "HealthChoices," is part of a statewidemandatory managed care program to be phased in over the next threeyears. The state has had a limited mandatory program for 100,000Philadelphia Medicaid recipients since 1986.Pennsylvania got a Sec. 1915(b) Medicaid waiver from HHS to set up"HealthChoices" in 1993 under then-Gov. Bob Casey (D). But the planwas criticized by some groups for lacking Medicaid HMO regulationsand implementation was delayed. A class action lawsuit over theproposal is still pending.Incoming Gov. Tom Ridge (R) made a number of changes toHealthChoices before the state issued a draft request for proposals(RFP) this month. HMO bids will be awarded in the summer, openenrollment will begin Aug. 6, and the program will start Nov. 1.HMO enrollment will be phased in, with coverage for certain groupslike AFDC recipients starting Nov. 1. Remaining eligibles will befolded in on July 1, 1997. Medicaid recipients targeted for 1997entry may voluntarily join HMOs sooner. Recipients who don't select an HMO within a specified time periodwill be randomly assigned to a plan.To address criticisms lobbed at the initial HealthChoices proposal,the department will:o       Ban HMO direct marketing, such asdoor-to-door solicitation, and instead have a benefits consultantconduct enrollment activities.o       Carve out behavioral health servicesfor a separate procurement process. Counties will be given thefirst rights of refusal to manage mental health-substance abusetreatment benefits before a private capitated contractor is picked.o       Require HMOs to submit encounterdata and comply with Medicaid HEDIS (MCW 2/5/96, p. 3).o       Capitate HMOs, build in an allowableprofit margin, and link performance and outcome measures to profitlevels. This addresses concerns about the Philadelphia Medicaidprogram, whose private contractor was found by the HHS InspectorGeneral to have made  excessive profits. That program isscheduled to terminate Oct. 31.o       Make direct payments to hospitalsfor disproportionate share and graduate medical education insteadof including them in the HMO capitation. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996HMOs' Voluntary Compliance Squelches Colo. Maternity BillColorado's HMOs and insurers convinced a state legislator to pullher mandatory maternity stay bill after the health plans agreed tovoluntarily comply with the provisions.The bill would have required health plans to cover 48 hours ofhospital care following a normal delivery and 96 hours following aCaesarean section.Last year, four states enacted similar laws, and a fifth adoptedthe mandate by regulation.The Group Health Assn. of America/American Managed Care and ReviewAssn. expects similar activity this year in at least 14 states(MCW's Managed Care Perspectives 1/29/96, p. 3).The HMOs and insurers that agreed to voluntarily comply represent95% of the market. The health plans agreed:o       Not to require reauthorization formaternity and newborn inpatient care for at least 48 hours afterdelivery.o       To apply guidelines issued by theAmerican College of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the AmericanAcademy of Pediatrics on utilization reviews and authorizationrequests.o       To conduct maternity policyeducation programs for pregnant women, new mothers, pediatricians,family physicians and OB-GYNs.Through various concessions in recent years, Colorado insurers andHMOs have fought off several other legislative attempts, includingany-willing-pharmacy and any-willing-provider laws.Separately, Maryland's doctors earlier this month agreed not topush for a state any-willing-provider law after HMOs made variousconcessions, including disclosure of economic credentiallingcriteria. The Maryland HMOs also agreed to revise provider contracts toclarify that physicians won't be penalized for making certainpublic statements about the health plans. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicare Adding Procedures To Bundled Payment DemoA Medicare bundled payment demonstration project that HCFA expectsto announce within the next two months will be expanded to includeseveral orthopedic and cardiology procedures.HCFA has already tested this centers-of-excellence concept onbypasses and cataracts, but those demos are expiring this year.Under the upcoming cardiology pilot, the agency will pay facilitiesa negotiated bundled rate to cover both hospital and physicianservices for heart bypasses, angioplasties, valve replacements andcatheterizations. The new orthopedic demo will cover total hip andknee joint replacements.Hospitals can participate in either the cardiology or theorthopedic demo, or both. The bundled payment will account foroutlier cases; separate payments won't be made for particularlyexpensive patients.HCFA hasn't decided on the number of sites, but most likely willchoose facilities in a region comprised of several contiguousstates. The sites will be well-dispersed throughout the region. Theagency will use qualitative data to choose participating hospitals,with price "way down the line," says a HCFA official.Pre-applications will be sent in March or April to all hospitalsthat routinely perform the procedures in the chosen region. HCFAhopes to select hospitals by late 1996 and have the first sitesoperating by early 1997.The scope of the demo could change if bundled payment for Medicareservices is enacted as part of budget reconciliation.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Mayo's Jacksonville Clinic, Ga. IDS Seeking HMO LicensesThe Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla., intends to file for an HMOlicense by May, while a Georgia integrated delivery system (IDS)that came under fire for accepting capitated payments will applyfor an HMO license this week.Mayo thus becomes one of the latest and most prestigious providerorganizations to form its own health plan, a trend that isspreading like wildfire (MCW 10/9/95, p. 4).The clinic already contracts with more than a dozen managed careplans that send over 10,000 patients a month to Mayo. By formingits own HMO, Mayo will have another option to offer patients. Mayohopes to offer the HMO in northeast Florida by September.Mayo's Jacksonville clinic has 30 primary care MDs among its 170doctors. Mayo will honor its contracts with other managed careplans.In Atlanta, Promina Health System, which claims to be Georgia'slargest community-based, nonprofit health system, will apply for anHMO license this week and hopes to have the plan up and running byJanuary 1997. The IDS is plunging into the HMO market because thestate requires licensure of provider entities that take capitationfrom self-funded employers.Last year Promina scrapped its capitated arrangement with CobbCounty after state regulators rapped the IDS' knuckles foraccepting capitation without an HMO or insurance license (MCW7/10/95, p. 4).Promina initially will offer the HMO to its own 13,000 workers andto public employers. Promina may later solicit private employercontracts. But only a small portion of Promina patients will be inits HMO; the majority will be members of other health plans thatcontract with the IDS for health services.The Promina HMO will capitate primary care MDs, specialists andhospitals. Providers will be free to join other plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996WellPoint, Trigon Struggle With Charitable ObligationsBlue Cross of California and Trigon Blue Cross-Blue Shield inVirginia are grappling with their public charity obligations asthey convert to for-profit publicly traded companies.California Blue Cross last week said it will recapitalize itsfor-profit, publicly traded managed care spinoff, WellPoint HealthNetworks, so the Blues plan can contribute all its assets to twonew charitable foundations and resolve its public charityobligations.The move involves an "upstream merger" in which WellPoint will buyBlue Cross of California's remaining commercial business, acquirethe rights to the Blue Cross name and mark in California, and gainabout 310,000 PPO members. WellPoint has 2.8 million PPO,point-of-service and HMO enrollees.WellPoint stockholders will get a cash dividend of $10 per share,followed by a two-for-three reverse stock split. Total cashproceeds to WellPoint's largest stockholder, Blue Cross, willexceed $1 billion.Blue Cross, which owns 80 million shares in WellPoint, willtransfer $1 billion in cash to one foundation, and about $2 billionworth of stock, or 80.4% of the stock in the new WellPoint, to thesecond foundation. That's similar to the $3 billion the twofoundations would have received if WellPoint and Blue Cross hadmerged with Health Systems International Inc. (MCW 1/1/96, p. 4).The recapitalization is subject to approval by the Calif.Department of Corporations and by stockholders other than BlueCross.Meanwhile, Trigon Blue Cross-Blue Shield recently filed an amendedconversion plan with the Virginia State Corporation Commission.The amended plan incorporates a recent agreement with the state'sAttorney General to allocate $165 million to public charity whenTrigon converts from a not-for-profit, taxable mutual insurancecompany to a publicly traded stock company (MCW 12/18/95, p. 4).The amended plan would set aside $165 million in a special class ofstock for public or charitable uses.Trigon originally was going to give all policyholders as of May 31,1995, the company's value in the form of stock. The amended planwould allow eligible policyholders to be those on record as of Dec.31, 1995.But the Virginia legislature is debating the state budget and theamount of Trigon public charity funds. Several legislators want toincrease the Blues' public charity obligation to at least $175million.The State Corporation Commission has set a May 6 hearing on theTrigon plan. The insurer covers nearly 1 million PPO, POS and HMOenrollees and 800,000 indemnity lives. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996GHAA/AMCRA Changes Name, Courts PPOs, UR FirmsThe Group Health Assn.of America/American Managed Care and ReviewAssn. is changing its name to the American Assn. of Health Plans,subject to board approval Feb. 25.The trade group didn't want "managed care" in the new title becausefield testing found the term has a negative connotation in thepublic's mind, several board members told MCW.In addition to the name change, the merged trade association isreaching out to all managed care organizations, includingutilization review firms and PPOs, "though there's still some fightagainst that from the old [HMO] guard" within GHAA, says one boardmember.To reflect its expanded mission, the association has put on itsboard Robert Patricelli, chairman-CEO of Value Health Inc., anational specialty managed care company, and Marcus Merz, presidentof Preferred One, a Minneapolis PPO firm. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996MANAGED CARE BRIEFS        Viva Health Inc. a for-profit HMOpartially owned by the University of Alabama-Birmingham, wasgranted a license to operate in three counties. A competing HMO ischallenging the university's ownership in the plan (MCW 1/15/96, p.4).        Nashville, Tenn.-based HealthWise ofAmerica, which owns and operates HMOs in four states, has signed abinding letter of intent to develop and manage Capital CommunityHealth Plan, a Medicaid HMO in Washington, D.C.        Healthsource Inc. of Hooksett, N.H.,has acquired Central Massachusetts Health Care Inc., an83,000-member nonprofit HMO based in Worcester, Mass., in a dealvalued at $46.5 million (MCW 9/12/94, p. 2). A substantial part ofthe proceeds will fund a nonprofit charitable foundation.        Humana Medical Plan of SouthFlorida, which had been denied accreditation by the  NationalCommittee for Quality Assurance in 1994, just received a fullthree-year seal of approval (MCW 6/6/94, p. 1).        A.M. Best Co. assigned an "A+"financial rating to the Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey HMOsof U. S. Healthcare Inc.        Health care purchasing coalitionsand large employers in several markets are working with CareDataReports Inc. on what it claims will be the largest employeesatisfaction study of managed care plans to date. For information,contact Janet Murphy: (212) 883-4087.        PacifiCare Health Systems Inc.'sPacifiCare  Behavioral Health subsidiary in Laguna Hills, Calif.,completed acquisition of Psychology  Systems Inc. Terms weren'tdisclosed.        On behalf of 26 states, WisconsinAttorney General James Doyle has asked the U.S. Supreme Court toreview a federal appeals court decision that reversed most of atrial court's $17 million verdict against the Marshfield Clinic inan antitrust lawsuit filed by Blue Cross and Blue Shield ofWisconsin (MCW 9/25/95, p. 2). Doyle is arguing that the decisionposes significant problems for state antitrust law enforcement. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Mortality, Hospital Costs Drop As Managed CareSpreads Hospitals in cities with high managed care penetration report lowercosts, reduced length of stays and decreased mortality rates,according to a study by KPMG Peat Marwick consultants of LosAngeles.The national study of 11.7 million patients at 3,700 acute-carefacilities found that hospital costs in highly penetrated managedcare markets were 11% below the national average and 19% belowhospital costs in low managed care markets.In markets with high managed care penetration, hospital stays were6.3% shorter than the national average and almost 12% shorter thanstays in medium managed care markets.And the risk-adjusted mortality rates in high managed care marketswere 5.25% below the national average.Although managed care is driving down hospital costs withoutnegatively affecting patient care, hospital costs were flat orstarting to rise in many highly penetrated managed care markets,notes Michael Hamilton, national director of KPMG Peat Marwick'shealth care group.For details, call Debbie Dalmand at KPMG: (714) 850-4440.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 199624 States Mandate or Regulate Workers' CompManaged CareAbout 24 states either regulated or mandated the use of managedcare organizations for workers' compensation coverage as of January1995, according to a study by the Workers Compensation ResearchInstitute of Cambridge, Mass.The survey of state workers' compensation officials also revealedthat eight states mandated  managed care to treat injuredworkers, 35 states limited a worker's initial choice of provider,and 38 states limited a worker's ability to switch providers. Otherfindings:o       Some 40 states used fee schedulesfor managed care providers;o       Hospital payments for workers' compcare were regulated by 35 states;o       Utilization review for workers' compcare was mandated by 21 states;o       Bill review was mandated by 16states; ando       About 12 states used treatmentguidelines.For details, call the institute: (617) 494-1240. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Physician Practices Worth More In High ManagedCare MarketsPhysician practices sell for more money in communities with highmanaged care penetration, according to the Center for HealthcareIndustry Performance Studies.High managed care markets were defined as those with at least 52.2%managed care penetration, while low managed care markets weredefined as those with less than 40% of the population in managedcare plans. The median value per physician for practices in high managed caremarkets was $106,000 in 1994, but only $95,000 in low managed caremarkets. Practices in medium managed care markets were valued at$134,000 per MD. The study covered 245 physician practiceacquisitions representing more than 650 doctors.For details on the center's Physician Practice Acquisition ResourceBook, contact Patrick Knott at (614) 457-1777. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Success of IPA, Network HMOs Not Linked to CareQualityHMO success isn't strongly linked to quality of care provided, andplans with relatively bad reputations continue to grow, finds aCommonwealth Fund study of IPA- and network-model HMOs.The case studies of six unidentified HMOs in Boston, Los Angelesand Philadelphia found that the most financially successful HMOseach had a provider-friendly and physician-focused philosophy;decentralized medical management; stable management; and a primaryfocus on developing IPA/network HMO business.Size and financial backing, often by large indemnity-basedinsurers, wasn't necessarily an advantage. Among the study's otherfindings:o       The HMOs in the three marketsincreasingly are shifting risk to providers.o       Employer demands to contract withfewer plans that cover broader markets are increasing marketpressures that favor size over past performance.o       Pressure to grow appears moremotivated by being in a position to exert market power than bygains in a plan's ability to provide quality care or invest ininternal systems.As competition intensifies, there is a critical need for readilyavailable, quality-of-care measures, but consolidating markets willmake it increasingly difficult to rely on meaningful choice toensure quality, the study concludes.For details, call Mary Lou Russell at the foundation: (212)606-3842. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996State Employees Offered More HMOs in 1995State-employed workers were offered a total of 375 HMOs last year,up from 350 in 1991, says a study by the Segal Co. consultants ofNew York.In 1995, 35% of state workers were in HMOs, up from 29% in 1991.Last year, 11 states enrolled more than 50% of state employees inHMOs, led by Arizona (88%); California (86%); Missouri (74%);Wisconsin (72%); and Delaware (66%).But 12 states had less than 10% of state workers enrolled in HMOs,and six states had no state employees in HMOs.The average monthly HMO premium for January 1995 was $170 forindividual state workers and $414 for families. As of January 1995, 46 states offered a PPO. In 28 of these states,the PPO was part of an indemnity plan and was available at theworker's discretion at the point-of-service. The PPO was separatein 12 states, and the worker had to choose a primary care physicianat the time of plan enrollment.For details, call Erin Burns at the Segal Co.: (212) 251-5000.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Oxford Shines, HIP Stumbles, Says New YorkPublic AdvocateOxford Health Plans Inc. ranked nearly tops with New York Cityconsumers while the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York (HIP)had the worst overall public complaints record and customer servicephone lines of 12 HMOs studied.Mark Green, public advocate for New York City, studied HMOs byAetna, ChoiceCare, Cigna, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, HIP,Oxford, Managed Health Inc., Prudential, Travelers, MetLife, Sanusand U.S. Healthcare. From 1991 through 1994, HIP was the only HMO to rank in the bottomone-third in public complaints each year. From 1992 to 1994, some49.5% of complaints against the HMO were upheld by the state, whileonly 20% of complaints against ChoiceCare and 25% of those againstSanus were upheld.Green also found that HIP by far had the longest delays inanswering phones, with typical delays of 10 minutes.By contrast, Oxford had the highest percentage of board-certifiedphysicians, the highest MD renewal rate, and the second-longestcustomer service hours. Oxford also had the fastest growth rate of all plans studied. Fromyear-end 1990 through June 1995, Oxford's membership increased from28,000 to 595,600.For the first half of 1995, the amount spent on physicians permember ranged from $30.61 per month at Empire HealthNet to $83.77at a Travelers HMO. January 1996 monthly premiums for individualsranged from $172.50 at Managed Health to $257.59 at ChoiceCare.For details, call Joe DePlasco at the Public Advocate's office:(212) 669-4195. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996California's HMOs Show Widely VaryingUtilizationUtilization varies greatly among California HMOs, according to astudy by the Center for Health Care Rights in Los Angeles.The study focused on the state's 18 HMOs that had Medicaidcontracts. Twelve of the 18 plans failed to include utilizationdata for all or some of their membership groups. Of plans that reported relevant data, the average number ofphysician encounters per member in California's so-called Medi-Calprogram during 1994 ranged from 0.37 in Universal Care's HMO to5.14 in Kaiser's southern California region.For the HMOs' commercial members, the average number of MDencounters per member ranged from 0.21 for Universal Care to 8.53for FHP's staff-model plan. MD encounters per member for Medicarebeneficiaries ranged from 4.11 for United Health Plan to 26.43 forFHP's staff-model HMO.Overall, the weighted average number of physician encounters permember for plans that reported data was 3.5 for Medi-Cal members,3.26  for commercial enrollees, and 9.19 for Medicare members.The average number of non-physician encounters per member, as wellas annual hospital stays per 1,000 enrollees and average length ofstay, also varied widely among HMOs. The study concluded that plans appear to collect and reportutilization data inconsistently to the state, and that California'sDepartment of Corporations apparently fails to check the accuracyof reported data.For details, call Jennifer Yang at the Center for Health CareRights: (213) 383-4519. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996California's Nonprofit HMOs Have Highest MedicalLoss Ratios The five California HMOs with the highest medical loss ratios wereall nonprofit plans, according to a study by the California MedicalAssn.Of the five HMOs with the lowest loss ratios, four were for-profitplans.The California HMOs that spent the largest percentage of premiumson medical care were:o       Kaiser Foundation Health Plan(96.8%); o       Santa Barbara Regional HealthInitiative (95.1%);o       Blue Cross of California (93.4%);o       Solano Partnership Health Plan(89.3%); ando       Contra Costa Health Plan (89.1%).The California HMOs with the lowest medical loss ratios were:o       CaliforniaCare Health Plans (73%),owned by Blue Cross of California;o       Molina Medical Centers (75.8%);o       Community Health Group, the onlynonprofit plan with one of the five lowest medical loss ratios(75.9%);o       Aetna Health Plans of CaliforniaInc. (77.4%); ando       Foundation Health Plans Inc.(77.4%), a publicly traded company.Nonprofit HMOs generally want high medical loss ratios, whilefor-profits want to keep ratios low, some experts note. Many industry experts argue that medical loss ratios by themselvesare not an accurate indicator of an HMO's efficiency or performance(MCW 1/8/96, p. 3).Among plans with 20,000 or more enrollees, California's for-profitHMOs had a medical loss ratio averaging 81% and posted profitsamounting to 4.6% of premiums. Nonprofits averaged an 86.8% medical loss ratio with profits of2.9% of revenue. For details, contact Danielle Walters at the California MedicalAssn.: (916) 444-5532. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Maternity Stay Lengths Shrink For Women in TwinCities The percentage of one-day maternity stays in the Twin Cities areaincreased nearly seven-fold between 1985 and 1995, according to astudy by the Minnesota Hospital and Healthcare Partnership.Last year, four states required insurers and managed care plans tocover 48-hour hospital stays for newborns and their mothers forregular childbirths, 96 hours for Caesarean sections (MCW'sPerspectives 1/29/96).The analysis of 360,000 maternity discharges revealed that, for allvaginal and Caesarean sections, including those with complications,the average length of stay dropped from 2.94 days in 1985 to 2.17days in 1995. From 1985 to 1995, the average length of stay for women withuncomplicated vaginal deliveries dropped from 2.42 days to 1.72days. During that same period, average length of stay foruncomplicated Caesarean deliveries dropped from 4.57 days to 3.53days.In the first quarter of 1995, 42.5% of women with uncomplicatedvaginal deliveries had one-day stays, up from 6.2% in 1985.Overall, women with private managed care and indemnity coverage hada higher percentage of one-day stays than did uninsured women orMedicaid recipients. Over the 10-year period, lengths of stay forwomen with commercial indemnity coverage generally tracked that ofwomen with private managed care coverage.For details, call Gretchen Musicant at the Partnership: (612)641-1121. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicare HMO Members Satisfied In SouthernCaliforniaSome 70% of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in five Medicarerisk-contract HMOs are highly satisfied with their plan, accordingto a study by CareData Reports Inc. of New York.And 81% of surveyed enrollees intended to re-enroll in theirMedicare HMO.The 2,673 beneficiaries surveyed were enrolled in Medicare HMOsoffered by FHP, Health Net, Kaiser Foundation Health Plans,Maxicare and PacifiCare in Southern California. The survey coveredmember satisfaction with primary care physicians, specialists,disease prevention and treatment, administration, pharmacy benefitsand other health plan components.Dr. Tod Cooperman, president of CareData, says seniors likeMedicare HMOs because:o       They value the extra benefits, likeprescription drug coverage, that are not covered byfee-for- service (FFS) Medicare;o       They find HMOs less administrativelyburdensome than the traditional Medicare program; ando       They believe their health status isimproving under the care provided by HMOs.Of the five HMOs studied, Kaiser's scored highest for totalsatisfaction, with 80% of members reporting they were at least verysatisfied.Overall, 53% of those surveyed who previously were in FFS Medicarerated their HMO as better than FFS, 20% rated the two systemsequally, and 27% preferred FFS. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Studies in Briefo       Little correlation has been foundbetween a metropolitan area's HMO market penetration and theutilization of CAT scans, MRIs, cardiac catheterization and nuclearmedicine services, according to a study by the Technology MarketingGroup of Des Plains, Ill. For details, call John Vanden Brink:(708) 297-1404.o       Nearly 20% of 620 employers usecenters of excellence to help control health costs, according to astudy by Watson Wyatt Worldwide consultants in Washington, D.C.Some 29% of employers with 2,500 or more workers used such centers,while only 8% of companies with less than 500 employees did. Fordetails, call Bob McKee at Watson Wyatt: (202) 508-4848.o       The U.S. per capita cost (USPCC) forMedicare aged beneficiaries increased from $297.33 in 1991 to$440.90 in 1996, according to a report by Coopers & Lybrandconsulting firm of Washington, D.C. The USPCC is used to calculatethe adjusted average per capita cost amounts that serve as thebasis for paying Medicare risk HMOs. For details, call Susan Palsboat Coopers & Lybrand: (202) 822-4000.o       Liver transplants managed by UnitedResource Networks, a subsidiary of United HealthCare Corp. ofMinneapolis, saved purchasers and consumers 33% per transplantprocedure, the company claims. The study also revealed thatUnited's transplant patients had one and two-year survival ratesthat were higher than the national averages. For details, callKirsten Simning at United HealthCare: (612) 992-5137.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicare Managed Care UpdateType of Contract, Number of Contractors as of 1/22/96 Total Enrollment                   (as of 12/13/95),                   as of 1/22/96                                                        (as of 12/13/95)Risk Contract, 189 HMOs and CMPs (182), 3.194 million (3.083 million)Cost Contract,  27 (32), 168,140 (177,012)Risk Contract with  Cost Enrollees Remaining,                 6 (4), 17,672 (5,834)Health Care Prepayment Plans (HCPPs),                54 (56), 341,906 (341,639)HCPPs Converted to Risk with  Cost Enrollees Remaining,                14 (14), 170,788 (180,465)Demonstrations, 6 (5), 19,186 (18,560)Source: HCFA monthly reportsBack to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Admar PPO, Hancock POS Test Risk Pools, Bonuses toBoost Physician PerformanceWhile capitation is the dominant method for HMOs to shift financialrisk to providers, Admar Corp., a PPO company, and John HancockInsurance Co.'s point-of-service (POS) plan are testing innovativeprovider risk-sharing mechanisms.Santa Ana, Calif.-based Admar holds providers in its HMO-typeproduct to overall performance budgets, while John Hancock'spoint-of-service (POS) product pays physicians under a negotiatedfee schedule with two bonus incentive pools.Admar is one of a few cutting-edge PPOs that are forming HMO-typeproducts and sharing risk with providers (MCW's Stats & Facts11/13/95, p. 1). Admar's product is available in California andArizona.Admar's fully insured "Exclusive Health" product, which is aboutone and one-half years old, uses primary care gatekeepers and isoffered through an insurance carrier partner, says Richard Toral,CEO-chairman. An overall provider performance budget is set by the payer, withthe budget segregated into risk pools for different categories ofproviders. The pools are funded by a portion of the payer'spremiums.Where Admar doesn't capitate providers, it sets up separate riskpools for primary care physicians, specialty physicians andhospitals. Where the company capitates only primary care MDs, itsets up pools for specialists and hospitals. The pools are adjustedfor the payer group's enrollee age and sex.Actual utilization is measured against each provider risk pool. Ifproviders stay within the allotted performance budget, they may getbonuses at year-end.Admar is scheduled to be acquired this month by Principal HealthCare Inc., the managed care subsidiary of Principal Financial Group(MCW 11/6/95, p. 4).Providers Like Bonus Pool ConceptSeparately, John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. uses two bonusincentive pools for MDs in its "Signature Health Advantage" POSproduct. The POS plan is being sold with a July 1 effective date toself-insured employers in three markets - Dallas, Houston andCleveland.The carrier contracts with physicians under a fee schedule. Inaddition, MDs are eligible for bonus pools:o        One bonus pool for primary caredoctors pays year-end bonuses based on an MD's individualperformance. The performance formula incorporates the MD's actualclaims costs; quality indicators, such as the physician's treatmentpatterns and member satisfaction results; and compliance withoverall plan rules, such as utilization review and specialtyreferral notifications. The pool is funded by a percentage of theadministrative-services-only fee an employer pays Hancock for thePOS plan.o        A second provider incentive fund forall physicians pays year-end bonuses to both primary care MDs andspecialists based on a separate performance formula, such as howwell a specialist meets quality indicators and controlsutilization. The employer funds the pool based on a percentage ofclaims paid.Hancock already has several contracts for the POS product withPHOs, IPAs and group practices.Providers have been receptive to Hancock's approach because it"gives them a real chance to collect on the bonuses," according toLyn Rosenstein, Hancock's director of network product management.Docs view the pools as financial incentives, she adds. Hancock isnot using payment withholds.In effect, the POS plan aligns incentives for providers and Hancockthrough performance guarantees to employers. If an employer'sclaims costs exceed the guarantee, some doctors may not get bonusesand the pool funds go back to the employer, Rosenstein notes.Bonuses aren't common in PPOs but will grow in popularity, addsBrant Kelch, president of MedStrategies consulting firm in Vienna,Va., and co-founder of the American Assn. of Preferred ProviderOrganizations. He says other forms of risk-sharing PPOs are tryinginclude capitation of providers without getting an HMO license, andglobal pricing of physician and hospital services.For details, call Admar at (714) 953-9600 or John Hancock at (617)572-6390. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED CARE WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996HMO Puts IDS at Full Risk For Plan's Medicare PopulationPittsburgh's HealthAmerica HMO has chosen a newly formedintegrated delivery system (IDS) as the provider for theplan's fledging Medicare HMO product.HealthAmerica thus becomes the region's first HMO to put a providerorganization fully at risk.Under the HMO's new "Advantra" Medicare HMO, Southwest IntegratedDelivery Network will take on the entire medical risk of the newproduct offering on a percentage of premium basis.While most provider groups first experience full risk through ahealth plan's commercial members, Southwest Integrated is buckingthe trend by first taking on full risk for Medicare enrollees. Thecontract represents the IDS' first venture with HealthAmerica.Southwest Integrated says it's simply a matter of timing thatMedicare risk is its first fully capitated deal.Taking on risk for seniors can be tricky for any providerorganization because of the special needs of seniors. To properlytake on such risk, providers must change their focus andoperations, experts say (PCC 7/24/95, p. 3; 6/26/95, p. 3).Western Pennsylvania has the second-oldest Medicare population inthe nation, and a high percentage of the region's residents areseniors, says James Fritz, president and CEO of SouthwestIntegrated.As part of the Medicare risk contract with Southwest Integrated,HealthAmerica is negotiating a similar full-risk contract with theIDS for the plan's commercial products, which have 250,000 members. In fact, Southwest Integrated's Medicare contract withHealthAmerica dictates that both parties will attempt to strikesuch an agreement within 90 days to serve HealthAmerica'scommercial membership.However, if such a deal is not reached, the Medicare agreement willstand, says Dan Lebish, executive vice president for the HMO'smedical delivery systems. HealthAmerica has held separate per-diem contracts with the fivehospitals that make up Southwest Integrated, according to Lebish.The HMO also has held individual capitated contracts with most ofthe 210 primary care MDs involved in the IDS, as well as feeschedule-based contracts with the 700 specialists in the SouthwestIntegrated group, Fritz and Lebish say.Details of the Full-Risk ContractOther provisions in the deal:o        Southwest Integrated is at riskfor visits by Medicare enrollees to roughly 800 non-SouthwestIntegrated specialists in HealthAmerica's overall provider network.o        The health plan delegated themedical management piece to the IDS. The ability to control medicalmanagement is key for Southwest Integrated, Fritz says.o        The HMO will provide on-siteassistance to help Southwest Integrated manage utilization.o        The contract prevents SouthwestIntegrated from starting an HMO. But the IDS can deal withother plans.o        Southwest Integrated can accessthe HMO's care management programs, which link members topsychosocial providers. o        The parties will collaborate onclinical studies on conditions that afflict the elderly anddisabled.Contact Lebish at (412) 577-5401 or Fritz at (412)  937-1396.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-20IA086-000615-B041-54http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh76.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020010 text/html 34878HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:58:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMTContent-length: 34691Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh76.html Sample Issue Copyright MANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNet February 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES `Gag Clauses' Appear More Frequently In Medicare, Medicaid HMO Contracts (494 words) HCFA to MCOs: Complete Your Homework (166 words) Firms Drop Retiree Benefits As Costs Soar in 1995 (255 words) Start-Up Medicare Health Plans Target Southern State Markets (418 words) Surviving HCFA Site Visits Requires Strong Pre-Audit Role (900 words) Managed Medicare, Medicaid Grabs Researchers' Focus (200 words) Florida HMOs Pan for Gold In Long-Term Care Experiment (404 words) Intergroup Offers Seniors Free Health Club Membership (245 words) FEDERAL & STATE BRIEFS (438 words) INDUSTRY BRIEFS (655 words) Medicare Risk HMOs with Biggest Monthly Enrollment Growth (For the month ending Jan. 22, 1996) (150 words) Change of Mindset Required to Manage Dual Eligibles (230 words) CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996`Gag Clauses' Appear More Frequently In Medicare,Medicaid HMO ContractsSome HMOs say the clauses prevent physicians fromsteering healthier Medicare and Medicaid patients to other healthplans.Although wide-ranging "gag clauses" are used by few HMOs, managedcare organizations enrolling Medicare and Medicaid beneficiariesare more likely to insert some type of "gag clause" than arecommercials plans, says an attorney who works on Medicare andMedicaid HMO contracts.The reason: Unlike commercial HMO members, who are locked into aplan for up to a year, Medicare beneficiaries and most Medicaidrecipients in HMOs are free to disenroll at any time.The disenrollment rules give providers a lot more opportunity tosway a senior's opinion of a health plan or disparage a planaltogether, says Wendy Krasner, an attorney with McDermott, Will &Emery's Washington office. "I'm seeing [gag clauses] more often forplans in Medicare and Medicaid," she says.Some Medicare and Medicaid health plans fear that physicians withnumerous plan contracts could steer patients from one HMO toanother.For example, a physician put at risk by a plan may suggest tosicker patients that they switch to a plan under which the MD ispaid on a fee-for-service basis. Or a physician who contracts withan HMO but also has ownership interest in another health plan couldencourage healthier seniors into the latter plan.While provider contracts may include varying degrees of "gagclauses," some Medicare and Medicaid HMOs have included language toprohibit physicians from advising enrollees to disenroll or join aanother managed care organization.Krasner has seen contract clauses enabling the HMO to collectthousands of dollars in liquidated damages for each member aphysician refers to another plan.Overall, few health plans use the expansive "gag clauses" that havedrawn backlash from MDs, consumers and legislators, experts say.Massachusetts just passed an anti-gag clause bill, and legislatorsin California, Illinois, Maine and New York are considering similarbills (MMM 2/5/96, p. 4).While HMOs say they use such clauses to prevent MDs from ruining aplan's competitiveness, physicians say "gag clauses" interfere withthe MD-patient relationship by prohibiting physicians fromexplaining that treatment decisions are based on an HMO's standardsand rules."[Gag clauses] are contractually restricting doctors' professionaljudgment," says Latham Williams, an attorney with Sidley & Austinin Chicago.Williams' advice to HMOs:o        Train MDs to understand plan rulescovered under each managed care offering by an organization;o        Encourage physicians to talk withthe plan's medical director before informing patients about acourse of action if a certain procedure is not covered; ando        Don't prohibit a determinedphysician from talking to a patient about alternative treatmentoptions if a resolution cannot be reached with the medicaldirector."I think the medical profession will prevail in this," Williamssays, adding that HMOs considering wide-ranging "gag clauses"should think about the possible cost of defending legal challenges.Contact Krasner at (202) 778-8064, or Williams at (312) 853-7000.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996HCFA to MCOs: Complete Your HomeworkAs scores of managed care organizations considerentering the hot Medicare HMO market, HCFA has some advice forwould-be applicants: Complete the necessary paperwork.Bruce Fried, director of HCFA's office of managed care, told theagency's regional administrators last month to withdraw all 1996contract or service-area expansion requests that aren't completedin a 60-day corrective period.The problem: Numerous HMOs recently submitted incomplete Medicareapplications in order to get in line for HCFA processing.Normally, HCFA takes 18-24 weeks to process new HMO applications.Fried told agency officials to process complete applications within19 weeks, notify organizations within four weeks if an applicationis incomplete, address issues raised in site visits in a timelymanner, and complete site-visit reports promptly.When Fried recently took over HCFA's managed care operations, hefound an unprecedented backlog of 100 applications. As of Feb. 1,45 applications were pending for new risk plans, and another 40existing risk HMOs requested service-area expansions, according tothe agency. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Firms Drop Retiree Benefits As Costs Soar in 1995HMOs have missed out on the retiree managed care boom,says a benefits analyst. The suggested selling point to employers:lower costs and reduced FAS 106 liability.The number of employers offering health care coverage toMedicare-eligible retirees fell last year as big business sawretiree health costs jump 9.5%, according to Foster Higgins' annualemployee benefits survey."I think the HMOs are missing some big opportunities," John Erb,Foster Higgins principal, told MMM. "The movement ofMedicare-eligible retirees into Medicare risk-contract HMOs"canreduce an employer's cost and FAS 106 liability to nothing."Last year, 35% of employers offered health coverage toMedicare-eligible retirees, down from 40% in 1994. But moreemployers, 41%, offered coverage to early retirees - a moreexpensive proposition for some firms.Employers have dealt with 1993 Financial Accounting Standards Boardchanges in various ways, including simply discontinuing coverage.The rules require companies to account for the costs of futureretiree health benefit commitments on financial statements.However, some companies have turned to HMOs for retiree healthcoverage, creating a market niche for Medicare HMOs (MMM 1/19/96,p. 1, 12/8/95, p. 1).While just 7% of Medicare-eligible retirees have joined HMOs, thepercentage of large employers offering them has tripled since 1993,to 21% in 1995.Drawbacks: In many markets, Medicare risk HMOs haven't set up shop,and in some places where they exist, retirees resist them.But 61% of early retirees, as opposed to 31% of Medicare-eligibleretirees, are in managed care.Contact Erb at (212) 574-9034. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Start-Up Medicare Health Plans Target Southern StateMarketsMedicare beneficiaries in Arkansas, South Carolina andTennessee get their first oppor- tunity to enroll in Medicarerisk products.Among managed care organizations that have received recent HCFAapproval to start Medicare risk HMOs, three plans will chart newterritory in Arkansas, South Carolina and Tennessee - states whichhave had no Medicare risk HMOs.In Tennessee, Health123 Platinum has begun  marketing to Medicarebeneficiaries in 18 counties in middle Tennessee. The plan,majority-owned by Nashville's Vanderbilt Health Plans, is operatedby THG Management Services of Nashville.THG manages four HMOs and a PPO in Tennessee, including VHPCommunityCare Medicaid HMO. Health123 officials expect to enroll3,500 seniors in its new product by year-end through an"education-based" marketing strategy, says a plan official. The HMOexpects to have the Tennessee Medicare risk market to itself untilthe end of the year.Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Arkansas and Blue Cross and BlueShield of South Carolina have started Medipak Advantage and PrimeCompanion, respectively. Both senior products are for-profit IPAmodels.Medipak, which expects to enroll 6,500 seniors by year-end, willoperate in four central Arkansas counties. Prime Companion beganmarketing in five counties initially and will expand to eight morecounties later this year.Other Medicare risk HMOs that have begun operation this yearinclude:o        Senior Choice, a New Jersey IPAmodel, operated by for-profit Aetna Health Plans of (Parsippany)New  Jersey.o        Optimum Choice Advantage, an IPAmodel being offered in southern Virginia by for-profit OptimumChoice Inc. of Rockville, Md.o        Blue Care 65, a Massachusetts IPAmodel operated by nonprofit Blue Cross and Blue Shield of (Boston)Massachusetts.o        Medicare Blue, an IPA modeloperating in New Jersey, offered by for-profit Medigroup Inc. ofNewark.o        HIP VIP, a New Jersey group model,offered by nonprofit HIP of (New Brunswick) New Jersey Inc.o        Gold Plan, an IPA model operating inBuffalo, N.Y., offered by nonprofit Independent Health Associatesof Buffalo.o        Medicare Plus, an IPA modeloperating in Tampa, offered by for-profit CAC-United HealthCarePlans of (Tampa) Florida Inc.o        FHP Senior Plan, an Illinois IPAmodel operated by for-profit FHP of (Oakbrook Terrace) IllinoisInc.o        Advantage 65, a Louisiana groupmodel offered by for-profit Advantage Health Plan Inc. of NewOrleans.o        Group Health, a staff modeloperating in western Washington, offered by nonprofit Group HealthNorthwest of Spokane, Wash.o        Advantra, an IPA model operating insouthwestern Pennsylvania, offered by for-profit HealthAmerica ofPittsburgh. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Surviving HCFA Site Visits Requires StrongPre-Audit RoleFHP Inc. holds mock audits prior to federalregulators' biennial visits to its Medicare HMOs. The processallows the HMO to discover which operational areas need tweaking.FHP Inc. depends on HCFA for some $2.5 billion in annual revenues.The Long Beach, Calif.-based company certainly doesn't want to giveits largest payer reason to doubt its ability to operate MedicareHMOs.So FHP created a process to prepare for HCFA's on-site monitoringvisit. FHP improved its process after HCFA ordered the HMO in 1991to revamp the enrollment process for its Senior Plan because agencyauditors said senior disenrollment rates were too high.Medicare risk HMOs can expect increased federal monitoring as HCFAplans to increase the frequency of site visits. A HCFA task forceis studying how to turn its biennial site visit process into annualmonitoring visits.HCFA officials say the monitoring process is straightforward; theagency publishes a comprehensive guide to the audit process to helpplans prepare for site visits.FHP, however, dedicates a lot of time and resources toward HCFAauditors' week-long examination of the Senior Plan. HCFA's centraloffice handles the fiscal and legal aspects of the audit, while theregional offices examine utilization, delivery and qualityassurance, and such operational issues as marketing, enrollment,claims and appeals/grievances.Set Compliance Measures for Audit"[A plan must have] compliance measures built into its policies andprocedures," says Steven Tucker, director of FHP's Medicareprograms and former HCFA regulator.As part of the pre-audit ritual, FHP conducts a mock audit beforethe auditors visit. "We sort of act as the plan's regulatoryconscience," Tucker says. "We do this so we shine a little bitbetter in the HCFA audit."HCFA looks at time-measured data, such as how a plan handled theappeals process. The plan has 60 days to resolve grievances, andHCFA expects a 95% compliance rate in this area, Tucker says.About eight weeks before the audit, HCFA asks for the universe ofdata, such as records on enrollment, disenrollment, appeals, claimsand utilization reviews. Two weeks before the visit, HCFA lets theplan know which claims and data auditors will review further."The last thing you want is to have HCFA identify a problem, andyou look surprised," Tucker says. A plan wants to address problemsbefore HCFA officials arrive. As part of the pre-audit, FHPrandomly pulls its own data to spot problem areas.Caution: Start the pre-audit cycle four to six months prior to thesite visit. A late start won't enable the plan to fix problems, anda plan can lose momentum going into the audit with an earlierstart, Tucker advises.During the pre-audit phase Tucker taps staff members to representthe plan to auditors. Technical types more often are better thanexecutives because they know the operational side better.Tips for Surviving an AuditAt the time of the site visit, the HMO should assemble the keypeople across departments that fixed any problems that arose duringthe mock audit.For example, if there's been a denial of service, a plan wants toensure it has been turned over to appeals before HCFA comes in.Tucker's audit and post-audit maxims:o        Being neat counts. FHP color-codesfiles, labels file boxes, and ensures the files contain enoughinformation so HCFA can measure against the standard.o        Prepare good space with windows andphones. Don't throw your auditors into a cubicle. Meet their basicneeds.o        Ensure the plan's top officialsattend entrance and exit conferences with auditors. There's nothingmore important happening that week for them.o        Have your technical people waitingin the wings to assist auditors. This is not a good vacation week.o        Prepare your delegated or contractedprovider groups. HCFA will visit some of a plan's contracted MDgroups.o        Take advantage of the exitinterview. Much of what will be contained in HCFA's correctiveaction plan will be mentioned here. Get a head start.o        Implement policy changes in otherMedicare HMOs. A plan should have affiliated plans operating inother regions adopt any policy changes that arise from the audit.Although HCFA regional officials continue to work with plans toensure they make suggested corrections, plans that continue to fallout of compliance could be subject to fines or an investigation."That's amazingly easy to overlook," as key officials leave a planand take with them its institutional memory, Tucker says.Tucker warns plans about the three hot spots:(1) Interdepartmental coordination. HCFA auditors have a keen eyefor identifying problems and seeing how problems can affect otheroperational areas. Proper policies will enable personnel in onedepartment understand how other departments are affected.(2) Service denials and appeals. It's the hot issue. HCFA isreacting to reports and stories in the general media aboutbeneficiaries' bad HMO experiences. HCFA doesn't want to be seen aslackadaisical. Make sure delegated groups, claims staff, and memberservices are up to speed on policies. HCFA's looking at thoseareas.(3) HMO oversight of delegated functions. HMOs need to add value asthey spread the risk. There's increasing scrutiny in this area. Aplan has to prove it has an oversight function in its delegatedcontracts. Ensure the plan has case management, utilization review,claims and credentialing oversight of contracted groups.Contact Tucker at (310) 809-5399. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Managed Medicare, Medicaid Grabs Researchers' FocusThe projects may help managed care organi- zations andpolicymakers better serve Medi- care and Medicaid populations.Researchers backed by The Commonwealth Fund will examine theeffects of a rapid move to managed care by the Medicare andMedicaid programs.The organization has awarded grants totaling $2.1 million toprojects including:o        Analysis of the effects of enactedor proposed Medicare changes. Researchers will identify ways toimprove quality and consumer satisfaction in Medicare managed care,medical savings accounts and other new delivery options; andanalyze solutions to Medicare's long-range financing problems.o        Identification of major high-costillnesses in Medicare populations. Researchers will exploreconcerns raised by such populations, such as barriers tospecialized care, and will examine financial incentives plans useto discourage enrollment of high-cost patients.o        Examination of the impact of managedcare on providers serving minority communities. Researchers willexplore how providers respond to the challenges of managed care andthe impact on delivery in minority communities.o        Evaluation of how the rapid growthof Medicaid managed care affects the organization and delivery ofhealth services in New York City.Contact Mary Lou Russell of the Commonwealth Fund at (212)606-3842. Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Florida HMOs Pan for Gold In Long-Term Care ExperimentAs states seek to hold down Medicaid long-term care costs,a handful of MCOs experiment with caring for the expensivedual-eligible population.PacifiCare of Florida and CAC-United HealthCare, as part of athree-county experiment in South Florida, claim to hold downMedicaid costs for long-term care recipients.The HMOs combined care for 2,900 Medicaid long-term care recipientsin Broward, Dade and Palm Beach counties. About 80% of recipientsare Medicare-eligible.Managing care for dual eligibles does not appeal to most HMOs,which would rather enroll healthy adults."We're doing exactly the opposite [in this program]," says MaryGuthrie, director of PacifiCare Independence Plan. Programparticipants must be SSI/Medicaid recipients and have a conditionthat prevents them from performing daily living activities."It's where most of the money is," says JoAnne Dutcher, director ofCAC-United ElderCare. Long-term care related costs make up the bulkof Medicaid expenditures.Both plans hope the state, which is developing a long-term carepolicy, will expand the program.A handful of managed care organizations around the nation dolong-term care management, including social HMOs, the Program forAll-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE), and a variety of stateinitiatives.How Florida's program works: The voluntary program allowsMedicare-eligible Medicaid long-term care enrollees to retain theirout-of-network physicians and providers. PacifiCare and CAC-Unitedoperate as supplemental insurers, covering Medicare copayments anddeductibles.Medicaid-only recipients must seek care from in- network doctorsfor primary and specialty coverage.The plans receive a capitated fee from Medicaid for providingstandard benefits, plus an array of additional home- andcommunity-based services including personal care assistance,homemaking/chore, home-delivered meals, adult day care, respitecare and skilled home care.The plans assign a care manager to each enrollee for monthlyassessment, care planning and monitoring.The plans say they save the state money by maintaining enrollees ina community setting as long as it's medically acceptable andeconomically feasible. When an enrollee can't be maintained in thecommunity, the plans cover nursing home care costs for the contractperiod.PacifiCare's Independence Plan last year received an average $1,133per member, per month from the state. In Dade County, Medicaid paidnursing homes an average $2,765 a month last year.Florida Medicaid has not done an analysis on the program so itcould not verify or refute the savings claims, according to aMedicaid spokesperson.Contact Guthrie at (305) 569-2221, or Dutcher at (305) 948-4064.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Intergroup Offers Seniors Free Health Club MembershipAn Arizona Medicare HMO says its unique benefit will helpimprove members' health status and the plan's competitiveness in atight market.Intergroup Prepaid Health Services of Arizona Inc. gives many ofits 35,300 SeniorCare enrollees free health club memberships, abenefit offered more often by commercial plans.Intergroup officials cite studies showing seniors benefit fromlight weight-training and aerobic workouts. Officials of theTucson-based HMO say encouraging Medicare beneficiaries to belongto a club will:o        Help prevent illness and injury;o        Assist the plan in managing medicalconditions, including high blood pressure, diabetes and otherchronic conditions; ando        Offer seniors a positive environmentfor socializing, which is particularly important for the well-beingof seniors who have recently relocated or lost a family member.HCFA approved the benefit last month. Intergroup may be one of theonly Medicare HMOs offering such a benefit, according to Intergroupand HCFA officials.The HMO provides health club memberships free to enrollees of itszero-premium SeniorCare plan and SeniorCare high-option plan, inPhoenix and Tucson.HealthCare Dimensions Inc. of Tempe, which will manage the programand conduct evaluations and satisfaction surveys of SeniorCareenrollees, customizes its "provider networks of health clubs" toserve managed care organizations. The health club managementcompany performs third party administration, design and qualityassurance of the benefit for HMOs.Contact Sally Allison of Intergroup at (520) 751-5801, or LynnLejcher of HealthCare Dimensions at ((602) 966-5412.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996FEDERAL & STATE BRIEFS       HCFA is soliciting organizations fora capitated managed care pilot project to treat Medicarebeneficiaries with end-stage renal disease. Applicants willintegrate acute and chronic care services through expandedcommunity care management and meet state requirements for bearingfinancial risk. For the three-year demo, HCFA will pay participantsa capitated rate, adjusted for beneficiaries' treatment status. Theagency plans to give $175,000 to each participant, and expects tochoose up to four participants. HCFA could announce participantsthis summer. Contact Bonnie Edington at (410) 786-6617.       Watch for HCFA to announce thismonth a Medicare "centers-of-excellence" program for cardiac and/ororthopaedic care, according to HCFA Administrator Bruce Vladeck.The program currently bundles payments to designated coronaryartery bypass graft and cataract surgery facilities and givesseniors who choose such facilities a rebate.       Federal lawmakers attempting tosalvage Medicare reform want to delay implementation of a minimumMedicare capitation rate. A bipartisan House group is crafting anew proposal that would set a $300 payment floor in 1997 and $350in 1998, a year later than under the vetoed GOP budget bill. GOPleaders also circulated a draft proposal that would let Medicarecapitated plans charge beneficiaries extra premiums if plan costsexceeded the capitation rate.       The nation's governors this monthunanimously approved a Medicaid reform outline that would letstates move to managed care without federal permission.Congressional leaders are putting the proposal in legislative formand have planned committee action for late February. House SpeakerNewt Gingrich (R-Ga) predicts Medicaid reform, which could moveforward without Medicare, could pass in March, but patientadvocates already are fighting the effort.       HCFA officials are wrapping upanalysis of abstracted chart reviews at 23 HMOs in five states. Thereviews are part of the agency's effort to improve the qualitymeasurement system that peer review organizations (PROs) use toevaluate Medicare HMOs. The agency will share the analysis with theHMOs and PROs so they can to improve measurements of care forMedicare beneficiaries with diabetes.       Tennessee adopted a rule Jan. 31that requires all managed care plans, including those in theTennCare program, to cover high-dose chemotherapy with stem celltransplants for certain breast cancer patients.       Medi-Cal HMOs vary widely in theamount of care they provide low-income enrollees, according to arecent study by the Los Angeles-based Center for Health CareRights. The average number of physician encounters per Medi-Calenrollee in 1994 ranged from 0.37 for Universal Care to 5.14 forKaiser Permanente Southern California. The average for all 18 HMOsstudied was 3.5. Contact Jennifer Yang at (213) 383-4519.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996INDUSTRY BRIEFS       United HealthCare Corp. ofMinneapolis signed a definitive agreement to acquireNashville-based HealthWise of America Inc. HealthWise owns HMOs inMaryland, Kentucky, Tennessee and Arkansas, and has receivedapproval to expand its operations into Virginia and Washington.United says the agreement will provide United with the opportunityto expand services to Medicare beneficiaries through HealthWise'sexisting Medicare HMO in Maryland. HealthWise also submitted anapplication to HCFA to operate a Medicare HMO in Tennessee,according to a HealthWise official. Contact Bernard McDonagh ofUnited at (612) 936-7214.       Just a few days later, HealthWise ofAmerica Inc. signed a letter of intent to develop and manage aMedicaid HMO in the District of Columbia to be known as CapitalCommunity Health Plan. Capital is owned by five district hospitals.Contact HealthWise's Harold Simpson at (615) 385-4666.       All financial planning relating toMedicare HMO capitation rates should be based on projections of thelocal adjusted average per capita costs, not the U.S. per capitacost of treating Medicare beneficiaries, says a new Coopers &Lybrand report. Contact Sue Palsbo at (202) 822-4000.       The American Managed BehavioralHealthcare Assn. and a number of other groups are developingstandards for use by public agencies when writing RFPs for managedbehavioral health care services. The groups want to limit problemsassociated with sometimes unclear program guidelines put out bystates and other public entities. The effort is designed to helpagencies clarify requirements. Contact the association's ClarkeRoss at (202) 434-4565.       PHP Healthcare Corp. of Reston, Va.,completed the sale of interest in its subsidiary, Chartered HealthPlan of Virginia, to University Health Services, which is anaffiliate of Medical College of Virginia. University will invest $3million in Chartered of Virginia in exchange for a 30% equityinterest. Chartered, modeled on D.C. Chartered Health Plan Inc.Medicaid HMO, operates in the Richmond and Tidewater areas ofVirginia. Unlike the D.C. plan, Chartered of Virginia will have aMedicare product as well. Contact PHP President Jack Mazur at (703)758-3600.       CareAmerica Health Plans, GroupHealth Cooperative of Puget Sound, Medica Health Plans, OxfordHealth Plans and Sentara Health System on Feb. 8 received grantsfrom the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop innovativevolunteer programs for their elderly members. Awards totalled$616,246 for the three-year project. The service credit-bankingprograms will allow the HMOs to better respond to Medicarebeneficiaries' needs for non-medical services, such astransportation and shopping (MMM 2/5/96, p. 2). Contact Marc Kaplanof the foundation at (609) 243-5937.       National Prescription AdministratorsInc., an East Hanover-N.J.-based prescription drug management firm,launched a program to support retiree/geriatric services, calledSILVERx CARE. The program aims to improve current physicianprescribing practices and offer information services to geriatricpatients, who often suffer from more than one disease state. Thefirm's program expands its clinical arm to assist physicians inmaximizing efficacy. Contact Patricia Kearns, public relationsmanager, at (201) 503-1000.       Omnia Inc., a Blue Bell, Pa.-basedwomen's healthcare network firm, has launched a regional network ofphysicians specializing in obstetrics and gynecology in New Jersey.Omnia, which has contracts with managed Medicare and Medicaidorganizations, assembled a similar network last summer in thefive-county Philadelphia area. On Jan. 26 the firm sentapplications to 1,300 ob/gyn specialists in New Jersey to join thenewly formed network. Contact John Reiff at (215) 567-4551.       Correction: The Recuperation SkillsTraining Center at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Sacramentohelped the health plan reduce its average length-of-stay for aradical retropubic prostatectomy from seven days to four. Anarticle in the Jan. 19, 1996, issue reported the length-of-stay fora different procedure.       Correction: Florida Medicaid's moveto reflect age bands in its fee structure to Medicaid managed careplans is expected to save the state $65 million this fiscal year.An article in the Jan. 5, 1996 issue reported an incorrect savingsamount.Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Medicare Risk HMOs with Biggest Monthly EnrollmentGrowth (For the month ending Jan. 22, 1996)Source: HCFAPlan,  Location, Enrollment for Latest Month, Contract Date, Total EnrollmentShare Health Plan of Ill., Chicago,     8,049, 7/1/84, 44,586Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Oakland, 7,097, 4/1/94, 121,918Rochester Area HMO, Rochester,, N.Y.,   5,680, 11/1/85, 14,739Keystone Health Plan East, Philadelphia,5,471, 1/1/93, 50,651Oxford Health Plans, New York,          4,255, 10/1/91, 66,399Keystone Health Plan West, Pittsburgh,  3,723, 3/1/95, 23,359U.S. Healthcare Systems of Pa., Blue Bell,, Pa.,                                         3,323, 11/1/85, 50,838Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Ohio, Cleveland,                                         2,890, 1/1/97, 19,349HMO of New Jersey (South), Moorestown,, N.J.,                                         2,735, 9/1/93, 22,724Group Health Plan, St. Louis,           2,538, 11/1/95, 2,538PacifiCare of Calif., Los Angeles,      2,328, 6/1/85, 280,663Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Los Angeles,                                         2,127, 8/1/87, 157,702PacifiCare of Calif., Northern Calif.,  2,096, 2/1/92, 75,080HIP of New Jersey, North Brunswick,, N.J.,                                         1,968, 1/1/96, 1,968Aetna Health Plans of Central/East Pa., Eastern and Central Pa.,                                        1,810, 6/1/94, 6,352Back to Headline List CopyrightMANAGED MEDICARE AND MEDICAID via NewsNetFebruary 16, 1996Change of Mindset Required to Manage Dual EligiblesOperators of PacifiCare of Florida's Independ- ence Plan have hadto change their mindset and  operations in managing care forMedicare/Medicaid dual eligibles.Independence Plan Director Mary Guthrie advises HMOs eyeinglong-term care management to:o        Work and educate out-of-networkproviders in addition to network providers. In Florida, mosteligibles can see non-network physicians.o        Contract with social serviceproviders. Commercial HMOs and even traditional Medicaid managedcare models don't contract with non-health care entities, but mealsand adult day care providers are essential to dual eligibles.o        Rewrite marketing materials. The HMOhad to rewrite promotion materials at a 4th grade level and producematerials in both Spanish and English.o        Case manage differently.Independence Plan case managers develop long-term relationshipswith enrollees. They also must use social service providers andnetworks.o        Take more time to enrollindividuals. Forget mass-marketing this population.o        Change mindset regarding utilizationmanagement. This population becomes very tied to providers. Whiletraditional utilization management would not allow a provider torefer patients to non-network providers, a plan for dual eligiblesmay not want to be as vigilant. The extra step may keep dualeligibles enrolled.Guthrie says to get good economies of scale, a plan needs to be arisk for both Medicare and Medicaid. Under the Florida program, theplan is put at risk for only Medicaid.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-21IA086-000615-B041-72http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020100 text/html 36486HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:58:32 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:44 GMTContent-length: 36299Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh24.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNet JANUARY 18, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES New Jersey Releases Hospital-Specific C-Section Rates (338 words) AMA Delegates Defeat Mandatory Point-of-Service Proposal (150 words) Colorado Coronary Care Consortium Has its Plug Pulled (332 words) Critical Pathways: Perhaps Ineffective, But Here to Stay (284 words) HMO Medical Director Faces Felony Charge Because Not Licensed in Florida (334 words) Patients May Also Be at Risk When Docs Are Paid Capitated Rates (316 words) HMO Opens Health Centers In Medically Underserved Neighborhoods (322 words) HMOs Mislead Medicaid and Medicare Patients, Says NYC Official (273 words) DEVELOPMENTS IN BRIEF (962 words) REPORT FROM THE FIELD: Consulting Firm Produces Health Plan "Report Cards" for Employers (1864 words) CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996New Jersey Releases Hospital-Specific C-Section RatesThe primary, or first-time, cesarean section rate for New Jersey hospitals was17.67 percent in 1994, down from 18.23 percent in 1993, according to ahospital-specific report released by the New Jersey Hospital Assn.  thatcovers 67 acute care hospitals.  This is the first release ofhospital-specific clinical data in NJHA's 77-year history.The 17.67 rate (see chart, next page) is down from 18.23 percent in 1993, butis higher than the national average of 15 percent and higher than the 17.02percent for the rest of the Northeast, says NJHA.  The c-section rate rangedfrom a 1994 high of 28.12 percent (LHS-Meadowlands Hospital) to a low of 9.73percent (Memorial Hospital of Salem).The results are particularly meaningful, says NJHA, because primary c-sectionsmost accurately reflect medical indications and not patient preference.  Inaddition, the NJHA report provides a variance rate for each hospital, whichshows the difference between the hospital's predicted rate - based on suchrisk-adjustment factors as socioeconomic conditions and demographics and themedical condition of the mother and baby - and its actual rate.  The reportthen indicates whether each hospital performed fewer or more first-timec-sections than predicted.  Nonetheless, the study "is not flawless,"acknowledges NJHA.  Rates are based on code information submitted by hospitalsas part of the Uniform Billing data, but not every hospital codes the sameway.  A task force of New Jersey obstetricians is currently developingconsistent definitions for diagnoses and guidelines for when such codingshould be used.  New Jersey hospitals, says the Association, will work withphysicians and the public to lower the number of c-sections by:* endorsing active labor management; * increasing peer reviews; and *encouraging physicians to turn babies while still in utero.NJHA will also initiate an educational program for consumers, particularlythose many women who have had previous c-sections and refuse to try a VBAC(vaginal birth after cesarean) delivery.  Brochures on c-sections will bedistributed to obstetricians and hospitals across the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996AMA Delegates Defeat Mandatory Point-of-Service ProposalThe American Medical Assn.  will not use its influence to try and force allmanaged care plans to provide a point-of-service (POS) feature for allenrollees at all times.  A move to do so was voted down by the AMA House ofDelegates in a contentious battle.Favoring access to providers outside a plan at any time were many specialtysocieties whose members have seen their practices eroding and who feel thatsuch access for a reasonable additional copayment benefits patients.  Amongthose against mandatory out-of-network access were physicians who have formedtheir own health plans in competition with HMOs.  Others felt that mandatoryPOS plans would greatly increase plan expenses.Existing AMA policy, affirmed by the House of Delegates, endorses theproposition that patients be given the option to elect or reject a POS optionwhen joining a plan and during annual open enrollment.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996Colorado Coronary Care Consortium Has its Plug PulledThe Rocky Mountain Heart Consortium, which has been collecting data relatingto heart disease from Colorado hospitals in order to determine and comparequality of care, closed its doors December 31 because of lack of funding forcontinued operations.The nonprofit Consortium, made up of Colorado hospitals, physician groups, andcommunity members, was founded in 1991 to maintain a high level of quality andto keep costs down.  This past year, when contributions were asked of 14Colorado hospitals, only eight signed up.  When it became evident that therewould be financial problems and lack of wide support, the Consortium's boardof directors decided to end its mission.During the Consortium's existence it was instrumental in decreasing the numberof open heart surgeries in the state.  It also restrained hospitals frompurchasing potentially profitable - but unnecessary - equipment.  Oneresearcher for the Consortium told UM that the major reason the Consortiumwent out of business is a change in climate in Colorado since the Consortium'sinception; namely, hospital mergers and the emergence of managed care.  "Thebottom line is cost," she said.  "Perhaps we'll come around to quality again -but it's not happening right now."  Managed care isn't interested in seeingdata, she adds, because they "know" they are giving good care.The demise of the Consortium and its data collection capabilities coincideswith the Colorado Health Data Commission being voted out of existence by thestate legislature.  Soon it will only be hospitals gathering their own data -and there will be no mechanism for comparisons, says a spokesperson for thedefunct Consortium.A Denver Post editorial places a lot of blame on the Colorado Hospital Assn.for contributing to the deaths of the Health Data Commission and theConsortium.  "The death of the Heart Consortium, a casualty of parsimony andfear in the health care sector, is but an early warning sign of even moretroubled times ahead," the editorial says.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996Critical Pathways:  Perhaps Ineffective, But Here to Stay While critical pathway programs being used by the nation's health careorganizations affect the care of thousands of patients daily, there is no hardevidence of their effectiveness, according to an analysis that appears in theDec.  15 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.The authors of the Annals study, who practice at Brigham and Women's Hospital,Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and Partners Community Health Care in Boston,believe that critical pathways hold promise for reducing costs and improvingquality.  And managed care organizations are increasingly pressuring hospitalsto use pathways to deal with unexplained variations in medical practice and toimprove care.Despite the growing popularity of pathways, "no controlled study has shown acritical pathway to reduce the duration of hospital stay or to decreaseresource use, nor has any study shown critical pathways to improve patientsatisfaction or outcomes," the researchers say.  In addition, they point outthat many physicians view critical pathways as "cookbook medicine."Uncertainties aside, pathways are a tool that is here to stay.  Therefore, theresearchers offer some ideas on how best to implement them.  If criticalpathways are to live up to their promise, "full and informed participation ofphysicians" in the development of critical pathways is necessary.  Theresearchers suggest that a "physician-expert" lead the multidisciplinary teamthat develops a critical pathway.  Such a physician, they say, lendscredibility and "builds a foundation of support among all clinicians."The researchers also explain their approach to critical steps in the pathwaydevelopment process, including evaluating current care processes, evaluatingmedical evidence and the practices of other providers, and structuring thecritical pathway in a way that is "user friendly."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996HMO Medical Director Faces Felony Charge Because Not Licensed in FloridaThe medical director of a Florida-based HMO responsible for overseeing theplan's UM decisions got into big trouble because he wasn't licensed topractice medicine in the state.Roger Strube, MD, the former medical director of AV-Med Health Plan, who islicensed in Indiana and Wisconsin, is charged with approving and/orrecommending courses of medical care and treatment in violation of a Floridalaw prohibiting the unlicensed practice of medicine.  He is also charged withviolating a requirement of the state's HMO regulatory body, the Agency forHealth Care Administration, that prepaid Medicaid health plan medicaldirectors hold a valid state license to practice medicine.Strube is pleading not guilty to the felony charges in what GHAA/AMCRA calls"perhaps the first case of its kind in the country."Strube is not in violation of any law, insists Richard Dorff, executivedirector of the Florida Assn.  of HMOs.  He tells UM that under the relevantstate statute, the professional judgment of a physician licensed in Floridaconcerning the proper course of treatment of a health plan member "should notbe subject to modification by the [managed care] plan or its board ofdirectors or administrators .  .  ."  However, it goes on, the statute "shallnot be considered to restrict a utilization management program established byan organization."  And that's all that Strube was doing, says Dorff -utilization management.  He adds that the attending physician has the soleresponsibility for attending the patient, but that the statute doesn'tpreclude a medical director from reviewing clinical criteria with thephysician.Subsequent to the charges being brought against Strube, and because of thecase, Medicaid contracts have to stipulate that the chief medical director ofa commercial HMO must be licensed in the state.  Another law requires thatdoctors using telemedicine must be licensed in Florida.Is there a movement in Florida to thwart the benefits of managed care?  "Itcertainly could be interpreted as such," says Dorff.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996Patients May Also Be at Risk When Docs Are Paid Capitated RatesPhysician groups that have capitated payment arrangements directly with HMOsenjoy practicing medicine without payers' interventions in their medicaldecisions.  These arrangements, though, raise eyebrows in some quarters aboututilization and quality of care.Six California medical groups paid by capitation are subjects of a studyappearing in the Dec.  21 New England Journal of Medicine.  Researchers foundthat the groups have relatively low rates of hospital utilization andphysicians per enrollee.  The study also notes that managing utilizationthrough the groups' own medical directors and physician committees creates acooperative rather than an adversarial approach to utilization management.The same issue of NEJM presents results of a telephone survey of 138 managedcare plans from 20 metropolitan areas nationwide.  Among the findings:  "Fiftypercent of the group or staff HMOs and 74 percent of the network or IPA HMOsadjusted payments [to physicians] according to utilization and cost patterns."In an accompanying editorial, Steffie Woolhandler, MD, and David Himmelstein,MD, oft-quoted critics of the health care system, look at risk-sharingarrangements and acknowledge the attractiveness of doctors, not insuranceexecutives, managing medical care.  They bemoan the idea, though, that somedoctors will boost their incomes by suppressing the use of services.  "If weshun the sick or withhold information to benefit ourselves, we conspire in thedemise of our profession," they note.  "Let us not end up like tobacco-companyexecutives, who, repenting their sins, find that their contracts forbidconfessing them."Himmelstein, a single-payer health plan advocate, was relieved of his dutiesat U.S.  Healthcare effective February 26 because, he says, he violated aconfidentiality clause prohibiting member physicians from saying anything thatcould undermine confidence in the plan.  The editorial he co-wrote includessome disparaging statements about his soon-to-be former employer's gag rules,profits, chief executive salary, and percentage of income that is spent onhealth care.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996HMO Opens Health Centers In Medically Underserved NeighborhoodsOxford Health Plans is opening two community-based health centers in New YorkCity, the managed care organization announced last week..  Each will bestaffed with at least five board-certified physicians who will serve allOxford members, "but particularly those members living in the two low-incomecommunities currently underserved by physicians and other quality healthprofessionals," says David Snow, the managed care company's executive vicepresident.One center is scheduled to open this March in the Mott Haven section of theBronx, an area with only 42 primary care physicians, or one doctor for every5,525 people.  Five new physicians, who are members of a professionalcorporation under contract to Oxford, increases the number of doctors by 12percent.  The site, which once housed a supermarket, is being renovated at acost of about $1.8 million, according to Oxford.The other center, to open in June in the Brownsville/East New York section ofBrooklyn, a former furniture building, will be renovated at a cost of about$1.5 million.  In addition to professional staffing, both centers will haveonsite lab drawing stations and dental and radiology facilities.  They willmaintain a community room and help organize outreach programs to improve thequality of life in the neighborhoods.Oxford went the health center route because there is a potential for clientsin the neighborhoods, but no network in place serving the Medicare andMedicaid population.  "We thought it would be advantageous to the community toactually put a facility there with doctors who meet our standards," says BillRicco, director of all Oxford Health centers.Oxford is making a large investment in the centers, and "we hope to at leastbreak even on it," says Ricco.  He adds that several other areas have beenidentified in the New York metropolitan area for similar centers.  "Progresswill depend, to some extent, on what happens in Brooklyn and the Bronx."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996HMOs Mislead Medicaid and Medicare Patients, Says NYC OfficialA New York City politician doesn't like the advertising generated by HMOs.  Astudy of marketing material from six Medicaid or Medicare HMOs led PublicAdvocate Mark Green to refer several of the ads "that appear the mostmisleading" to the state's attorney general for possible action."Our investigation showed that for some HMOs, the letters stand for 'HypingMedicine to the Old,'" says Green.  Examples of misleading ads, according toGreen, include "we are #1" data from one plan's survey being used to advertiseanother of its plans.  Still other plans promise "something for nothing,"ignoring the fact that to qualify for the Medicare managed care plans,"recipients still have to pay their Medicare Part B premiums - a factconveniently buried in their marketing materials."Oxford Health Plan of New York, one of the accused HMOs, retorts that everyadvertisement and marketing brochure is reviewed and approved by city andfederal regulators.In a separate Public Advocate report, Oxford did indeed come out Number Onewith regard to the greatest number of primary care doctors and the largestproportion who are board certified.  Not faring as well was the only nonprofitHMO in the report, the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, which hadthe greatest number of valid complaints from patients.  Almost all the HMOsdid not provide accurate basic information over the phone, says the report.For example, patients had been told by two HMOs that they have 48 hours tocall for approval when admitted to a hospital emergency room, when in fact theplan requires a call within 24 hours.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996DEVELOPMENTS IN BRIEFA physician profiling bill that would provide $335,000 for the state medicalboard to compile information for consumers about physicians, including theirmalpractice history, passed the Massachusetts Senate in December.  The Houseis expected to pass the legislation in about a month, prior to its expectedsigning by Gov.  William Weld (R).Case management guidelines to reduce medical costs, enhance health carequality, and increase provider and patient satisfaction have been developed byAetna Health Plans in collaboration with the Individual Case ManagementAssociation.  Aetna started with generic guidelines applicable to all casesand then created specific ones for high-cost, catastrophic cases, such asAIDS, high-risk pregnancy, organ transplants, brain injury, and spinal cordinjury.  There are separate guidelines for workers' compensation cases.Copies of the case management practice guidelines may be obtained from Mosby,Inc.  by calling 800/633-6699.HEDIS should provide a mechanism for companies to track their own qualityimprovement rather than compare individual plans in a way that implies one'ssuperiority over another, according to USQA, the research arm of the managedcare company U.S.  Healthcare.  An article in USQA Quality Monitor shows howU.S.  Healthcare used HEDIS to improve its rate of giving retinal exams todiabetics.  After consecutive years with rates of only 35.1 percent and 35.9percent, letters were sent to physicians and to diabetic patients remindingthem of recommendations for yearly exams.  The percentage for 1994 jumped to41.6 percent, even though the quality improvement program was not implementeduntil mid-year.Boston's Beth Israel Hospital and Harvard Medical School have formed afoundation for research and medicine in order to avoid overlapping of theacademic and clinical missions of both institutions.  The restructuring of thelongstanding relationship between the two institutions was deemed necessarybecause of declining financial support for medical education and the changingmethods of delivering and paying for health care.  Cost-cutting and clinicaltreatment beyond the usual bounds of the teaching hospital are making some ofthe traditional strategies for training doctors obsolete, say hospital andschool spokespersons.Female heart attack patients received clot-busting drugs nearly one-half hourlater than their male counterparts, according to a two-year study conducted attwo suburban Michigan hospitals, which is reported in the January issue ofAnnals of Emergency Medicine.  In addition, more than half the men received anECG within 15 minutes of arrival to the emergency department, while less than40 percent of women were tested during this time.Maternity stay legislation is expected to be considered in the 1996legislatures of the following states:  California, Connecticut, Delaware,Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, RhodeIsland, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.  Meanwhile, on its own, GeorgeWashington University Hospital in Washington DC plans to permit women who havenormal deliveries to remain hospitalized for as long as two days - a daylonger than most managed care plans pay for.  "We felt it was time for theclinicians to be ahead of the legislators, and not necessarily have somethingmandated," says Keith Ghezzi, the hospital's medical director.Increasingly, medical resources are being used on patients with somaticsymptoms that have no pathophysiological explanation.  The reasons includelittle financial disincentive to seek treatment because of enrollment in aprepaid health plan and lower tolerance of mild symptoms and benigninfirmities.  A report in the Dec.  27 Journal of the American Medical Assn.says that a gatekeeper primary care physician could make it easier to detectand control physician shopping and to prevent fragmented care, excessivetesting, and the overuse of specialty consultations.  "Medical personnel needto remind both their patients and the public that not every symptom denotesdisease, and despite modern biomedicine's stunning advances, there remains agreat deal it cannot cure," say the researchers.There is evidence that competitive pricing among HMOs brings rewards to theircustomers, according to a just-released market report by InterStudy.  Forexample:  It appears that family premiums are lower in markets with highenrollment growth.  And, on average, medical expense ratios tend to be lowerin markets with low industry penetration but with a greater number of HMOs.Regardless of the budget debate outcome, the growth of Medicare managed careis expected to continue, says a spokesperson for The Managed Care InformationCenter.  Currently, the largest managed care provider for a Medicarepopulation is PacifiCare with 481,365 subscribers in the West, Northwest, andSouthwest, according to an enrollment study by the Center.  Next in order ofsize are FHP with 369,305 subscribers; Kaiser Foundation HP, with 353,455covered lives; Humana Group Health Plan, with 307,155 members; and U.S.Healthcare, with 72,192 subscribers.Managed care tends to prevent people with rare diseases from being referred touniversity-affiliated hospitals, the institutions most likely to havephysicians familiar with such diseases, says the National Organization forRare Disorders.  The consequences, according to NORD, are denial of access tospecialists, young doctors not being trained to recognize rare disorders andtheir treatment, and the severe economic problems of teaching hospitals whichmay force many of them to close.Disease management techniques (UM 12/21/95) are now being used with organtransplants.  Sandoz, a pharmaceutical company that manufactures a drug thathelps prevent organ rejection, and Value Health, a provider of specialtymanaged care benefit programs, have joined forces to design and offerprograms, products, and services that will help health care providers enhancepatient care, further improve organ survival rates, promote organ donation,and manage costs.The National Institutes of Health have turned out to be a winner in the budgetbattle with a 5.8 percent increase in funding for a full fiscal year.  In anabout face, Republicans determined that biomedical research fosters economicgrowth.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT via NewsNetJANUARY 18, 1996REPORT FROM THE FIELD:  Consulting Firm Produces Health Plan "Report Cards"for EmployersTaking advantage of employers' hunger for information on health plans'performance, the employee benefits consulting firm Hewitt Associates recentlylaunched its own health plan "report card" involving plans in 75 markets and aproprietary set of performance indicators.To date, 130 large national employers have signed on for Hewitt's Health ValueInitiative (HVI), which was rolled out in early December.  Participantsinclude such Fortune 500 companies as Marriott International, IBM, and UnitedAirlines.  The fee depends on what a company wants in how many markets, but isless than if the regional reports had to be customized, says a Hewittspokesperson.HVI has been designed to simplify the plan evaluation process by providingparticipating employers with regional cost and quality of care scores for eachplan offered in a region.  Results will be available in late March (see figure1, next page), but if an employer wants additional updates, Hewitt will workwith it on an individual basis.Financial IndexFor the HVI, Hewitt is using its own performance indicator sets, dubbed the"Financial Index" and "Quality Index."  The Financial Index is an actuarialstudy that determines the economic value of each plan.  It is based onpremiums adjusted for location, enrollee demographics, dependent coverage,plan design, and managed care efficiency.  ("Managed care efficiency" refersto the efficiency of the mix of plans a large employer offers - typically HMO,point-of-service (POS), and indemnity.  An employer who knows relativeefficiencies may want to look at the direction in which it should be steeringemployees.)With the Financial Index, the employer is able to determine whether a planprovides good economic value, says Tom Beauregard, principal in Hewitt'sRowayton CT office and chief architect of the HVI.  "We are testing the valueof a plan's cost relative to the population enrolled in that plan.  So we lookat the age of the population, male/female distribution, number of dependents,and geographic location of enrollees.  We are basically coming back to theemployer to say whether this is good or bad economic value based on thisactuarial study.  It's not a simple survey; it's a refined analysis of theeconomic value of health plans being offered to employers.""Employers," says Beauregard, "will also be able to see the range of economicvalue that each of their health plans is offering other participatingemployers.  We may say to a company that a health plan is offering a goodvalue in actuarial terms, but it's not the best value out there.  We can showthe range of economic values from the 30 or so companies within our study thatuse this health plan.  In other words, two employers with the same health plancan in fact be paying different amounts, depending on a number of factors,including negotiating skill."Quality IndexThe Quality Index is based on a Request for Information (RFI) to the healthplans in the 75 markets, along with a scoring process.  The RFI asks formeasures of clinical quality (clinical processes, physician/hospitalmanagement, and quality improvement and utilization), administrativeeffectiveness (member services, access, ID card issuance, and post-65coverage), and organizational effectiveness (provider compensation, financialstability, membership, and National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA)accreditation status).  An RFI will be sent out annually, but a health planhas the opportunity to update its information at any time for inclusion inHewitt's ongoing database, says Beauregard.An RFI was sent in mid-December to over 1,000 HMOs, POS plans, PPOs, andindemnity plans in the 75 markets, and the results will be sent to employersat the end of March.  The health plans are expected to answer all questionsbecause they have done so before on behalf of individual Hewitt clients andbecause the questions are based largely on the familiar Health Plan EmployerData and Information Set (HEDIS 2.5) developed by NCQA, the HMO accreditinggroup.  Beauregard says that there are about 40 questions asked, half of whichare HEDIS.  If a plan has filed HEDIS information, it can just attach it tothe questionnaire rather than reanswer the questions for Hewitt.Regarding authentication of responses relating to a plan's quality, Beauregardsays the RFI is very specific.  "In terms of utilization measures, we ask thehealth plans to use the HEDIS 2.5 methodology for calculating rates.  If theyhaven't used it, we ask them for their methodology - for kind of a paper auditof the methodology."The health benefits consultant doesn't expect to do onsite procedural auditsas part of the HVI.  But, he says, "we have gone through the study many timeswith employers on their larger plans and frequently have gone onsite foroperational, procedural, and clinical audits.  But those audits for individualemployers tend to be for their largest plans that through a scorecard processhave a high variant compared to other plans.  So the Quality Index that ispart of the HVI is a great way for employers to trigger the plans for whichthey want onsite audits.  The triggers typically are a large enrolledpopulation in that plan and how that plan did relative to other plans in thesame community."Hewitt vs.  HEDISBeauregard insists that Hewitt in no way means to supplant, or compete with,HEDIS.  He says that even though the HVI is new, Hewitt - which according toNCQA, is a member of a HEDIS users' group - has been offering financialscorecards to its clients for the past five years, and quality scorecards forthree.  A spokesperson for NCQA finds no fault with Hewitt's use of HEDISquestions.Beauregard adds that while HEDIS questions focus on utilization rates, such asa child's immunization rate within the first two years of life, the Hewitt RFIgoes beyond that by asking questions about administrative effectiveness,organizational stability, member services, products available, service areainformation, provider compensation, and financial ratios of the health plan.Data, Not Decisions"We've found that on average 45 percent of each employer's plans cost morethan the community average," says Beauregard.  "If all of those plans achieveaverage cost efficiency, employers could save 3 percent to 5 percent of theirtotal health care costs.  We've also found an average 18 percent differencebetween the most efficient and least efficient health plans, making thepotential for savings even greater."These figures obviously are not from the recently-initiated HVI.  "We've donethese kinds of studies in individual cases across the country for the lastseveral years," says Beauregard.  "This is the information we have extractedfrom our database.""We provide data findings and advice, but ultimately it's the employer thatmakes the decision," says the Hewitt principal.  "An employer, for example,may look at a plan and note that in his marketplace the plan has the highestquality score and provides the highest economic value - but that he has a verysmall part of his population in that plan.  The employer at that point may tryto encourage migration into that plan from other plans in that samemarketplace.  It comes down to the employers' objectives."What's customized about HVI is the employers' application of the findings.There is no one answer for what employers do with the data.  The data providea regional description of the value of each health plan the employer isoffering.  What the employer does with that information is going to varyacross the board."Whether cost or quality receives more attention depends on the employer, saysBeauregard.  He says that many large employers focus almost entirely on thequality of care that's being delivered.  Others focus almost all their energyon the economic efficiency of the plan.  Most employers fall somewherebetween.An Employer's PerspectiveRohm & Haas, a global specialty chemical company headquartered inPhiladelphia, has signed on to Hewitt's Health Value Initiative and willreceive reports on about 30 health plans for all its U.S.  locations.  Inaddition, the company is having Hewitt conduct onsite audits of health plansat its three major locations:  U.S.  Healthcare for the Philadelphia area,Sanus for Houston, and Humana for Louisville.  "It just gets too expensive toaudit everyone," says Lois Morris, BSN, manager of health care and disabilityprograms.Morris says that U.S.  Healthcare is a natural for an audit because it is thecompany's biggest health plan provider and will be used as a benchmark.  It isalso the plan with which employees are most satisfied.  On the other hand,Sanus is also a natural because a Hewitt analysis and a satisfaction surveyhave indicated problem areas.  "We work with Hewitt by building on previousanalyses," explains Morris.Quality analyses weren't available not so many years ago under the oldindemnity system, says the company benefits administrator.  "We had to assumethat doctors practiced high quality medicine.  There was no attempt, unlessstate by state, such as Pennsylvania's Health Care Cost Containment Council,to measure quality.""Primarily," says Morris, "we want to be comfortable that these veryprofitable companies, such as U.S.  Healthcare, are delivering cost-efficientand quality plans.  We look at the Health Value Initiative as an opportunityto partner with the HMOs for improvement.  In other words, we are notinterested in saying an HMO's immunization rates or mammogram rates are lowfor this area, and therefore we want money back.  We want the HMO to tell uswhat they plan to do to increase that rate so that it exceeds local standards.And then we want to relay this information back to employees in order to makethem comfortable with the choices that we are offering.  The unions are alsointerested in that because neither do they want to hear complaints aboutHMOs."We also want to say to the health plan that we've given it ample opportunityto improve, says Morris.  "We certainly would consider eliminating a plan thatshows no interest in improving the quality of health care delivery.""The services of Hewitt do not come cheaply," adds Pat Coyle, director ofbenefits and workforce strategies.  "But we feel it's money well spent when wesee an increase in quality.  The Health Value Initiative also lets us know howour costs compare with the costs of other companies, and this puts us in agood bargaining position."HEDIS information, says Coyle, is only part of the basis for a clinicalassessment.  "Hewitt fine-tunes HEDIS information and takes it to anotherlevel, adding what is important to our employee population."Overall health care costs have been pretty flat over the past couple of years,says Coyle, largely because 80 percent of the company's employees, thanks toincentives, have enrolled in HMOs.  "We have to be able to go back to thoseemployees to assure them that we are working to improve the health benefitprogram."And even though costs are flat, it's still a $50 million expenditure for thecompany.  We can't continue to shell out that kind of money without somequality indicators that give us confidence in our plans."  -KMBack to Headline List WT03-B02-22IA086-000615-B041-97http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020120 text/html 40790HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:59:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:45 GMTContent-length: 40603Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh21.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Budget Negotiators Push On, But Actuaries Say Plans Could Backfire (420 words) FTC Reviews 'Light' Cigarette Rules (123 words) Some HMOs Shortchange Patient Care, But Field Pays Lots To Its Executives (346 words) Pew Urges Start Of Interdisciplinary Evaluations And End To 'Monopolies' (243 words) Not All Whistleblowers' Tunes Unhappy (210 words) 'Gag' Rule Gets Himmelstein, He Says (208 words) Double-Digit Indemnity Hikes Predicted (136 words) Hospitals Happier With JCAHO Surveys (139 words) Approval Fails To Quell Controversy Over 'Sensor Pad' Breast Lump Device (139 words) VT Hospitals Decry Scaled-Back Reform (144 words) Briefly This Week... (447 words) People Coming & Going... (222 words) Year In Review: Ghost of Reform Returns to Haunt GOP (1484 words) In Other Business... (931 words) Medicine & Health's 8th Annual Health People of the Year Awards (356 words) CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Budget Negotiators Push On, But Actuaries Say Plans Could BackfireBudget negotiators meeting Dec.  29 vowed to work through the holiday ifnecessary.  "We all know what the differences are.  The key now is to keepworking" on a balanced budget, says White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta.The greatest concern is to get federal workers, "innocent victims being hurt,"back to work, he said.  "We want to get this done as quickly as we can to getfederal workers back to work, and get back to normal as soon as possible,"agreed Senate Budget Committee Chair Pete Domenici (R-NM).Meanwhile the American Academy of Actuaries sees "major defects" in Medicarereform plans at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.  Its Medicare Work Groupsays both White House and congressional proposals rely too heavily on curbingprovider pay growth when there's no evidence it reduces overall spending.  "Infact, in many cases, the rate of growth in volume and intensity of servicesincreases when unit payments are lowered," says a report released Dec.  21.It criticizes both plans for having capitation rates set "arbitrarily" bygovernment rather than the market.  That will cause providers to choosepayment mechanisms to maximize revenues, it says.  Hiking rates where they arecurrently low, plus "favorable selection" of capitated plans by healthyseniors, also make it "far more likely" that overall costs will rise, say theactuaries.  Provider-sponsored networks in particular "will allow forsignificant increases in favorable selection."  Providers who make up suchplans "have detailed knowledge of their own patients and, on that basis, willbe able to steer these patients to the program that will yield the mostfavorable payments" for such plans, say the actuaries.  The report slams as"fiscal sleight-of-hand" an Administration proposal to transfer home healthpay from the Part A Trust Fund to the Part B Trust Fund without acorresponding increase in Part B premiums.  It "gives the appearance of havingsolved a problem" by meeting short-range solvency standards, says the report,but "undermines" fiscal discipline.  The report also blasts the Republicans'"failsafe" mechanism that would cut provider pay further if expected savingsfrom capitation don't materialize.  Such cuts could decrease access andquality in the Medicare fee-for-service program.  Where capitation rates arealso cut, that could mean access to quality care is "significantly impaired,"says the report.  Still, says Medicare Working Group Chair Guy King, it wouldonly take a handful of changes, such as adding beneficiary cost-sharing to thefailsafe and increasing competitive bidding, to make "a pretty good plan."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FTC Reviews 'Light' Cigarette RulesThe Federal Trade Commission is reconsidering cigarette tar and nicotinedescriptions.  "Light" cigarettes are defined as those with less than 15milligrams of tar.  But tobacco foes say the smoking machines used todetermine cigarette content underestimate how much smokers inhale.  They citesurveys showing most people think "light" cigarettes are safer.  Butscientific studies show that "light" cigarette smokers can often ingest asmany harmful substances as regular cigarette smokers.  They either coverairholes or suck harder, longer, or more often.  The Commission is thinkingabout having cigarette manufacturers list a range of tar and nicotine levelsrather than a set number, or include a statement saying that actual inhaledamounts vary.  And deceptive advertising suits are another possibility.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Some HMOs Shortchange Patient Care, But Field Pays Lots To Its ExecutivesSome HMOs are taking much more off the top than others, says a Weiss Ratingsstudy released Dec.  19.  The average plan spends 83 cents of every premiumdollar on patient care.  But CaliforniaCare Health Plan, with more than 2million enrollees, spends 74.8 cents, Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Georgiaspends 72.4 cents, and CIGNA Healthcare of Virginia spends 71.5 cents.  At theother end, Aetna Health Plans of New York spend 94.6 cents of every premiumdollar on patient care, and the Scott & White Health Plan in Texas and the 4.8million member Kaiser Foundation Health Plan in California both spend 98.3cents.  Meanwhile another study shows HMOs are paying their CEOs more than anyother industry.  The Crystal Report says total annual pay to Foundation HealthCorp.'s Daniel Crowley is $6,147,000 - that's 277 percent above the averagefor executives in companies of similar size and financial performance.  U.S.Healthcare's Leonard Abramson gets $3,992,000 a year - 107 percent above sizeand performance peers.  Healthcare Compare's James Smith gets $1,756,000 - 88percent above average pay at similar firms.  The report, which analyzedcompensation packages of 896 CEOs who had held their jobs for at least 3years, found that health insurance industry CEOs as a group earn 80 percentabove average pay.  Pharmaceutical and biotech firms also pay executives wellabove average rates.Yet another study suggests costs under capitation are cut most byphysician-owned groups.  A study in the Dec.  21 New England Journal ofMedicine of six physician-owned medical groups paid primarily under capitationfound that, for non-Medicare patients in 1994, hospital days per 1,000 rangedfrom 120 to 140, vs.  a 1993 average of 232 for commercial health maintenanceplans in California and 297 nationally.  Rates of physician visits were alsolower than at HMOs; one group averaged 6.8 days per Medicare enrollee in 1994vs.  a 9.1 average for the state.  The authors caution that the data were notcontrolled for case-mix, and could mean merely that the groups had relativelyhealthy patients.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Pew Urges Start Of Interdisciplinary Evaluations And End To 'Monopolies'Physicians should no longer be evaluated only by their own kind, says the PewHealth Professions Commission.  Interdisciplinary oversight is amongrecommendations for health provider regulatory reforms released Dec.  22 bythe Commission's Task Force on Health Care Workforce Regulation.  Nurses,physicians' assistants, and consumers should be included in physicianevaluation because managed care increasingly involves interdisciplinary teamsof providers, says the Task Force.  Director Leonard Finocchio sayshospital-based, fee-for-service practice skills "are about to be obsolete.  Wemust instead use new strategies for ensuring that physicians, nurses, andother [providers] understand the health care of tomorrow - community-basedmanaged care that emphasizes prevention and primary care solutions."  The TaskForce also calls for an overhaul of scopes-of-practice rules that have"created monopolies" by erecting "unreasonable access barriers."  Dentalhygienists should be "free from a financial leash" to dentists, nurses andmidwives should be free to manage uncomplicated pregnancies and deliveries,and nurse practitioners and physicians' assistants should be able to bill fortheir services "without requiring the consumer to make an overhead payment tophysicians," says Commission Chair Richard Lamm.  The Task Force says thereshould be periodic competency testing to ensure that providers are currentwith the newest information.  And it wants disciplinary files opened to thepublic.  The medical establishment is criticizing the report.  The Federationof State Medical Boards' James Winn says consumers are already on most boards,but no physicians were on the Task Force.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Not All Whistleblowers' Tunes UnhappyMost people who blow the whistle on scientific misconduct say the negativeeffects are not so bad.  A survey of such whistleblowers by the Department ofHealth & Human Services' Office of Research Integrity finds that fears ofretaliation are not always borne out.  Almost a third (31 percent) ofrespondents say they had no negative repercussions, and almost as many (28percent) say they only experienced one.  However, 12 percent say they werefired, jobs were not renewed, or pay hikes were denied.  Fully 43 percent saythey were pressured to drop allegations, 40 percent say they were victims ofcounter-allegations, 25 percent report ostracism, 20 percent say researchsupport was reduced, 15 percent say they were threatened with lawsuits, 10percent say travel funds were cut, 10 percent say desirable work assignmentswere lost, 10 percent say staff support was reduced, 9 percent say manuscriptreviews were delayed, 9 percent say they were denied tenure, and 7 percent saythey lost promotions.  In most cases, the accused initiated retaliation.  Butinstitutional officials like administrators, deans, and department chairs wereinvolved in 88 percent of serious, career-threatening actions.  The reportconcludes that, to prevent the most serious consequences, regulations andenforcement must "primarily" target institutional officials.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996'Gag' Rule Gets Himmelstein, He SaysProminent single-payer health plan advocate David Himmelstein says he's beingousted from an HMO for violating its 'gag' rule.  The Physicians for aNational Health Program co-founder contends that U.S.  Healthcare is droppinghim for comments he made at a National Managed Healthcare Congress.  He showeda slide of the confidentiality or 'gag' clause prohibiting member physiciansfrom saying anything that could "undermine confidence" in the plan.  He alsocomplained about referral disincentives and the CEO's multimillion dollarsalary, and made similar comments on the "Donahue" show.  "It is not illegalfor them to fire me," he concedes.  "We need a law outlawing" gag rules and tothrow firms that use them out of health care, he says.  U.S.  Healthcare saysit is dropping Himmelstein because it has too many doctors in his area, butHimmelstein says the plan is hiring.  The HMO industry says confidentialityclauses aren't designed to curtail patient advocacy, and merely protectproprietary information.  But gag rules were repeatedly attacked at lastmonth's American Medical Association meeting.  The AMA has many of its ownemployees sign confidentiality agreements.  Nonetheless, its Council onEthical & Judicial Affairs is drafting policy on the issue that may be readyfor the Association's June meeting.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Double-Digit Indemnity Hikes PredictedOnly loosely-managed indemnity plans will see costs rise by more than 10percent in 1996, predicts the Alexander & Alexander Consulting group.  Itssurvey of self-funded, employer-sponsored medical plans suggests thatpreferred provider organizations will see increases of 9 percent to 10percent.  Point-of-service HMOs that let members see out-of-plan physicianswill cost 5 percent to 7 percent more.  And closed-panel HMOs will see costsrise by at most 4 percent, if at all, says the survey.  It found littledifference among regions, except for higher indemnity plan increases of 15percent in California.  Meanwhile Interstudy predicts Boston, Nassau-SuffolkNY, Philadelphia, Tampa-St.  Petersburg, and St.  Louis will lead largemarkets' HMO growth in 1996.  Fastest-growing medium size markets include WestPalm Beach-Boca Raton FL, Albany-Schenectady NY, Springfield MA, Worcester MA,and Knoxville TN.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Hospitals Happier With JCAHO SurveysHospital are more satisfied with Joint Commission on Accreditation ofHealthcare Organizations (JCAHO) onsite surveys, according to an AmericanHospital Association (AHA) survey.  The survey, conducted in November, foundthat 64 percent of hospitals "strongly" agree that they are satisfied, up from48 percent last August.  Just one year ago relations between JCAHO andhospitals were so bad AHA was talking about withdrawing its support from theaccrediting body.  Hospitals are unhappy with delays in getting writtenaccreditation reports after onsite surveys.  Only 63 percent said reports weredelivered within a reasonable time, down from 76 percent in August.  JCAHOsays a computer system caused delays.  The number of hospitals who feel theJCAHO survey was of value stayed at about 80 percent.  But the number who feelit's worth the fees charged is up slightly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Approval Fails To Quell Controversy Over 'Sensor Pad' Breast Lump DeviceFoes and fans dislike the Dec.  22 Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approvalof the Sensor Pad.  The 10-year tussle over the purported breast lumpdetection aide is one of FDA critics' favorite examples of alleged agencyarrogance and intransigence.  The FDA says it granted approval now becausedata submitted in November show that the product, two sheets of plasticsliding over a silicone filling, does not decrease detection of lumps.  An FDAadvisory panel asked the manufacturer, Inventive Products Inc., for suchevidence earlier in the year.  But Pad critics say there's still no proof thatit improves lump detection.  And Pad supporters say the approval, allowingsales only in clinics and physicians' offices, is too narrow.  Both campsclaim the action was political.  Advocates of legislation to allowover-the-counter sales plan to push ahead.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996VT Hospitals Decry Scaled-Back ReformThe exclusion of inpatient coverage from sharply curtailed health reform plansin Vermont has hospitals crying foul.  Legislation was passed last spring toenroll everyone below 150 percent of the poverty level in managed care.  Butonly one out-of-state, for-profit plan successfully bid, and it didn't havethe infrastructure to meet the Jan.  1 target startup date.  Providers say thecontract it offered was not for true managed care but "discountfee-for-service" that indemnified the plan against any decisions it made.  Thestate is going ahead with enrollments in a "limited fee-for-service" plan,albeit only for people below 100 percent of the poverty level.  The governor'soffice says inpatient coverage won't be provided until at least two managedcare plans are participating.  But hospitals feel cheated.  The whole packagewouldn't have passed without their support, says hospital associationPresident Norm Wright.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Briefly This Week...The largest provider of insurance to cover gaps in Medicare coverage isincreasing premium costs 30 percent on average.  The 3.1 million seniors withAmerican Association of Retired Persons "Medigap" policies will be charged onaverage $51 per month for the most basic and $151.75 for the most completeplan.  Growth of outpatient claims is being blamed.Hospitals can now check the Internet to see if they're getting a good deal ondisposable products.  PriceGuide, from the nonprofit research agency ECRI,provides both national and geographic average price and lowest price paid byhospitals for brandname disposables.  A test of the system for cardiaccatherization labs found average potential savings of $243,000 per hospital,says ECRI.The Food & Drug Administration may allow more flexibility for food labelhealth claims.  A proposed rule in the Dec.  21 Federal Register would allowsynonymous nutrient content claims next to the required standard text, permithealth claims for certain foods that don't contain at least 10 percent ofrequired nutrients, eliminate some requirements for health claims, and makeother refinements in regulations issued two years ago.Malpractice awards are back up to 1993's record setting $500,000 median, saysa Jury Verdict Research report.  The 1995 figure is a 40 percent jump from1994's $365,000.  Since 1990, says a Tillinghast-Towers Perrin study,malpractice costs rose 48.6 percent, vs.  16.6 percent for overall tort costs.University of California/San Francisco has the greatest percentage ofunderrepresented minority graduates among non-historically black medicalschools, according to Association of American Medical Colleges statistics.From 1990 to 1994, 21 percent of UCSF graduates were Native-, African-,Mexican-American, or Puerto Rican.  Saint Louis University ranks last with0.57 percent.The drug AZT given after needle sticks cuts HIV infection rates by 79 percent,says the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention.  The agency plans to hold ameeting on possible new needle stick injury guidelines.Prozac is more cost-effective than other selective serotonin re-uptakeinhibitors used to treat depression, says a report in the November/DecemberJournal of International Medical Research.  Annual mean health care costs are$442 for patients taking Prozac, $744 for those on Paxil, and $756 for thoseon Zoloft.  More frequent dose changes on the last two explain much of thedifference.The American Jewish Congress is protesting a Health Care FinancingAdministration decision to not require nursing homes to take account ofresidents' religious dietary restrictions.  The Congress is upset by a letterfrom a HCFA staffer saying that the government "does not impose any" religiouspractices, and that patients with religious dietary needs "should choose ahome that adheres to those" rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996People Coming & Going...Dean Metcalfe will head the National Institutes of Allergy & InfectiousDiseases' new allergic diseases lab and direct the Allergy & ImmunologyTraining Program.  He has been head of NIAID's Asthma, Allergic & ImmunologicDiseases Cooperative Intermural Research Center.  .  .  Brian Atchinson is thenew National Association of Insurance Commissioners president.  He's Maine'sSuperintendent of Insurance.  Josephine Musser of Wisconsin is now VP.  .  .David Altman is now Health Care Organizations Practice VP at Lewin-VHI,working out of Sausalito CA.  He was head of the Association of AmericanMedical Colleges' Generalist Physician Initiative, and before that was aUniversity of California/San Francisco associate dean and professor.  .  .Lynnette Moten is now a VP in the Powell Tate health care policy group.  Shewas press secretary in Sen.  Arlen Specter's (R-PA) presidential campaign.  . .Mike Rust, a Florida Hospital Association senior VP and head of the FHAManagement Corp., is leaving to become Kentucky Hospital Associationpresident.  Pat Haines, another FHA senior VP, has just retired after 22 yearsthere.  .  .  David Wexler, a Beverly Hills attorney, is the new AIDS ActionCouncil board chair.  .  .  Correction:  James Kingsbury and William Mance arechair and chair-elect of the American Hospital Association Committee onGovernance, not its Board of Trustees as reported here Dec.  18.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Year In Review:  Ghost of Reform Returns to Haunt GOPA poignant and ironic spectacle unfolded in 1995 as victorious Republicans inCongress lifted the burden of leadership in health care reform from theshoulders of a battered Democratic Administration - and then staggered underthe load just as the Democrats had.Initially, the collapse of universal coverage and comprehensive federalreforms in the 103rd Congress appeared to leave in its wake an agenda ofincremental policy measures for the states and the new Congress to take up.But the budgetary goals of the new Republican majority soon put systemwidereform of Medicare and Medicaid back at the top of the national agenda.The Republicans had no more choice than Clinton but to shape policy in theimage of the breathtaking changes taking place in the private market.  Despiteall the partisan rhetoric and rancor, the Republicans wanted to do forMedicare and Medicaid what Clinton tried to do for the system as a whole -facilitate a minimally-disruptive transition to the new order."The events of 1993 and 1994 may have put proposals for government-guaranteeduniversal coverage and cost control in the deep freeze, but they assuredly didnot cool political interest in health care policy," writes Henry Aaron, asenior fellow at the Brookings Institution, in a new book.Federal budget pressures, combined with the aging of the population andcontinuing technological advances, ensure that "health care financing as anational political issue will not go away," according to Aaron.  But the termsof the debate will change.  "Public and private policy in the United Statesare combining to transform the health care financing system in ways that werenot widely foreseen when the Clinton administration made health care reformits number one domestic priority."Incrementalism DeferredIn the states and the Congress, incremental change was the order of the day as1995 began.  Most of the states were implementing insurance-market reforms.Organized medicine and the managed care industry were fighting astate-by-state war over any-willing-provider laws, the latest in a long seriesof state reform issues clouded by the formidable influence of the EmployeeRetirement Income Security Act (ERISA).  But the most urgent issue for thestates was the uncontrolled growth of Medicaid costs.Consolidation of payers and providers continued in the marketplace, withphysician practices and practice management companies contributingincreasingly to the trend.  Despite the eclipse of health purchasing alliancesin the national policy sphere, several states were sponsoring alliances, andbusiness buyer coalitions continued to form.  For the second consecutive yearhealth plan premiums were under control - growing at or below the generalinflation rate, or down.In May, details of the Republican plan for Medicare began to emerge.  Thehallmark of the proposal was the opening of the Medicare market to arelatively unrestricted variety of competing health plans, with specialtreatment for those sponsored by providers.  Medical savings accounts (MSAs)would be an option for those who preferred to receive their benefit in cash.Increased cost-sharing was dropped as a penalty for beneficiaries who wantedto stay in the traditional Medicare fee-for-service system, but retrospectivecuts in reimbursement would penalize fee-for-service providers if budgettargets were not met.As expected, the Republicans proposed abolishing Medicaid as an entitlementfor the poor and disabled and converting the program to block grants for thestates.  The puissant National Governors' Association hailed the block grantconcept, but was handcuffed by divisions - across party lines - over proposedallocation formulas.Obstacles to the Medicare plan seemed to melt away in the face of theRepublicans' tight party discipline and focus on budget goals.  Sen.  AlanSimpson's (R-WY) attacks on the tax-exempt status of the American Associationof Retired Persons (AARP) helped distract the seniors' strongest lobbying armand forestall frontal resistance to Medicare budget reductions per se.  HouseSpeaker Newt Gingrich (R-GA) worked assiduously to maintain the AARP'srelative quiescence.  The American Hospital Association apparently succumbedto implicit threats that there would be no seat at the table for stakeholderswho went negative in public.The coup de grace came in September when the American Medical Associationannounced its support for the GOP Medicare plan.  As Aaron suggests, theground had shifted under the policymakers' feet.  Out-and-out warfare betweenorganized medicine and the managed care industry had been a major distractionduring the fight over the Clinton plan.  Now, many in the AMA believed thatprovider-sponsored plans would be their salvation.Republican unity and finesse in neutralizing potential opposition did not workas well on Medicaid.  The nation's governors were offering their acquiescenceto tight constraints on federal Medicaid spending in exchange for freedom torun the program without federal interference.  Republican moderates in theSenate, however, led by Maine's William Cohen, refused to accept repeal offederal nursing home standards, and the Republicans lost their grip on aveto-proof strategy for this mother of all step-child programs.Stab In the DarkWith passage of the Republican budget bill and the ensuing Presidential veto,the policy debate moves out of the subjunctive mode.  The questions are nolonger:  "What if we do this?"  or "What if we do that?"  They become:"What's going to happen when we do this?"  and "What if it turns out to be adisaster?"But even changes that are near at hand are difficult to visualize.Provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs), for example, are an unknown quantityin Medicare and the marketplace generally.  They will be subject to varyingstate licensure requirements and solvency standards overseen by the Secretaryof Health & Human Services.  PSOs may provide a sort of haven for doctors.But if their sickest patients follow them, the doctors are in for some joltinglessons in risk selection.The pace of Medicare enrollment in managed care is another crucial variablethat is impossible to forecast, according to Guy King, who was chief actuaryat the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) for 16 years and iscurrently chair of a working group on Medicare in the American Academy ofActuaries (AAA)."Any estimate there is really a stab in the dark, because you've got twooffsetting things going on," King says.  Opening the Medicare choice market toall comers will facilitate expansion of enrollment, but lowering capitationrates will have a constricting effect, he says.  An additional downwardadjustment of rates will be made in areas that currently have relatively highcapitation payments, slowing growth where it is now most vigorous, King warns.The AAA workgroup faulted both the Republican MediPlus plan and PresidentClinton's proposal for maintaining a system of capitation payments "determinedarbitrarily by the government, rather than the market."  (See this week's M&H,p.  2.)  King suggests that the Republican plan could be fixed with a systemof blind price-and-product bidding by plans, against fixed per capita paymentsthen set by HCFA; and by increases in cost sharing for beneficiaries whochoose expensive coverages.To preempt Democratic criticism and mobilization of the seniors' lobby, theRepublicans dropped beneficiary cost sharing from the retrospective failsafemechanism on the fee-for-service side of the program, which still accounts for90 percent of all enrollment.  By inflicting on providers all of the pain fromthe lookback mechanism, the Republicans risk driving doctors and hospitals outof Medicare and pinching off access for many beneficiaries, according to Kingand others.Greater access problems could result from curtailment of Medicaid growth to4.8 percent per year, combined with a continuing erosion of employment-basedcoverage, according to a recent analysis by Harvard University healtheconomist Kenneth Thorpe - a former Clinton advisor - and others.Recent data indicate that the percentage of the population covered through theworkplace fell from 61 percent four years ago to less than 57 percent in 1994.Reductions in Medicaid coverage by the states could freeze out growing numbersof workers who lose job-based coverage in the future, pushing the number ofuninsured as high as 66 million in 2002 in a worst-case scenario, Thorpe andhis colleagues estimated.  Lewin-VHI expects 45.9 million to be uninsured in2002.Dramatic growth in the number of uninsured would lead to public discontent and"pressures for a revived and heightened role of government," Aaron predicts.And according to King, "You and I both know that what's really going to happenis that if access to care and quality of care start suffering in the[traditional] Medicare program, that something's going to be done."The Medicare Preservation Act calls for a national MedicarePlus Health Fair inOctober 1996 "which would provide for a nationally coordinated educational andpublicity campaign to inform MedicarePlus eligible persons about MedicarePlusplans, and the election [choice] process, including the upcoming annual,coordinated election periods that would begin in October 1997."Candidates, start your engines.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996In Other Business...Academic health centers (AHCs) survived the storm of deficit reduction withoutcatastrophic losses to their shrinking revenue base.  Medicare-based subsidieswere largely salvaged by creation of a trust fund for graduate medicaleducation.  Plans to slash funding for the National Institutes of Health wereblocked.  But with cross subsidies for research and teaching drying up on allsides, AHCs were looking increasingly to partner with managed care systems tobroaden their financial and patient base.The Agency for Health Care Policy & Research (AHCPR) was targeted forextinction by Republican budget hawks, then resurrected after an impressiveshow of support from its friends, including influential voices in thecorporate community who value medical effectiveness research.  In its ongoingwork, AHCPR placed increasing emphasis on efforts to implement practiceguidelines as well as develop them, and to renegotiate the roles ofspecialists in managed care.The Business Health Care Action Group in Minnesota turned heads among themanaged care elite with plans to solicit direct bids from competing providergroups within the big integrated health plans that dominate theMinneapolis/St.  Paul market.Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp.  acquired more than 40 new hospitals during theyear, most of them former nonprofits.  The Nashville TN powerhouse put anotable new jewel in its crown in December with the announcement of a jointventure with the respected Sharp HealthCare in San Diego.  Consumer advocatesvowed to make sure Sharp's nonprofit status is not subverted.Cost shifting by providers resulting from the Republican Medicare and Medicaidbudget rollbacks will add more than $84 billion to private insurance billsover the next seven years, Lewin-VHI estimates.Dying in the hospital is often prolonged against patients' wishes, accordingto a massive study sponsored by the R.  W.  Johnson Foundation.  A controlledintervention aimed at improving communication of patients' preferences tophysicians was largely ineffective, researchers found.Depression, because of its prevalence and impact, is the focus of a new,AHCPR-sponsored Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) project that will seekto identify more effective approaches to treatment in primary care settings.Fraud and abuse in Medicare and Medicaid were not as big a political focus inthe legislation-making process as some expected.  Differences between the twoparties were largely rhetorical.  Republicans could not play tough on theissue if they were also shrinking enforcement budgets.Golden Rule Insurance Co.  earned a reputation for super-clout with its heavydonations to Republican candidates, the friendship between chair PatrickRooney and Speaker Gingrich, and success in helping to place medical savingsaccounts - which Golden Rule sells - high on the Republican agenda.The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) shrugged off relentlessmaligning while attempting to balance fiscal and program accountabilityagainst the states' desire for quick and easy Medicaid managed care waivers.Haste had made waste in large scale programs in Arizona and Tennessee.  Butwaiver applicants like New York City chafed at delays and dreamed fondly ofblock grants.Jackson Hole WY became a vacation spot again.Kaiser Permanente, losing market share, undertook restructuring and became atarget of California's feisty Health Care Workers' Local 250, whose 13,700Kaiser workers rejected a 3-year wage freeze proposed by the archetype HMO.MedPartners and Mullikin Medical Enterprises announced merger plans creatingthe largest company yet in the booming physician practice management field,with projected revenues of $1 billion in 1996.  Growth continued with themerged giant's planned acquisition of Pacific Physician Services.The federal Office of Technology Assessment was put out of business byCongress.  Blue Cross and Blue Shield's Technology Evaluation Center steppedin soon after to serve one former OTA client, the Civilian Health and MedicalProgram of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS), under a long term contract.Point-of-service (POS) health plans are the fastest-growing managed carehybrids on the market.  While HMOs and PPOs each held a stable 25 percentmarket share in 1993-1994, Foster Higgins reported that POS plans absorbedmost of the 10-point drop in indemnity coverage, climbing from 9 percent to 17percent of the market.  HCFA worked overtime preparing new rules to allow POSplans to enter the Medicare market, where they were expected to havesubstantial appeal as a door-opener, or transitional product.The Ryan White CARE Act received overwhelming support in the Senate'sfive-year reauthorization vote on the program, which grants money to citiesand states for care for AIDS patients.Strokes due to atrial fibrillation could be cut in half with properanti-coagulation therapy with warfarin, according to the AHCPR's stroke PORT.Telemedicine experiments advanced in many rural areas.  Further development ofthe fledgling technology will depend on the effects of deregulation oftelecommunications and the buildup of a multipurpose informationinfrastructure that will allow costs to be spread among government, education,and health users.The tobacco industry stayed on the defensive, as internal memos discovered inlitigation characterized cigarettes as "nicotine delivery systems" and likenednicotine to cocaine.  The AMA and the Clinton Administration kept up theirpush for regulating tobacco as a drug.The President's Vaccines for Children program was targeted for defunding byCongress after being undercut by a government report that said outreach tosocially-isolated children was a bigger obstacle to immunization goals thanthe cost of vaccines.WellPoint Health Networks Inc.  and Health Systems International Inc.  droppedplans for what would have been the biggest HMO merger ever, after a longwrangle.  Power-sharing by CEOs Leonard Schaeffer and Malik Hasan appeared tobe a major hangup.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICINE & HEALTH via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Medicine & Health's 8th Annual Health People of the Year AwardsWinner:  Newt GingrichThe Speaker of the House displayed disarming naivete when he blithely assertedto the AMA House of Delegates in December that after physicians set up PSOs,"you're going to be able to offer dramatically better services at lower costs.Within a very short time the customer's going to figure out where to go, andat that point you're going to see a very dramatic drop in the profit margin ofthe insurance company."But Gingrich was nothing short of brilliant in marshalling his assets andneutralizing his opposition during the crafting of the Republican Medicare andMedicaid legislation.  Squabbling among stakeholders helped paralyze reformthe previous year.  Gingrich refused to let it happen again.  The Speaker madetime for meetings over details with the trade and consumer lobbies.  He coaxedand cajoled the American Association of Retired Persons and the AmericanHospital Association out of frontal resistance.  He wooed the American MedicalAssociation with the promise of freedom to run their own managed care plansand reap the rewards.Revolutionaries don't often take the AMA by storm.  We think Gingrich probablyoverstates the promise of the free market, and that his rhetoric and ideologyget in the way of smart health policy.  But in 1995, Newt Gingrich set theagenda.Runner-up:  Nancy KassebaumThe retiring icon of incrementalism from Kansas might have been our winner inmany other years.  Few can match the scope and persistence of her efforts tomake the system work better.  She engineered a message vote in the Senate onthe Ryan White CARE Act; worked unstintingly on Food and Drug Administrationreform; co-sponsored action on drive-through deliveries; labored patiently onincremental insurance reforms; and even held a Senate committee overtime toconduct an impromptu civics lesson for a group of students after wrapping upaction on national organ transplantation legislation.Sen.  Kassebaum has been one of the anchors of a group of moderate Republicansin the Senate who stopped attempts to completely dismantle the Medicaidprogram and represent the voice of reason in current budget negotiations.  Shewill be missed.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-23IA086-000615-B041-117http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh34.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020145 text/html 47194HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 01:59:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMTContent-length: 47007Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh34.html Sample Issue Copyright PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 24, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEDERAL CIRCUIT FINDS PTO ERRED IN REJECTING PATENT FOR OBVIOUSNESS.TEXT (567 words) CLASS ACTION FILED AGAINST AHF MAKERS BY COLORADO HEMOPHILIACS.TEXT (517 words) U.S. SUP. CT. LETS STAND FINDING NIH SCIENTISTS ARE NOT CO-INVENTORS (701 words) BRIEF FILED SUPPORTING MERRELL'S APPLICATION FOR WRIT OF ERROR (971 words) MI CT. GRANTS SUMMARY JUDGMENT TO MERRELL IN BENDECTIN SUIT (689 words) $1.5 MILLION AWARDED IN NEGLIGENCE SUIT AGAINST NEW YORK BLOOD CENTER (550 words) WIDOW TELLS IL SUP. CT. $2.14 MILLION NEGLIGENCE RULING SHOULD BE AFFIRMED (990 words) ARIZONA JUDGE CERTIFIES PARTIAL HIV/BLOOD CLASS ACTION ON TIME ISSUE.TEXT (798 words) CIBA ARGUES THAT NEGLIGENCE CLAIMS BY CA WOMAN ARE PREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW.TEXT (844 words) 2ND CIRCUIT AFFIRMS INJUNCTION AGAINST NASAL NUTRIENT (126 words) CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996FEDERAL CIRCUIT FINDSPTO ERRED IN REJECTINGPATENT FOR OBVIOUSNESS.TEXT     Both a Patent and Trademark Office patent examiner and thePTO's Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences erred when theyruled that "similar" elements of a chemical compound are"identical" elements and, therefore, that a patent applicationshould be rejected as being obvious in light of the prior art,the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruled Dec. 11.In re Ochiai et al., No. 92-1446 (Fed. Cir.).     In 1992, the Patent and Trademark Office's Board of PatentAppeals and Interferences upheld a patent examiner's rejection ofclaims 6-10 of Michihiko Ochiai's patent application SerialNo. 07/462,492 for a method of making "a cephem compound havingantibiotic properties" for obviousness in view of the combinedteachings of six prior art references.     The principal claim, claim 6, describes the use of a new,non-obvious acid to make a new, non-obvious cephem, but theexaminer ruled that it actually describes a "standard,conventional" process starting with an acylation agent (aminoacid) that is only "slightly different" from the prior art toresult in a final product that is only "slightly different."     On appeal, the board upheld the rejection, agreeing with theexaminer that there was nothing non-obvious in the particularprocess chosen and claimed by the appellants.     The Federal Circuit reversed that finding, however, findingthat the PTO failed to apply the required statutory test ofobviousness under federal patent law, 35 U.S.C. sec. 103, whichrequires that one compare the claim's subject matter as a wholewith the prior art to which it pertains.     In this case, the process that Ochiai recites in claim 6requires the use of a new, non-obvious acid as one of thestarting materials and, therefore, that claim cannot be obvious,the circuit court ruled.     "One having no knowledge of this acid could hardly find itobvious to make any cephem using this acid as an acylating agent,much less the particular cephem recited in claim 6.  In otherwords, it would not have been obvious to those of ordinary skillin the art to choose the particular acid of claim 6 as theacylating agent for the known amine for the simple reason thatthe particular acid was unknown but for Ochiai's disclosure inthe 429 application," the court said.     The examiner incorrectly drew from case law a generalobviousness rule, that a process claim is obvious if the priorart references disclose the same general process using similarstarting materials, the Federal Circuit found.  However, thecourt said, "similarity is...not necessarily obviousness," andthe PTO cannot make up any such per se rules of obviousness forits own convenience in violation of the fact-intensiverequirement of sec. 103 of the federal patent law.     "Per se rules that eliminate the need for fact-specificanalysis of claims and prior art may be administrativelyconvenient for PTO examiners and the Board.  Indeed, they havebeen sanctioned by the Board as well.  But reliance on per serules of obviousness is legally incorrect and must cease," theappellate panel declared.     Ochiai was represented by Harold C. Wegner, Herbert I.Cantor and Douglas P. Mueller of Foley & Lardner, Washington, DC.The PTO was represented by Fred E. McKelvey, Nancy J. Linck, LeeE. Barrett, John W. Dewhirst, Albin F. Drost and Richard E.Schafer of the Solicitor's Office of the PTO, Arlington, VA.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996CLASS ACTION FILEDAGAINST AHF MAKERS BYCOLORADO HEMOPHILIACS.TEXT     A multi-count Colorado District Court negligence and breachof warranty class action was filed Oct. 5 by a seven-member groupseeking to represent individuals with " or survivors of personswho contracted " HIV through tainted antihemophilic factor (AHF)concentrate in the early 1980s.  Morabito et al. v. Rhone-PoulencRorer et al., No. 95-CV-4409 (CO Dist. Ct., Denver Cty.).     Targeting Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Inc., Armour PharmaceuticalCo, Inc., Miles Inc., Baxter Healthcare Corp., Alpha TherapeuticCorp., and the National Hemophilia Foundation (NHF), the suitalleges that the defendants failed to warn hemophiliacs of therisk of using AHF or employ available processing measures thatwould have reduced the incidence of tainted blood.  It alsoaccuses the pharmaceutical companies of distributing knowinglyHIV-tainted AHF while working to enact infection control measuresand telling hemophiliacs the products were safe.     The NHF, according to the suit, acted in a "willful andmalicious" manner by presenting itself as an impartial watchdogfor the welfare of hemophiliacs while failing to disclose to itsmembership that it was funded "almost entirely from contributionsand other financial support given by the defendant manufacturersand other affiliated organizations."  NHF's Medical andScientific Advisory Committee, according to the suit, was stackedwith physicians who "had received and were continuing to receivemonetary payments from the defendant manufacturers to carry outtheir scientific research and, in some cases, to fund clinicaltrials for the testing of products manufactured by the defendantmanufacturers."     The suit asserts claims of negligence, strict liability,breach of implied warranty, and outrageous conduct against thepharmaceutical companies and includes a separate liability claimagainst NHF.     "By December 1982, the manufacturers were belatedlydeveloping new manufacturing techniques to reduce the viralcontamination of AHF products but, in the interim, continued toaggressively promote and sell their existing AHF products knowingor having reason to know that said products were defective andharmful," says the suit.  "Notwithstanding the mounting body ofmedical and scientific information in 1982, that AIDS was likelyof viral etiology and the certain knowledge at that stage that itwas blood-borne, the defendants, without any serious basis onwhich to dispute such inferences, represented or caused to berepresented that the risk to persons with hemophilia associatedwith the use of AHF products was remote and that the likelihoodof a person with hemophilia developing AIDS as a result of AHFuse was insignificant."     Further, the complaint says, "[d]uring the time frame thatsuch information was given and produced, it was known that thehemophilia community and their medical treaters would reasonablyrely on such information and representations coming as they didfrom organizations they supposed were in a position of a higherlevel of knowledge on the subject matter.  The hemophiliacommunity supposed that defendants would be acting in accordancewith the best and most conservative state of the medical andscientific art and be faithful to their legal, ethical and moralobligations to the thousands of persons with hemophilia."     The suit was filed by Denver attorneys William E. Brayshawand Larry F. Hobbs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996U.S. SUP. CT. LETS STANDFINDING NIH SCIENTISTSARE NOT CO-INVENTORS     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 16 let stand a ruling by theU.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, finding that twoNational Institutes of Health scientists merely helped BurroughsWellcome Co. reduce its patented invention of the AIDS drug AZTto practice and are not its co-inventors.  Barr Laboratories Inc.v. Burroughs Wellcome Co., No. 94-1527 (U.S.); Novopharm Inc. etal v. Burroughs Wellcome Co., No. 94-1531 (U.S.); seePharmaceutical LR, May 1995.     The Federal Circuit ruling affirmed that Burroughs Wellcome(BW) is the sole owner of five of six patents for the drug andthat two companies seeking to market generic versions of it areliable for infringement.  The issue involved hundreds of millionsof dollars in revenues for the rival companies because AZT is oneof the few drugs approved for treatment of AIDS and is prescribedto nearly all AIDS patients.     BW began experimenting with different compounds to determinetheir effectiveness for treating AIDS in the early 1980s.  At thesame time, scientists at the NIH had developed a test that coulddemonstrate a compound's effectiveness against HIV, theretrovirus that causes AIDS.     On Feb. 6, 1985, BW's five inventors had prepared a draftpatent application for filing in the United Kingdom.  Two daysearlier, it had sent samples of AZT and other compounds to NIHfor blind testing against its HIV cell line.  When the NIH testsshowed that the compound was active against HIV, BW filed itspatent application in the United Kingdom on March 16, 1985.     BW subsequently applied for and received the six U.S.patents for AZT.  After receiving Food and Drug Administrationapproval, it began marketing the drug in 1987 under the trademarkRetrovir.     Barr Laboratories, and then Novopharm Ltd. of Canada, soughtto manufacture generic versions of AZT.  BW filed complaints ofpatent infringement against the two companies in the U.S.District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina.  Bothcompanies admitted that their generic versions would infringe onBW's patents, but they claimed BW's patents are invalid andunenforceable for inequitable conduct because BW failed to namethe two NIH researchers, Drs. Samuel Broder and Hiroaki Mitsuya,as co-inventors.     In July 1993, more than three weeks into what appeared wouldbe a lengthy trial, U.S. District Judge Malcolm J. Howard issueda directed verdict for BW, finding the company the sole inventorof the six patents.     Barr and Novopharm then appealed to the Federal Circuit,which affirmed Judge Howard's ruling for five of the patents butfound a significant material fact in dispute on the sixth patent.According to the circuit court opinion, the central issue of thecase was the question of when the BW inventors conceived theirinvention.     Barr and Novopharm had contended that an inventor's ideamust include a reasonable expectation that an invention will workfor its intended purpose before conception is complete.  In thiscase, they argued, conception was not completed until the two NIHscientists proved that AZT is effective against HIV.  Therefore,they said, the NIH researchers should have been named as co-inventors.     However, the Federal Circuit found that an inventor does notneed to prove that his invention will work for its conception tobe complete.  It is enough for the inventor to prove that he hada definite and permanent idea that someone skilled in the artcould understand, the panel said.  In this case, BW had in factfully conceived the AZT invention by the time it prepared thedraft application for the United Kingdom patent, which wasprepared before the NIH test results were known, the panel found.     Barr was represented by Dan Webb, Eric L. Hirschhorn, GeorgeC. Lombardi, James F. Hurst and Monique M. Vasilchik of Winston &Strawn in Chicago.  Novopharm was represented by Robert F. Green,Bruce M. Gagala and Jeffrey S. Ward of Leydig, Voit & Mayer, alsoin Chicago.     Burroughs Wellcome was represented by E. Anthony Figg ofRothwell, Figg, Ernst & Kurz, Washington, DC; and Thomas F.Curnin, Laura Mezey, Daniel L. Cantor and Michael B. Weiss ofCahill, Gorgon & Reindel of New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996BRIEF FILED SUPPORTINGMERRELL'S APPLICATIONFOR WRIT OF ERROR     Amici curiae The Chemical Manufacturers Association, TheChamber of Commerce of the United States of America and The TexasChemical Council on Dec. 14 filed with the Texas Supreme Court abrief in support of Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc.'sapplication for writ of error in Ernest and Marilyn Havner's suitalleging that the drug Bendectin caused their daughter'slimb-reduction defect.  Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. v.Havner, No. 95-1036 (TX Sup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, October1995.     Merrell contended in its application for writ of error thatthe appellate court's decision in this case not only doesinjustice between the parties, it eviscerates the standard of theadmissibility of scientific expert testimony that the TexasSupreme Court recently articulated in E.I. duPont de Nemours andCo., Inc. v. Robinson, 38 Sup.Ct.J. 852 (June 15, 1995).     "Indeed, the expert testimony in this case amounts to nomore than guesswork and surmise disguised in a deceptive mantleof scientific certainty.  As this Court held in Robinson, suchunreliable evidence is inadmissible under Rule 702, and as thisCourt concluded in Parker [v. Employers Mutual Liability Ins. Co.of Wisconsin, 440 S.W.2d 43,47 (Tex, 1969)], evidence of a merepossibility, even if properly admitted, is insufficient tosustain a jury verdict," Merrell claimed.               Merrell's Nov. 16 application pointed to three specificpoints of error:     " "The court of appeals erred in affirming the trial court's     submission to the jury of unreliable and irrelevant     causation evidence";     " "The Havners' expert testimony was legally insufficient to     establish causation"; and     " "Merrell was denied due process of law as guaranteed by     the United States and Texas Constitutions."     Merrell asked the state's high court to grant writ of error,reverse the appellate court and render judgment that the Havnerstake nothing.     In their brief in support, the amici offered three centralarguments:     " "The en banc opinion accepts expert testimony contrary to     the scientific consensus that Bendectin does not cause birth     defects";     " "The en banc opinion contradicts overwhelming precedent     rejecting respondents' expert testimony"; and     " "The en banc opinion ignores Robinson's requirement that     expert scientific testimony be derived by scientific methods     and reflect 'scientific knowledge.'"     The brief concluded, "In Robinson, this Court reiteratedthat expert testimony must satisfy a threshold standard ofreliability and relevancy before reaching a jury.  Regardless ofhow that threshold is articulated, the expert testimony offeredby Respondents cannot pass muster.  This is particularly truegiven the uniform body of case law reaching the same conclusionin other Bendectin cases.  For these reasons, the Court shouldgrant Petitioner's application for writ of error and reverse thejudgment of the trial court."     In their suit, the Havners alleged that the prescriptionanti-nausea medicine Bendectin, used by Mrs. Havner during herpregnancy, caused a limb-reduction defect of their daughter'sright hand.  On Oct. 4, 1991, a state court jury in CorpusChristi, TX, awarded the Havners $30 million in punitive damagesand $3.75 million in compensatory damages; punitive damages werelater reduced to $20 million.  In March 1994, the court threw outthe jury verdict in favor of the Havners, finding that they hadfailed to present anything more than suspicion on the essentialelement of causation.  The court then granted rehearing en banc,heard oral argument before the entire court and, in August 1995,affirmed the judgment below with regard to liability and actualdamages, but reversed that part of the jury verdict awardingpunitive damages.     The court held that, in reviewing the factual sufficiency ofevidence, a court could only exercise its jurisdiction overfactual sufficiency to prevent a manifestly unjust result; itcould not reweigh the evidence and set aside a jury verdictmerely because the judges feel that a different result is morereasonable.  It said a jury is the sole judge of the credibilityof the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony.Here, it said, each of the witnesses was extensively cross-examined; flaws in their credentials, methodologicaldisagreements and errors of omission in their testimony wereexplored by opposing counsel; and each of the experts' work wascriticized by an expert for the opposing party.  After reweighingthe evidence to determine if the jury's verdict is so contrary tothe greater weight of the evidence so as to be manifestly unjust,the court concluded that the verdict as to causation is supportedby sufficient evidence.     As for punitive damages, the court concluded that theevidence "is too weak to support the conclusion that Merrell Dowwas consciously indifferent to an extreme risk that Bendectincould cause limb reduction defects if taken during the criticalperiod of pregnancy."     Merrell's application for writ of error was filed by RobertL. Dickson, Hall R. Marston and George E. Berry with Dickson,Carlson & Campillo of Santa Monica, CA; by John L. Hill Jr., RobL. Wiley and James E. Essig with Liddell, Sapp, Zivley, Hill &LaBoon, L.L.P. of Houston; by Steven Goode of Austin, TX; and byGene M. Williams with Mehaffy & Weber of Beaumont, TX.     The amici brief was filed by Clifton T. Hutchinson and DannyS. Ashby of Hughes & Luce, L.L.P. in Dallas; with Bert Black ofWeinberg & Green LLC in Baltimore; David F. Zoll and Donald D.Evans of The Chemical Manufacturers Association in Washington,DC; and Stephen A. Bokat and Robin S. Conrad of the NationalChamber Litigation Center, Inc. in Washington, DC, of counsel.     The Havners are represented by Barry J. Nace with Paulson,Nace & Norwind of Washington, DC; by Guy H. Allison and RebeccaE. Hamilton with Allison & Huerta of Corpus Christi, TX; and byRobert C. Hilliard and Kevin W. Grillo with Hilliard & Grillo ofCorpus Christi, TX.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996MI CT. GRANTS SUMMARYJUDGMENT TO MERRELLIN BENDECTIN SUIT     Finding that the testimony of the plaintiffs' experts wasinadmissible because their methodology was not generally acceptedby teratologists, the Wayne County, MI, Circuit Court on Nov. 27granted summary judgment to Bendectin manufacturer Merrell DowPharmaceuticals, Inc.  DePyper et al. v. Navarro et al., No. 83-303467-NM (MI Cir. Ct., Wayne Cty.).     "Given the otherwise unexplained incidence of birth defects,scientific uncertainty as to their origin, and widespreadscientific recognition that Bendectin is not a human teratogen,it is necessary that there be expert scientific testimony whichdemonstrates that more probably than not Bendectin is a humanteratogen and a cause of the injury, and further, that such anopinion be grounded in generally accepted scientificmethodology," the court said.  The court conducted a Davis/Fryeinquiry, and said it was not concerned with what plaintiffs'experts finally concluded, but rather the methodology or processor basis for their conclusions, and whether it is generallyaccepted or recognized.     In determining whether the methodology used by plaintiffs'experts to establish causation is generally recognized byteratologists, the court made note of factors established byMichigan case law, including:  Have the results been published?Has there been independent or objective verification?  Has therebeen independent testing and what are the rates of error?  Andhas there been criticism of the method or technique within thescientific community?     The court said that, among other factors, "at least two highquality epidemiological studies showing a strong associationbetween the substance and the occurrence of a birth defect" arerequired to show that a substance is a human teratogen.  Inreaching this conclusion, the court did not reject out of handthe assertion that in vitro studies, animal studies or structureactivity data have a role in determining whether a substance is ahuman teratogen.  But it said these types of data have their ownlimitations that inherently limit their usefulness orapplicability, and reliance on such data to form an opinion onhuman teratogenicity would basically amount to no more thanspeculation.     "Given the lack of any epidemiological studies that show anymeaningful statistical positive association, this Court findsthat teratologists using generally accepted methodology, couldnot conclude that Bendectin can more probably than not cause limbreduction birth defects in any given case," the court said.  Itaccordingly found that the opinions of the plaintiffs' expertsare not supported by a methodology generally accepted byteratologists, so the opinions of those experts that Bendectin isa human teratogen are inadmissible because they fail theDavis/Frye test.  In a footnote, the court said its conclusionwould be the same under Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals,Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2786 (1993) (see Pharmaceutical LR, November1995, P. 10,790), another Bendectin case.  The Daubert test hasnot been adopted in Michigan; the Davis/Frye rule is Michigan'sstandard governing the admissibility of scientific evidence.  Thecourt, therefore, granted Merrell's summary judgment motion.               Lawrence R. DePyper Sr. and Jane N. DePyper filed suit onbehalf of their son and themselves, claiming that Lawrence R.DePyper Jr.'s limb reduction birth defects were caused by inutero exposure to Bendectin, which Jane DePyper ingested whilepregnant.  The court granted Merrell's summary judgment motion,citing two earlier published federal cases.     However, on appeal, the Michigan Court of Appeals reversedand remanded, stating it was satisfied that the evidentiary rulein those cases did not comport with Michigan jurisprudence.  Theappellate court said the trial court should conduct a Davis/Fryeinquiry into the question:  "Do impartial and disinterestedexperts in the field of teratology generally accept themethodology employed by plaintiffs' expert in assessing theimpact of in vivo, in vitro, chemical structure and animalstudies in determining teratogenicity?"     The DePypers were represented by Barry J. Nace with Paulson,Nace, Norwind & Sellinger of Washington, DC; and by Robert A.Tyler with Sommers, Schwartz, Silver & Schwartz of Southfield,MI.  Merrell was represented by Frank C. Woodside III and FredErny with Dinsmore & Shohl of Cincinnati; and by Lamont E.Buffington with Garan, Lucow, Miller, Seward, Cooper & Becker,P.C. of Detroit.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996$1.5 MILLION AWARDED INNEGLIGENCE SUIT AGAINSTNEW YORK BLOOD CENTER     A New York Supreme Court jury in Manhattan on Dec. 19awarded $1.5 million to a 16-year-old Staten Island resident whosaid New York Blood Center's (NYBC) failure to employ surrogatemarker or Hepatitis B-core antibody tests led to his receipt ofHIV-tainted blood during a 1984 heart operation.  DiPaolo et al.v. Greater New York Blood Center et al., No. 2751/91, (NY Sup.Ct., New York Cty.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.     Attorneys for both sides disagree, however, whether theamount will be set off by settlements already obtained byplaintiff Joseph "Joey" DiPaolo.     Capping six days of deliberation, the panel, however, ruledfor co-defendant Dr. Richard Golinko, the pediatric cardiologistwho recommended that DiPaolo undergo surgery.  DiPaolo said thedoctor failed to obtain informed consent before allowing theoperation to proceed and accused him of failing to reveal theexistence of a then-pending test to identify HIV antibodies.Dr. Golinko said such duties were those of DiPaolo's surgeons.     DiPaolo was operated on at Downstate Medical Center inBrooklyn, NY, on May 23, 1984.  During the procedure to correctan atrial septal heart defect, he received some 16 units of NYBC-supplied blood components.  One of those units was tainted withthe AIDS virus.     DiPaolo, who tested HIV-positive at age eight, alleged inhis suit that NYBC neglected to "aggressively institute" adirected donations policy, educate doctors about the risk oftransmitting HIV via blood and blood components, or directlyinterrogate donors about any high-risk behaviors.     In 1993, the surgeons settled with DiPaolo and his familyfor $1.2 million.  The hospital entered a separate $400,000settlement.     Both sides are expected to file various post-trial motionsbefore the end of January, including a plaintiff's request for anew trial on the damages issue.  Plaintiff co-counsel RobertJenner says he expects to appeal the jury's charge on thestandard of care question and to ask the court whether theaggregate $1.6 million settlement DiPaolo received from thesurgeons and hospital is considered, under New York law, a set-off against the $1.5 million jury verdict.     NYBC attorney Roger K. Solymosy of Brody & Fabiani in NewYork City expressed little concern over the jury's award, sayingthat under a recent state appellate court ruling, there isclearly a set-off against the amounts the plaintiff alreadyreceived.  Solymosy says he expects to file several pro formapost-trial motions on behalf of his client before expiration of a30-day deadline.     Jenner says although the jury entered a "very compromisedverdict on damages," DiPaolo is "very pleased that NYBC was heldresponsible after avoiding such responsibility in so many casesto date.  My client, however, still has AIDS whether the awardwas $1.5 million or $1.5 billion."  Although Jenner did not seeka specific amount in damages, during the nine-week trial hefrequently cited an internal NYBC memo stating that the bloodbank stood to save some $10 million by avoiding core-antibodytests.     DiPaolo is represented by Jenner and by Martin Freeman ofFreeman & Jenner in Bethesda, MD; and by Dennis Drasco of Lum,Danzis, Drasco, Positan & Kleinberg in Roseland, NJ.  Golinko isrepresented by Jay Rappaport and Nancy A. Steptoe of Aaronson,Rappaport, Feinstein & Deutsch, LLP in New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996WIDOW TELLS IL SUP. CT.$2.14 MILLION NEGLIGENCERULING SHOULD BE AFFIRMED     The widow of a man who died of AIDS as the result ofreceiving HIV-tainted blood during a February 1984 heartoperation urged the Illinois Supreme Court on Dec. 11 to second astate Appellate Court's affirmation of a $2.14 million juryverdict against United Blood Services (UBS), the supplier of thebad blood.  Advincula v. United Blood Services, No. 79653 (ILSup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.     Marietta Advincula told the high court the rulings belowshould stand and that it should reject the blood bank's assertionthat the trial court misapplied the Illinois Blood Shield Law(745 ILCS 40/3 [1994]) in judging the case under a "due care"rather than a "professional liability" standard based onadherence to industry practice.  The 75-page brief says that evenif UBS were judged under the latter test, the verdict would standby virtue of its failure to follow internal procedures at the1984 blood drive during which the implicated "John Donor"provided the tainted blood.  UBS barred him from giving bloodonce a 1986 donation proved HIV-positive.     "UBS' fundamental position is that 'only a failure to adhereto [professional] standards can give rise to liability' [emphasisadded]," says the Advincula brief.  "Both the circuit court andthe appellate court were correct in rejecting thisargument...because it conflicts with the plain language of theBlood Shield Law and violates fundamental principles of statutoryinterpretation....  The Blood Shield Law states that a blood bankwarrants that it has 'exercised due care and followedprofessional standards of care in providing the service accordingto the current state of the medical arts [emphasis added].  Thislanguage, and in particular, the conjunctive 'and,' plainlyimposes two requirements " a blood bank must exercise due careand follow professional standards of care."     Advincula says the court should reject the asserted UBSinterpretation of sec. 40/3, that blood banks are "to exercisedue care in following professional standards of care."  Becauseneither that interpretation, nor those offered in amicuspetitions by the American Red Cross, the American Association ofBlood Banks and Abbott Laboratories, says the plaintiff, "adheresto the language the Legislature did adopt, they all should berejected."     Adds Advincula, "[T]he phrases 'exercised due care' and'followed professional standard of care' describes the means bywhich a blood bank is to fulfill this responsibility.Accordingly, compliance with professional standards of care isnot necessarily conclusive evidence that a blood bank hassatisfied its duty of care.  If such standards do not incorporatecurrently known and available safeguards at the time of the blooddonation at issue, then compliance with them is not enough."     The brief says that despite knowledge held by UBS in early1983 that homosexual men should be barred from donating blood andthat any of several surrogate marker tests would have almosteliminated the threat of HIV in the blood supply, UBS took nosuch action.  Surrogate tests, it adds, were rejected on abusiness basis because of their cost.  The suit over the AIDSdeath of Ronaldo Advincula, says the brief, is not grounded onmedical malpractice claims as intimated by UBS, because the finalauthority over whether to implement surrogate tests rested withthen-UBS Chief Executive Officer Hayle Rudolph.     Responding to the claim UBS made in its Illinois SupremeCourt brief, Advincula says she is not required to show that herlate husband would have avoided HIV infection if any of fivediscussed surrogate tests were in effect in February 1984.Testimony from her experts, she says, indicated that any of thetests would have been effective in disqualifying HIV-positivedonors.  The Hepatitis B Core Antibody test, said plaintiffexpert Dr. Thomas Asher, was the most thorough test available,while another plaintiff expert estimated there was a 100%probability that the test would have excluded John Donor's bloodin 1984.     The Advincula brief states that even if UBS were to bejudged under a professional standard, as it wishes, the jury'sverdict would still stand, based on the blood bank's failure toadhere to its own operating procedures.  "UBS argues that nothingUBS could have done would have kept John Donor from donatingbecause he did not think he was at risk for AIDS," argues theplaintiff.  "The evidence, however, showed that John Donor was agay man...; that gay men were at highest risk for AIDS...; andthat UBS did not adequately educate John Donor before and duringthe blood drive about those who were at risk for AIDS and shouldnot donate blood....  The evidence also showed that had UBS usedproper screening methods at a properly conducted blood drive,John Donor would have excluded himself or been deferred.  It wasundisputed that UBS did nothing to educate John Donor before orafter he arrived at the blood drive."     Concluded the brief, "Additionally, contrary to UBS' claim,John Donor testified that he never received any 'disqualifyinginformation' in any of the years he donated blood from 1983 to1986....  Thus, UBS' argument that better screening in 1984 wouldhave made no difference because John Donor donated in 1985 and1986 when UBS gave more specific information to donors...iswithout merit.  Further, the jury could well have concluded thathad UBS educated John Donor properly in 1984, he would not havedonated then."  Because UBS failed to obtain writtenacknowledgment from the donor in 1984 that he had read andunderstood the blood bank's "Important Message" notice on AIDS,adds Advincula, "UBS' negligence in this regard violated theindustry practices and UBS' own policy."     Advincula is represented by Judith Fors and Margaret Byrneof Chicago; and by Maureen Witt, Elizabeth Phelan and CarlosSamour of Holland & Hart in Denver.  UBS is represented byMichael Brody, Jerold Solovy, Barry Levanstam and Jeralyn Baranof Jenner & Block in Chicago, and by Foster Robberson of Lewisand Roca in Phoenix.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996ARIZONA JUDGE CERTIFIESPARTIAL HIV/BLOOD CLASSACTION ON TIME ISSUE.TEXT     Although rejecting class proceedings on negligence,liability and failure to warn claims, a U.S. District Court judgein Tucson on Dec. 4 granted partial class action status to allArizonans infected with HIV via blood transfusions between July1982 and March 1985.  Doe et al. v. American Red Cross et al.,No. CV 94-521 TUC RMB (D AZ).     Judge Richard M. Bilby ruled that lead plaintiff Jane Doe,the widow of an AIDS-infected blood recipient, failed to show thecase met the class certification requirements of FRCP 23(b)(1)(A)because there are too many individual variables for classmembers, including time and medical factors.  A  partial classaction, however, is appropriate for class determination ofanother issue under FRCP 23(b)(3), said the judge.  That issueis:     At that point in time, if ever, between 1982 and 1985     was sufficient information available to cause a reasonable     blood components provider to adopt screening and testing     procedures to protect Arizona transfusion recipients from     the transmission of HIV.     Because "individual questions of fact predominate overcommon questions of law or fact," said Judge Bilby, the classaction device is not a "superior means of adjudicating thisentire controversy."  Even if a class were certified on theliability, negligence and failure to warn claims, the judge notedthat "a great deal of time and expense would be involved in theconduct of individual trials necessary to determine liability asto each potential member, creating great difficulties in themanagement of the litigation."     On the certified issue, however, the order held, "What ajury will determine on a class-wide basis is whether, and if sowhen, the defendants had the knowledge needed to eliminate orreduce the risk of HIV-tainted blood being used for transfusion."The jury, noted Judge Bilby, "will not reach the question ofultimate liability of any defendant to any particular plaintiff."     The judge said class certification of the time issuesatisfies the requirements of Rule 23(b)(3) because it aids inefficient case management.  "The time that the knowledge wasavailable is the same in each individual case although eachplaintiff may have been affected differently," said thecertification order.  "The class issue of available knowledge ata particular time is much more narrow than negligence.  If thejury determines a date at which time sufficient knowledge wasavailable that a reasonable blood provider would have implementeddonor screening and blood testing measures, that date serves toinclude and exclude plaintiffs.  This will greatly aid in thefair and speedy adjudication of this controversy by deciding akey issue that is common to each claim and will not need to berelitigated."     Added Judge Bilby, "...[T]his is not the type of issue thatan individual plaintiff would have a strong interest incontrolling.  The availability of knowledge at a certain point intime is not particular to any plaintiff and does not require aventure into her lifestyle and personal circumstances.  Thedetermination of knowledge availability is distinct from itsimpact on any one person."     In addition to lead defendant American Red Cross, othernamed defendants include United Blood Services (UBS), a divisionof Blood Systems, Inc., the American Association of Blood Banks(AABB), Council of Community Blood Centers (CCBC), and theUniversity of Arizona.     In an Oct. 16 opposition brief, the Red Cross said there areno common issues which would lend to class resolution and thatDoe's suit fails to meet the requirements of either FRCP23(b)(1)(A) or 23(b)(3).  "[E]ven if plaintiff's issues werecertified for class action treatment, not only damages, but eventhe defendants' liability to each individual class member wouldstill have to be litigated separately," said the Red Cross."Thus, the class certification plaintiff requests will result inmere advisory opinions on certain abstract issues.  Moreover,those advisory will not meaningfully advance the litigation, oreven save time in the individual class member trials that mustfollow the class issue trial, because the bulk of the evidencewill have to be presented and considered again in the individualclass member trials."     The plaintiffs are represented by Rose Marie Ibanez ofIbanez and Wilkinson, and J. Patrick Butler of Dickerson, Butler,Rabb & Rodriguez, P.C., both in Tucson.  The Red Cross isrepresented by Joseph E. Mais and Samuel A. Thumma of Brown &Bain in Phoenix; and Tracy L. Merritt, William H. Forman andJacqueline R. Denning (of counsel) of Arnold & Porter inWashington, DC.  Foster Robberson of Lewis & Roca in Phoenixrepresents UBS.  CCBC is represented by Ellen Wheeler of Tucson.The AABB is represented by Tom Manning of O'Connor, Cohn, Dillon& Barr in San Francisco.  Michael W. Capp of Weyl, Guyer, MacBan& Olson in Tucson represents the University of Arizona.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 1996CIBA ARGUES THAT NEGLIGENCECLAIMS BY CA WOMAN AREPREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW.TEXT     Approved labels and warnings on medical devices are"specific requirements" of federal law that preempt causes ofaction brought under state law, respondent Ciba Vision Corp.argued in its answer to a petition filed by a California womanasking the state Supreme Court to overturn a lower court's rulingthat all of her claims against Ciba are preempted by the MedicalDevices Amendments (MDA).  Scott v. Ciba Vision Corp.,No. S049608 (CA Sup. Ct.); see Pharmaceutical LR, January 1996.     In its Nov. 15 answer, Ciba contended that the CaliforniaCourt of Appeal, Sixth District, was aligned with a majority ofjurisdictions that have held that federal law preempts causes ofaction brought under state law.     Appellant Leslie Scott brought suit in California statecourt against Ciba, alleging claims of strict liability,negligence, failure to provide adequate warnings and breach ofimplied warranty.  Scott claimed she had difficulty indistinguishing Ciba's AOSEPT solution, which contains hydrogenperoxide, from its saline solution.  She claimed that as a resultof her failure to distinguish between the bottles, she sufferedchemical burns to her eyes when she rinsed her contacts in theAOSEPT solution instead of the saline solution.     Scott argued that, around the time of her injury, Ciba hadbegun to market its AOSEPT solution with a red cap, but alsocontinued to market it in the old bottle, knowing that personsnot wearing their contacts would have difficulty indistinguishing the two.     The Santa Clara County Superior Court granted Ciba's motionfor summary judgment, finding Scott's claims preempted by theMDA.  On appeal, the California Court of Appeal, Sixth District,affirmed the trial court.     The Court of Appeal cited to Evraets v. IntermedicsIntraocular, Inc., 29 Cal.App.4th 786, and 21 C.F.R. sec.808.1(b), in holding that the "requirement" the Food and DrugAdministration refers to in sec. 360k includes "any requirementhaving the force and effect of law 'whether established bystatute, ordinance, regulation, or court decision.'"     Examining Scott's argument that the MDA contains no specificcounterpart regulations regarding AOSEPT, the Court of Appealheld that all Class III medical devices are subject to therequirements of the MDA, which include the FDA's stringentpremarket approval (PMA) process.     In her petition to the California Supreme Court, Scottargued that the only other state Supreme Court that has addressedthe issue of federal preemption concerning Class III devicesfound that the plaintiff's claims were not preempted (Larsen v.Pacesetter Systems, Inc. [Hawaii 1992], 837 P.2d 1273, 1281).     Some of the leading cases that have expounded on the issueof preemption have recently been criticized, Scott said.  Forexample, the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' 1984 ruling inMartello v. Ciba Vision Corp. gave sec. 360k(a), the MDA'spreemption provision, an expansive reading, but was criticized inthe Ninth Circuit's ruling in Kennedy, Scott said.  "The...NinthCircuit in Kennedy...stated that the language of [sec.] 360k(a)does not create the broad, sweeping preemption found by the'strained reading of the statute' by the court in Martello,"Scott argued.     And, Scott said, state actions that attempt to enforcefederal standards are not preempted.  Citing to Evraets, theappellant said, regarding a claim of negligence per se, since thestate requirements are equal to the federal requirements becausethey adopt the federal standards, they are not preempted.     On the other hand, Ciba argued in its answer that aconsistent line of cases holds that state law tort and warrantycauses of action are preempted because the pre-market approvalprocess envelopes the approved product in specific requirementsof federal law.     "Scott makes no claim of any defect in the design ormanufacture of AOSEPT," Ciba said.  "Rather, she contends thatCalifornia tort and warranty law required that Ciba Visionpackage and label AOSEPT differently in order to warn usersagainst accidental placement of deneutralized solution in theeye."     Ciba argued that this is a "strong case for MDA preemption"because of AOSEPT's premarket approval and Scott's singular focuson warning deficiencies in the product.     The respondent said that the court's decision in Evraets,which Scott cited in her petition, does not warrant review by thestate Supreme Court.  Ciba said Evraets does not deal with adevice that received FDA premarket approval.     "Evraets contains a discussion of the preemption of statelaw claims for breach of warranty that is consistent with thedecision in Scott," Ciba said.  "Evraets only reaches the issueof preemption in relation to a claim of breach of an expresswarranty."     Ciba concluded that by enacting the MDA, Congress interposedthe FDA as an expert watchdog and preempted certain state lawcauses of action.  A jury ought not be allowed to rethink thesufficiency of labels and packaging that the FDA endorsed, saidCiba.     Scott is represented by Jonathan D. Gordon of the LawOffices of Jonathan D. Gordon in Denver.  Ciba is represented byThomas M. Peterson and Diane S. Rice of Brobeck, Phleger &Harrison in San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 24, 19962ND CIRCUIT AFFIRMSINJUNCTION AGAINSTNASAL NUTRIENT     Finding that the Food and Drug Administratiusandpersons reached.     Legal advertisers should be aware that negotiated placementcosts from media vehicles may be used to avoid the full mediacommission charged by advertising agencies.(Copyright 1995, Hilsoft, Inc.  Reprinted with permission.)Todd B. Hilsee is the President of Hilsoft, Inc., a Souderton,PA, firm that provides class action media services and analysis.His class action media planning and testimony experience hasincluded the Airlines Antitrust Litigation, 900 Number ClassActions, Generic Drugs, Defective Polybutylene Pipe Litigationand Castano Tobacco Litigation.  Mr. Hilsee spent the majority ofhis advertising career with Foote, Cone & Belding, the largestU.S. advertising firm, where, as Account Director, he won anEffectiveness Award from the American Marketing Association.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-24IA086-000615-B041-138http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh59.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020200 text/html 37205HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMTContent-length: 37018Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh59.html Sample Issue Copyright PHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNet February 23, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Hospital Overhauls Information System To Adopt Client-Server Environment (223 words) Hospital Slashes Patient Admission Time Using `Administrative Partner' Program (383 words) Plans Target Accessible MDs For Contracts, Rewards (217 words) Hospital Restructures Triage To Speed Interventions (220 words) HMOs Held Financially Liable For Meeting Quality Goals (239 words) Blues Group Implements Appropriateness Rules (215 words) Problems with Provider Risk Outlined in Safe Harbors (222 words) Group Tackles Pregnancy Care In First Report Card Effort (250 words) Telephone Survey Comments Influence Outcomes Initiatives (226 words) Nurse Quality Initiative Garners `Magnet Hospital' Rank (257 words) Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy Process (193 words) Contract `Gag Clauses' Rare, Seldom Used on MDs (244 words) Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic Record (284 words) Compliance Plans Crucial As Whistleblower Cases Grow (232 words) Firm Tweaks Report Card To Pinpoint CQI Initiatives (273 words) Hospital Cuts CABG Costs By $7 Million, LOS by 23% (134 words) Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product Reviews (199 words) HCFA Merging Quality Rules For Medicare, Medicaid Plans (199 words) Multiprovider Networks Eyed As 1996 Antitrust Target (339 words) CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Hospital Overhauls Information System To AdoptClient-Server EnvironmentTired of the lack of communication between and duplication ofeffort among components of its budding integrated delivery system,one Texas hospital decided to rework the entire information system.Hermann Hospital of Houston embarked on a three-year initiative tophase in a system to create an electronic medical record accessiblefrom all parts of the network, says CIO David Tucker.The first phase involves pilot tests at five or six University ofTexas clinics associated with the hospital. After phase one iscomplete, the hospital will focus on integrating other departments,such as nursing, into the network.The hospital currently operates in a mainframe environment, but isnow moving to a client-server environment that makes informationmore accessible to the end-user, Tucker says.The paperless, client-server system will eliminate the need forduplicate medical records scattered around the network.For example, if a patient goes into a clinic in the morning, thengoes to the Hermann emergency room that night, physicians in the ERhave no way of knowing about the encounter that morning and willdraw up a new chart, Tucker says.When implemented, the system will link about 2,000 devices,including workstations and printers, located at about 60 clinics inthe area. Hermann hopes to have the first pilot systems in place bySeptember.Contact Tucker at (713) 704-3367. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Hospital Slashes Patient Admission Time Using`Administrative Partner' ProgramPhysician managers at a Southern California hospital creditfirst-phase implementation of a patient-focused quality care model- the use of "administrative partners" - with shorter patientwaits, increased cash collections and other process improvements."Our overall goal is to bring services closer to the patient, toeliminate wait times, the redundancy of people asking the samequestions of the patient"to rework the entire patient flow processso it is simpler and easier from a patient's perspective," saysKari Cornicelli, director of financial operations at 109-bedPomerado Hospital in Poway, Calif.Called Patient First, Pomerado's four-stage program began in April1994 with implementation of the administrative partners phase."Service partners" was implemented in March 1995, and the hospitalplans to begin "clinical care partners" (training direct-care stafffor multiple tasks and improved case management) and "familypartners" (working with families to improve care for dischargedpatients) by the end of 1996.Pomerado's sister hospital, 353-bed Palomar Medical Center inEscondido, Calif., runs a similar patient-focused care program.Administrative partners, which combine the roles of unit secretaryand admitting clerk, surpassed some stated goals:o       Average admission time fell to 3.07minutes by December 1995, down from 15 minutes in February 1994.The 1995 goal: not to exceed 5 minutes.o       Monthly cash collections rose to$86,752 by December 1995, up from $15,270 in February 1994. The1995 goal: $53,000.From February 1994 to year-end 1995, officials also cite thefollowing process improvement indicators for administrativepartners: (1) Completed account files for patient billing rose to86% from 50% (below a 1995 goal of 95% completion); (2) Advanced directive acknowledgments on patient chartsclimbed to 92% from 61.8% (above a 90% goal);(3) Signed requests for extension of hospital stay for Medi-Calpatients increased to 92% from 83% (below a 98% goal).Pomerado then re-designed the role of the environmental serviceworker/housekeeper. Housekeeper  duties were limited to somecleaning chores. But Pomerado trained 11 FTEs as "service partners"to clean an entire floor and to ambulate patients and perform basiccomfort duties, such as getting blankets and water.Registered nurse Lori Burnell, assistant administrator and nurseexecutive, says Pomerado saved $173,800 in its service partnersphase through staff consolidation and the elimination of 4.2 FTEs.Contact Burnell at (619) 485-6511. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Plans Target Accessible MDs For Contracts, RewardsAn increasing number of managed care plans are rewarding primarycare physicians based on their ability to take on new patients.The trend started a few years ago and has taken root in mature Eastand West Coast markets and in  the Twin Cities, says BillTownsend, a consultant in Towers Perrin's integrated health systemsgroup in Minneapolis.The move toward rewarding MDs for seeing more patients is part ofa broader strategy among employers and managed care plans toincrease access to services. To meet this objective, a plan oremployer must first make sure it contracts with doctors who offereasy access to patients.According to Townsend, plans and employers use a variety of methodsto reward MDs who maintain their access for patients, including:o       Paying an MD a flat bonus forkeeping his or her practice open to new patients; oro       Tying the MD's share of any surpluspool to the percentage of plan enrollees that physician sees.Generally, plans and employers don't set "growth targets" thatspecifically reward MDs for increasing the number of patients theysee over a period of time, Keyes says. That's because allocatingthe risk pool based on the number of enrollees an MD seesencourages doctors to add new patients, he explains.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Hospital Restructures Triage To Speed InterventionsFinding its emergency room triage system redundant and frustratingto patients, Fairfax (Va.) Hospital's continuous qualityimprovement team empowered nurses to intervene in certain patientcases.The result: a 40% reduction in turnaround time for intervention inextreme-trauma cases. The same triage method was used to conductseptic workups on children, stomach pain, and urinary tractinfections.The 700-bed, level-one trauma center receives about 62,000emergency room visits annually and admits 23% of its patients.That's a significant number compared to most emergency departments,which admit an average 12% to 15% cases.Most emergency departments have four vertical care "silos" thatpatients encounter, says Dr. Thom Mayer, chairman of the departmentof emergency medicine. Those silos: (1) physicians; (2) nurses;(3) essential service providers such as lab and X-raytechnicians; and (4) registration personnel.But each silo operates independently, leading to redundancies andpatient frustration.Applying continuous quality improvement methods, Fairfax emergencydepartment representatives held monthly quality council meetings todetermine how to improve services.The team examined the amount of time it took to get a patient intoan X-ray or to the lab and the number of steps involved in theprocess.One result: a key staffer intervenes in patient cases and guidescases through the emergency room.For more information, contact Mayer at (703)  698-3195.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996HMOs Held Financially Liable For Meeting Quality GoalsA Denver small-business alliance has launched a "performanceprogram" of quality indicators - complete with financial incentivesand disincentives - for health plans in its Cooperative for HealthInsurance Purchasing (CHIP).Founded in 1988, the Colorado Health Care Purchasing Allianceoffers two products to its 370-odd members, which represent 85,000covered lives: a PPO for self-insured companies and the CHIP. About228 companies, representing 5,000 covered lives, use the purchasingalliance.The "performance program" covers the four CHIP HMOs with which thealliance contracts for standard benefit plans. The program setsseven indicators, with common objectives for each.Financial incentives and disincentives were a part of the plan fromthe beginning, says LaDon Kessler, alliance information manager. Atthe end of the year, the best-performing health plan in eachindicator gets 50% of the pool accumulating over the year fromplans not meeting the goal.Service indicators are reported monthly and financially assessedquarterly; other indicators, including provider access and membersatisfaction, are reported annually and financially assessedannually. Clinical indicators have no financial adjustment.Assessments run 0.333% of total quarterly premium for serviceindicators, and 0.333% of total annual premium for satisfaction andprovider access indicators.Close to the fall open enrollment period, the alliance will releasea "report card" that shows plans'  performance against the sevenindicators' common  objectives. The alliance may attach someHEDIS results to the report card.Contact Kessler at (303) 333-6767. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Blues Group Implements Appropriateness RulesThe National Account Consortium, a group of nine Blue Cross andBlue Shield plans with national employer accounts, has adoptednationwide standards for treatment appropriateness for allparticipating caregivers.The standards, developed by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Assn.'sTechnology Evaluation Center, are outcomes- and protocol-based.Other health plans, including Cigna, Prudential, Kaiser and HCFA,use the system as well.The consortium is implementing the standards as part of its managedcare strategy, says Dr. Alex Rodriguez, medical director of theStamford, Ct.-based consortium. The standards apply to HMO, PPO,point-of-service (POS) and indemnity plans.Consortium members use the standards to determine payment forservices. If physicians don't follow the standards, they could bedenied payment, may not receive authorization for treatment, and,if inappropriate utilization persists, risk exclusion from providerpanels.The standards systematize more than 200 medical evaluations andtreatments that involve complicated diagnoses, includingcontroversial, high-risk and high-cost treatments. They alsoprovide a summary of appropriate and inappropriate care withreferences to scientific evidence, and include the appropriateprocedure and diagnosis codes for treatments such as routine Papsmears for women.The consortium plans to automate the standards to allow for morerapid payment of claims. Blues plans in California, Connecticut,Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Texasparticipate. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Problems with Provider Risk Outlined in Safe HarborsThe final managed care "safe harbor" regulations raise the specterof false claims accusations for providers who participate innon-contract managed care plans that use withholds, lawyers say.Issued Jan. 25 by the HHS inspector general, safe harbors protectcertain deals from prosecution under the Medicare-Medicaidanti-kickback law (61 FR 2122).The preamble to the regulations state the IG has "declined toprovide specific safe harbor protection to withhold pools, riskincentive pools or other types of incentive programs offered bynon-contract managed care plans" (PM 2/9/96, p. 8).The safe harbors expand the definition of "health plan" to protecta wider variety of managed care arrangements, including (1) PPOsthat act as intermediaries between providers and payers and (2)self-insured employers or union welfare funds that contractdirectly with providers or insurance companies.The rules also protect provider fee-for-service discounts tomanaged care plans, as well as some capitated arrangements thatplans make with providers. But they don't protect other forms ofprovider risk assumption, such as payment withholds and risk pools.The safe harbors only protect the waiver of Medicare coinsuranceand deductibles in Medicare risk and cost-contract HMOs and thewaiver of inpatient hospital coinsurance and deductibles inMedicare Select PPOs and HMOs. The rules don't protect waivers ofcoinsurance and deductibles in other types of plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Group Tackles Pregnancy Care In First Report Card EffortDallas/Forth Worth employers, hospitals and physicians have joinedforces in an ambitious first-time effort to measure health carequality and value - and thus improve health communitywide.Called the Health Care Value Initiative, the collaboration by theDFW Business Group on Health, Dallas-Forth Worth Hospital Council,5,900-member Dallas County Medical Society, and 2,000-memberTarrant County Medical Society in Fort Worth seeks to design aquality report card with uniform standards for health providers todisseminate to the business community by March 1997.While the initial focus is on measuring quality during pregnancyand childbirth, which employers cite as a top concern, the groupalso plans to examine cardiology, orthopedics, oncology andpsychiatry, says John Gavras, president of the 82-member hospitalcouncil.Pregnancy and childbirth indicators include maternal mortalityrate; neonatal mortality rate; post-operative mortality rate;C-section rates (primary, secondary, total and vaginal birth afterC-section); post-operative surgical site infection; uterine rupturerate; infection rate (metritis only); and unplanned neonatalreadmission. All are risk-adjusted.The group also will examine indicators that are not risk-adjusted,including complications due to anesthetic/sedation.The coalition will follow up with health risk assessment andpatient satisfaction surveys.The hospital council anticipates statewide comparison of hospitaldata and perhaps comparison with cities such as Seattle and KansasCity, Mo.Participating hospitals will sign a confidentiality statement sodata will not be used for marketing; the council will sign aconfidentiality statement with members underscoring anunderstanding that data are hospital-owned.Contact Gavras at (214) 719-4900. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Telephone Survey Comments Influence Outcomes InitiativesUsing qualitative comments gleaned from post-discharge patientsatisfaction surveys, a children's hospital tries to pull parentsinto pediatric care decisions and influence patient outcomes.The hospital gleans qualitative comments from 20-minute telephonesurveys of parents conducted 10 days after patient discharge. Thosecomments - positive and negative - show up on a large bulletinboard in the waiting room of the hospital's outpatient center forcancer and blood disorders.HealthCare Research Systems of Columbus, Ohio, conducts thetelephone surveys - about 400 twice a year for the outpatientcenter, in addition to mail and other surveys performed for thefacility over the past four years.If the comment is negative, the hospital lists the action it tookto fix the problem.Comments generally deal with how a physician listened to theparents, how much time the physician spent with the parents, andwhether the physician involved the parents in decisions made abouta child's medical care.Although some quantitative scores are posted, they don't interestparents as much as the qualitative scores, contends Charlie Hauser,vice president of the provider division for HealthCare ResearchSystems.The goal: encourage parental involvement by breaking down theintimidating and often mysterious barriers surrounding medicalcare. By encouraging family participation, the bulletin board hasa positive effect on the patient's outcomes, Hauser says.Contact Hauser at (614) 487-6333. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Nurse Quality Initiative Garners `Magnet Hospital' RankAn Atlanta hospital's initiative to give nurses moredecision-making authority at the patient bedside and in turn boostquality of care nabbed the facility "magnet hospital" status.Saint Joseph's Hospital of Atlanta became the third hospitalnationwide to earn recognition by the American Nurses CredentialingCenter as a magnet hospital for nursing care.The center reviews documentation and conducts site visits toevaluate whether a hospital meets nursing standards in nine areas,including quality assurance. More than 200 criteria are used.The voluntary, four-year magnet hospital designation allowshospitals to go beyond the Joint Commission on Accreditation ofHealthcare Organizations' overview to a closer examination ofnursing programs, says Mary Tilbury, consultant to the magnetprogram.Noting that Atlanta's highly competitive health market includes50-odd hospitals and a recent influx of managed care, Kim Sharkey,the hospital's director of nursing business planning and supportservices, says Saint Joseph's sought magnet status to getrecognition of ongoing positive feedback from physicians, patientsand families on a shared governance professional practice model.Implemented in 1981, the practice model allows the nurse at bedsidegreater decision-making autonomy. The model includes nurse qualityassurance, management, and practice and education councils.Saint Joseph's uses a top-down, multidisciplinary approach tocontinuous quality improvement. The hospital also uses nationaldatabases to compare performance on quality measures. "Our feelingis if we can validate outcomes that are positive, payers ultimatelywill realize cost is important but outcomes are even moreimportant," Sharkey says.Contact Sharkey at (404) 851-7296, and Tilbury at (202) 651-7000.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Hospital Cuts Paper Chase Out of System Buy ProcessIn its search for a new information system, a New York hospitalfound an alternative to the usual paper-intensive process ofsubmitting a request for proposal (RFP) to vendors.Brooks Memorial Hospital of Dunkirk, N.Y., first sent out a requestfor information to 13 vendors and narrowed the choice to seven.But an RFP involves a great deal of paperwork on both sides andoften is not filled with information that prospective buyers canreally use. So hospital CFO Ralph Webdale chaired a 13-membercommittee that included physicians and representatives fromnursing, billing, accounting and pharmacy departments.For one day a week, each of the seven vendors did on-site demos ineach department. Committee members independently rated eachvendor's software package, then discussed the systems' strengthsand weaknesses as a group.A vital element of the review process was the telephone reference,Webdale says. Each committee member spoke to their counterparts athospitals that had installed the vendors' products, then rated anddiscussed each product based on the conversations.The final step: rate the documentation of the top six vendors basedon criteria such as ease-of-use.Contact Webdale at (716) 366-1111. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Contract `Gag Clauses' Rare, Seldom Used on MDsLike it or not, physicians generally have little choice but toagree to the "gag clauses" included in HMO provider contracts.However, few HMOs use the wide-ranging clauses that lately havedrawn backlash from physicians, consumers and legislators, sayexperts.HMOs say the clauses, when used, prevent MDs from (1) disclosingproprietary information, (2) spoiling a patient's opinion of thehealth plan, or (3) enticing the patient to enroll in a competingplan.But physicians say the "gag clauses" distort the  doctor-patientrelationship because they prohibit physicians from explaining tothier patients that treatment decisions are based on a healthplan's appropriateness standards, treatment guidelines or paymentrules."Gag clauses" can range from:o       A simple clause that says aphysician faces termination for interfering with the plan'srelations with employer groups and business contacts; too       A dictum that MDs can't underminethe confidence of enrollees, potential enrollees, employers, plansponsors or others in the plan's quality of care; too       A prohibition on physiciansdiscussing the HMO-provider compensation arrangement, advisingpatients to disenroll, or recommending to patients services andtreatments not covered by the plan.But HMOs have found any "gag clause" hard to  enforce. The onlymeans of identifying violations:  (1) anomalies in members'disenrollment patterns;  (2) patient complaints; and (3) commentson member disenrollment forms.Industry observers say most HMOs using "gag clauses" will defineallowable physician-patient communications, or get rid of theclauses altogether. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Clinic Tracks Utilization Through Electronic RecordTo track patient utilization and improve allocation of resources,a multisite Iowa provider group decided to use a computerizedmedical record system.The Iowa Physicians Clinic Medical Foundation will installcomputerized medical record systems in about 15 sites around thestate, according to Dr. Mark Purtle, director of internal medicine.The group has patient record systems up and running, although onlyin partial installation, in about half of its sites.Patient demographics data is collected at registration on aworkstation linked to the central database. The systemautomatically updates the patient record. Billing information isfowarded in daily batches to the database.Instead of entering encounter notes directly into the record,physicians record notes, which are then transcribed and enteredinto the record.All clinic sites can access records stored in the central database.However, each site maintains a server with its own records.Workstations are located at all physician offices, nurse stationsand registration desks. When the system is fully installed, therewill be workstations in every exam room.Because the electronic medical record has not yet eliminated theneed for a paper record, the group may use a scanner to createelectronic images of the paper records.The group hopes to build a complete database of codes anddemographics that tracks encounters by provider and clinic site.Being able to track seasonal variations in utilization would enablethe group to better plan the number of physicians it needs duringcertain periods of the year or the type of physician it would needin a certain  community.The group hopes to have the system fully implemented at all itssites by the end of the year.Contact Purtle at (515) 241-4000. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Compliance Plans Crucial As Whistleblower Cases GrowGiven several false-claims cases sparked by whistleblowers pendingagainst major companies, physician managers should take voluntarydisclosure and compliance plans very seriously, a top governmentattorney says."Health care enterprises, especially bigger ones, need aggressivecompliance policies in place to self-correct [billing problems] andvoluntarily disclose these problems"while they're still small,"says HHS Inspector General Chief Counsel D. McCarty Thornton.Thornton says if your company's compliance plan turns up seriousliability, you can take advantage of the feds' voluntary disclosureprogram regardless of where you're in business - even though theprogram is technically operational only in the five states wherethe government is piloting its anti-fraud initiative.For compliance plans to be meaningful, Thornton says they should:o       Be "quite elaborate," not a slimcode of conduct that's just "window dressing."o       Include a hotline so people canreport suspected fraud and other wrongdoing.o       Track complaints that come over thehotline, which means assigning them to someone to handle, recordingthem and following up.o       Protect tipsters so they don't failto report misconduct because they fear losing their jobs.o       Assign at least one full-time personto handle  implementation of the plan.o       Continually educate all employees onthe ethics of dealing with federal health plans.o       Require periodic, independent auditsof billing and other practices.       Have "commitment and attention fromsenior level managers," Thornton says. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Firm Tweaks Report Card To Pinpoint CQI InitiativesAn Indianapolis-based home care company this spring will release asecond-generation report card on the satisfaction rates of severelychronically ill patients."Even though we were the first [home care] company to come out witha [patient satisfaction] report card, there were certainimprovements we could make in methodology and our treatment of datafor the continuous quality improvement process," says Sandra Kretz,vice president of standards and outcomes for Quantum HealthResources Inc.Quantum in 1993 piloted a clinician-developed  patientsatisfaction survey instrument, used in the for-profit company's 40branches nationwide the following year. Using results from thespring 1994 national survey of 1,000-plus patients, Quantumpublished its first report card in January 1995, outlining patientsatisfaction rates (95.3% overall), and a composite patientretention rate of 96.1% from 1989 to mid-1994.Quantum's 1994 survey could not discern old patients from new. Butits 1995 survey targets last year's more than 900 new patients.Kretz says this ensured a good picture of new patients, with whomone expects more glitches in satisfaction to occur.In its effort to reinforce better service patterns companywide,Quantum feeds survey information back to clinicians, customerservice representatives and its sales force.Kretz says the 1994 survey identified issues for  improvement,such as access to an after-hours company contact. Although Quantum puts its 24-hour, toll-free number on all patientmaterial, the company faces a continuing dilemma in alertingpatients on how to contact the company after hours. Various interventions include using customer servicerepresentatives to follow up with patients and putting thetelephone number on notepads in patients' medication packets.Contact Kretz at (317) 580-6830. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Hospital Cuts CABG Costs By $7 Million, LOS by 23%Saint Joseph's Hospital of Atlanta's involvement in a HCFA nationaldemonstration project on coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)surgery highlights its multidisciplinary quality improvementapproach.The project combines efforts of nurses, surgeons, respiratorytherapists, pharmacists, rehabilitation therapists and others tocut costs and improve outcomes for post-surgical patients.Saint Joseph's has performed more than 1,300 CABG surgeries,decreasing length of stay by 23% without compromising quality, andsaving HCFA more than $7 million since the project's implementationin July 1993.CABG patients rank satisfaction at 2.94 on a three-point scale,above the national average; their mortality rate is 4%, below thenational average; they leave the ICU within 24 hours of surgeryrather than three to four days; and they are discharged in five toseven days, not seven to 10 days. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Telemedicine Web Site Offers Product ReviewsThe Telemedicine Information Exchange World Wide Web site,maintained by the Telemedicine Research Center of Portland, Ore.,links users to a telemedicine products and services directory thatcatalogs articles on equipment reviews, evaluations or technicalspecs.After selecting a browser, physician managers will have a selectionof three menus: (1) starters; (2) hot items; and (3) searchabledatabases.From the starter menu, users can get the history and definition oftelemedicine, or read case studies on telemedicine in action andthe latest news, including legislative issues and success stories.Users can also offer feedback on the site.Under the hot items menu, users can explore the  legal andethical issues surrounding telemedicine through the text of currentstate legislation, peer- reviewed articles and hypertext links toother Internet resources.The searchable databases include information on funding fortelemedicine projects, active projects, and upcoming meetings andconferences.The site also offers information on the Telemedicine ResearchCenter's Clinical Telemedicine Cooperative Group that bringstogether researchers nationwide.The site's home page lets users choose a text-only or a graphicbrowser, enabling users to sacrifice aesthetics for the sake ofspeed.The site is located at http://tie.telemed.org/ on  the Web.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996HCFA Merging Quality Rules For Medicare, Medicaid PlansHCFA is working on devising one set of quality standards for bothMedicare and Medicaid managed care plans.The agency also is considering giving credit to plans thatrecently were accredited by private bodies such as NationalCommittee for Quality Assurance,  according to Jeffrey Kang,chief medical officer at HCFA's office of managed care.For example, HCFA would look to see where its standards and NCQA'soverlap, Kang told a recent conference of the Academy of ManagedCare Pharmacy. For these areas, the agency would recognize NCQA'sseal of approval.But HCFA is concerned that applying a broad set of NCQA measures"could lose its meaning for Medicare," Kang said. The agency mightidentify a subset of measures suitable for Medicare managed careplans.NCQA likely won't have Medicare performance measures until HEDIS3.0 launches in early 1997, says Bruce Fried, director of HCFA'soffice of managed care.As part of that effort, HCFA wants the new quality standards toreplace the 50-50 commercial enrollment composition rule. TheMedicare law and regulations require Medicare HMOs to enroll atleast 50% commercial members. Fried says he hopes to have the newquality standards in place by July 1997. Back to Headline List CopyrightPHYSICIAN MANAGER via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Multiprovider Networks Eyed As 1996 Antitrust TargetAs health care dealmakers continue to travel uncharted territory,government regulators and enforcers are watching closely todetermine whether cutting-edge health delivery systems,collaborations and compensation arrangements comply with the law.Experts tell physician managers that 1996 will be a year in whichantitrust enforcers will focus on multiprovider networks,payer-provider collaboration, and most-favored nation clauses. Multiprovider networks will be a big focus of Justice's antitrustenforcement this year, says Gail Kursh, chief of the health caretask force. "We have a number of investigations of multiproviderarrangements underway," Kursh says.Last year, in two separate cases, Justice settled antitrust chargeswith two PHOs formed with most of the doctors in one-hospitaltowns. Those settlements provided the industry with a blueprint fordoing such deals without antitrust violations.This year, Justice will look at PHOs in multihospital markets andmay strike deals that provide guidance, Kursh says. The kind ofconduct scrutinized includes: (1) hospitals buying too manyphysician practices;  (2) hospitals with market power locking upall referrals in town; and (3) hospitals keeping out competitors byinducing MDs not to hook up with a new hospital.Kursh emphasizes, though, that Justice doesn't want to "chill"deals that spur competition. "Our goal is not to deterefficiency-enhancing arrangements where they're appropriate," shesays.Merger-Like Deals to Get More ScrutinyObservers also predict the FTC and Justice Department will backaway from hospital merger challenges and focus more on integrateddelivery systems, HMOs and physician practice acquisitions.While traditional hospital mergers may be less of a focus, otherincarnations of hospital collaborations will get more scrutiny.Justice's Kursh notes that "we're attuned to partnerships oralliances between hospitals that aren't necessarily mergers."Her staff is exploring the competitive implications of deals thatlook like mergers but aren't, she says. "The question is how do weanalyze them? Are they illegal? Are they joint ventures? Or arethey enough like mergers they should be treated like a merger?We'll be looking very closely at this area." Back to Headline List WT03-B02-25IA086-000615-B042-7http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020215 text/html 40454HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:43 GMTContent-length: 40267Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh31.html Sample Issue Copyright THE PPO LETTER via NewsNet November 2, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PPO NEWS First Choice PPO, Group Health HMO to Bid Jointly on CHAMPUS Pact (920 words) 22 Companies Offer New Medicare SELECT Plans, HCFA Survey Shows (691 words) SouthCare Adds 11 Hospitals to Establish Statewide PPO Network (445 words) New York Life Chooses PHC to Provide Mental Health Networks (454 words) Admar Acquires Two TPAs As Part of EPO "Evolution" Move (344 words) CHAMPUS Northern Region Rebidding Offers New Market for PPOs (602 words) Spiegel Looks to Add Physician, POS Networks to Successful PPO (355 words) PPO TRENDS PHCS Uses Quality-Based Ranking System to Evaluate PPO Providers (681 words) Letter to the Editor (161 words) Specialized Needs of Retirees Said to Create PPO Opportunities (556 words) PPOs Expected to Participate in New AMCRA Healthcare Database (586 words) CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992First Choice PPO, Group Health HMO to Bid Jointly on CHAMPUS PactIn an action that could set an industry precedent, PPO FirstChoice Health Network and HMO Group Health Cooperative of PugetSound are teaming up to bid on the giant CHAMPUS contract forWashington state and Oregon, THE PPO LETTER has learned."We think we complement each other far more than we compete,"says First Choice President and CEO Clayton Field. And Fieldsuggests that such joint marketing efforts may become common inthe future as "part of the maturity of the industry."It is possible, he says, that First Choice, Washington's largestPPO with about 300,000 covered lives, and Group Health Coopera-tive, the state's largest HMO with 470,000 enrollees, mightcooperate in bidding for other public and private pacts later.To date, joint ventures involving PPOs and HMOs have been ex-tremely rare. The only one involving large organizations recentlyoccurred in Minneapolis, where PPO Preferred One agreed in 1991to lease its provider network to HMO GroupCare, a unit of GroupHealth, to offer clients more flexible benefit options (THE PPOLETTER, 9/2/91, p. 4).It was a similar need - in the form of the new federalmandate to offer a "triple option (i.e., HMO, PPO, and indemnity)- in managed-care programs for the Civilian Health andMedical Program of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS) that helpedbring together First Choice and Group Health Cooperative.The Washington-Oregon CHAMPUS Reform Initiative (CRI) contract,for which bids are due in mid-January 1993, covers a whopping250,000 military dependents and retirees. The current pact doesnot contain managed-care features and expires in early 1994.Given the "mega-big" nature of the contract and the fact that"one vendor would be responsible for the risk and care," GroupHealth Cooperative decided "no one plan can absorb that," ex-plains Peter Brumleve, vice president of marketing for the HMO.While many of the requirements of the contract were "right up ouralley," include utilization management, quality assurance, costcontainment, and a large number of network providers, Brumlevesays, one wasn't. "We're not a PPO," he notes, and since thecontract specifications mandate a PPO option, the HMO decided "weneed a PPO."He says Group Health Cooperative looked at the PPOs available andsoon focused on First Choice. Like First Choice, the 45-year-oldstaff-model HMO is not for profit. Moreover, the two Seattle-based organizations and their CEOs, Field and Phil Nudelman, hadlongstanding relationships "that facilitated negotiations," saysBrumleve.The HMO went on to fill another contract requirement, claimsprocessing, by recruiting as a bid partner Blue Cross and BlueShield of South Carolina. That organization, the CHAMPUS fiscalintermediary for the mid-Atlantic region, is well regarded forCHAMPUS claims administration (THE PPO LETTER, 8/10/92, p. 2).Brumleve says the group also will have other partners, but hewon't identify them yet since arrangements haven't been final-ized. He acknowledges that the partners expect to face consider-able competition for the one-year pact (with four one-yearrenewal options) slated to start February 1994, based on atten-dance at the bidders' meeting held this year.But regardless of whether the group wins the contract, thecooperative effort has major implications for the future. Termingthe relationship "synergistic" and "good and getting better,"Brumleve says it is "definitely possible" that Group HealthCooperative and First Choice could team up for other pacts,although it's "too early to tell."The chances of such arrangements are growing especially since CRIcontracts are like other large ones increasingly being discussedat both public and private levels that involve risk and account-ability for cost and quality, he says. He cites as examples thepurchasing cooperatives in Minnesota that are awarding singlecontracts covering several customers.Teamwork between PPOs and HMOs hasn't occurred much before, heasserts, because there haven't been opportunities - or needs- to do this previously. The joint bid on the CHAMPUS pact"will be a learning experience for our organization and for theindustry," adds Brumleve."This is the right way to go," agrees Field. It's clear now, hesays, that HMOs are trying to loosen up (e.g., allowing moreflexibility) at the same time that PPOs are trying to tighten upin areas such as medical management. Thus, there's a need forchange, but "we're in an era where it seems foolish to invent anew HMO or PPO," he maintains."If you have them out there, why not go together?" he asks. Heargues that the public is better served in this way, and PPOs andHMOs have increased "buying power" if they collaborate to assuredoctors significantly more patients. It also eases administrativeproblems, Field says, since, for instance, a Taft-Hartley entityhas to deal with only one managed care firm.Such cooperation hasn't occurred often before since "there's beena perception that PPOs and HMOs compete," Field notes. This ispartly true, he says, since they each may solicit the samecompany for contracts. But there invariably are some employeeswho want only an HMO or only a PPO, so "it's an advantage" to beable to offer both.The trend, says Field, is toward the kind of "managed competi-tion" model now popular in both the Democratic and Republicanparty camps. He adds it's "ironic" that the government, in theform of the huge CRI pact, was responsible for leading organiza-tions such as First Choice and Group Health Cooperative to thisnew kind of teamwork.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 199222 Companies Offer New Medicare SELECT Plans, HCFA Survey ShowsAn informal and limited survey conducted by the Health CareFinancing Administration (HCFA) indicates that a total of 22companies are offering plans under the new Medicare SELECTprogram in 10 of the 15 designated states.The survey, sent out in late August and just tabulated, alsoshows that seven additional companies have SELECT proposalsawaiting approval in the same plus one other state, which HCFAdeclines to identify.But two of the designated states, Oregon and Michigan, havewithdrawn from the program, and replacement states probably won'tbe named until early next year, according to HCFA.Medicare SELECT, which began operation July 1, enables Medicaresupplemental insurance (Medigap) carriers to offer retirees afee-for-service preferred provider network. A principal attrac-tion is that employers can buy Medicare SELECT plans at prices15% to 25% lower than they paid for previous conventional Medigappolicies.But there are some restrictions. The policies offered must beselected from the 10 specific ones described by the NationalAssociation of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and must includethe basic plan A. And no other new Medigap policies may beoffered in the participating states.The HCFA survey did not attempt to find out which of the nineother plans were being offered or how many beneficiaries arebeing covered. It did show SELECT policies are available inAlabama, Arizona, Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Minnesota, Missou-ri, North Dakota, Texas, and Wisconsin.That indicates no SELECT policies were being offered as of thetime of the survey in two of the biggest states, California andOhio, as well as in Washington state. Oft-proposed legislation toextend the SELECT program to all 50 states died in a House-Senateconference committee this year. It is expected to be reintroducedin 1993.Despite the relatively limited initial use of the pilot program,which runs through 1994, HCFA expects other companies to beginoffering SELECT policies in the designated states soon.One major trigger for that may be the long-delayed approval of"safe harbor" provisions for the SELECT plans. They would allowSELECT PPOs to get discounts from providers and waive copaymentsfor only the Medicare beneficiaries who use these providerswithout running afoul of Medicare's anti-kickback rules. Thatmight help overcome the current lack of interest among many PPOsin the over-65 market.A Department of Health and Human Services source says those safe-harbor provisions - along with others eagerly awaited by PPOsfor non-SELECT plans to protect their payment arrangements -probably won't be out until late November at the earliest.The reason for the delays, the source says, aside from therelatively recent addition of the SELECT provisions, is that therules need the blessing of the Office of Management and Budget.There also have been managed-care industry concerns, communicatedto federal policy makers, that the planned safe-harbor rules weretoo narrow and leave too much regulatory authority to the states,which often do not have mechanisms for overseeing PPOs.Safe-harbor worries notwthstanding, one Medicare SELECT marketparticipant sees a bright future for the plans.SELECT will become "more and more significant" in the futuresince the over-65 population is growing and becoming more accus-tomed to preferred provider arrangements, says Debbie Ahl, execu-tive vice president of Olympic Health Management Systems, Inc.(Bellingham, Wash.).Olympic is a health-care consulting firm and third-party admin-istrator specializing since 1986 in Medigap and now SELECT plans.The company is marketing SELECT policies underwritten by SierraHealth & Life in Texas, where it knows of only one other company(Humana) competing for that business, according to Greg Brethour,vice president of sales.Ahl, however, says she's not surprised by that since SELECT is a"brand new concept." She declines to say in what other SELECTstates Olympic is active.But she does say there is a consensus in the industry that NAIC-designated plans C and F will be the dominant SELECT policies.Plan C pays the 20% Medicare Parts A and B coinsurance based onthe Medicare-allowable fees, while Plan F covers 100% of physi-cian charges.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992SouthCare Adds 11 Hospitals to Establish Statewide PPO NetworkSouthCare Medical Alliance, which has been a provider-owned PPOin the Atlanta area since its establishment in 1985, will have astatewide hospital network by the end of the year. The PPO hassigned up nine not-for-profit hospitals outside metropolitanAtlanta (11 overall) as affiliates during the past three months,says President and CEO Larry L. Madlem.Moreover, Madlem says, SouthCare expects to start contractingwith physicians affiliated with these hospitals in 1993. Bycompletion in 1994, the PPO will boost by about 1,200 its current1,300-physician network, he adds.SouthCare, which now has 16 hospitals in its network, therebyapparently will become the first statewide provider-owned PPO inGeorgia. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Georgia now has a state-wide network, as does investor-owned Affordable Health Concepts,a unit of HealthCare COMPARE.The expansion push for SouthCare outside metropolitan Atlantabegan in the Savannah area and includes hospitals generally inthe 400- to 500-bed size range, according to Madlem.The additions are Douglas General Hospital (Douglasville),Egleston Children's Hospital at Emory University (Atlanta), FloydMedical Center (Rome), Northeast Georgia Medical Center (Gaines-ville), Paulding Memorial Medical Center (Dallas), Peach CountyHospital (Fort Valley), Rockdale Hospital (Conyers), SaintJoseph's Hospital (Savannah), Scottish Rite Children's MedicalCenter (Atlanta), The Medical Center of Central Georgia (Macon),and University Hospital (Augusta).Madlem says several factors resulted in the decision to gostatewide. Among them were the requests of some of SouthCare'smajor customers, including The Principal Financial Group andMutual of Omaha, he says. Others that have contracted for state-wide access include employers Waffle House and Home Depot.The "changing dynamics" in the legislative and political arenasalso spurred the statewide expansion, Madlem adds. He explainsthat SouthCare wants to be able to bid on Medicare and Medicaidas well as large private provider-network contracts that willbecome more prevalent.There is an industry trend, he says, toward consolidation,bringing more and more coverage under a single contract largelyto save on expense from a time and personnel standpoint."We didn't feel we had much time left to be viable in the marketas just a metropolitan area PPO" as SouthCare was before, assertsMadlem. To remain competitive, he says, the PPO needed to becomebroader in the services it offers (including adding mentalhealth, workers' compensation, and utilization review), and "weneeded to be at least statewide."SouthCare now claims to be Georgia's largest managed care organi-zation with 366,390 covered lives as of last month and more than1,300 doctors in its directory. A handful of physicians, as wellas 11 hospitals, were its original owners.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992New York Life Chooses PHC to Provide Mental Health NetworksNew York Life Insurance Co., fulfilling a pledge early this yearthat it would hire a nationwide mental-health services vendorrather than handle this specialty in house, said October 20 thatPreferred Health Care Ltd. (PHC) will be its provider.The agreement, which New York Life predicts will cover 525,000lives by 1995, offers major pluses for both firms.New York Life, which has been rolling out a whole range of newprovider-network products (THE PPO LETTER, 1/13/92, p. 1), gainsthe aid of a proven developer and manager of mental-healthnetworks. It does that at less cost than if it had developed aprogram from scratch or acquired a behavioral-health specialistsuch as insurers CIGNA, The Travelers, and Aetna have done.PHC (Wilton, Conn.), which has built its reputation and much ofits business providing services directly to self-funded Fortune500 employers, gains enhanced access to the insured, smaller-employer market through an alliance with a huge carrier.Under the contract, PHC will support mental-health components ofa wide range of New York Life's managed care products, includingPPOs and managed indemnity.The agreement calls for it to furnish provider networks, caseevaluation, patient referral, utilization review, claims review,and management reporting and analysis. Those services will not beprovided in "southern New York State," where New York Life saysits Sanus HMO subsidiary will continue to furnish managed mentalhealth care to clients."Our unique affiliation with New York Life will provide nation-wide access to managed mental health services for small and mid-size businesses," says David McDonnell, chairman and CEO of PHC.He calls that an "expanding segment" in the managed mental healthmarket.PHC, founded in 1983, now covers seven million people in managedbehavioral health and workers' compensation services. It has beenbeen boosting stakes aggressively in both businesses this year,most recently in the latter by agreeing to buy the stock ofAdjustco Inc., a third-party administrator primarily in workers'comp.In its most recent financial report, for the quarter that endedJune 30, PHC posted net income from continuing operations of 10cents a share, up from 4 cents a share in the comparable year-agoperiod. Revenues climbed to $13.3 million from $9.3 million.New York Life has introduced an exclusive provider organization(EPO) this year and continued its rollout of second-generationPPO products designed for employee groups of up to 3,000 coveredlives.In unveiling its mental-health strategy early this year, VicePresident for Managed Care Dr. Dan Fishbein pointed to theefficiency of using an established vendor rather than "reinventthe wheel." Fishbein added then, "It's not a carve-out. We'reassuming risk."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992Admar Acquires Two TPAs As Part of EPO "Evolution" MoveThe Admar Group, which started out as a third-party administrator (TPA) inCalifornia before becoming a PPO operator, has come full circle. The SantaAna, Calif.-based managed care firm acquired two TPAs in Colorado to supportits planned operation of an exclusive provider organization (EPO) there."We're evolving into an EPO organization," says Richard Toral, CEO of Admar.Because of the need for its own administration to support the more intensivedata requirements of an EPO than of a PPO, he explains, the company agreed topurchase Boulder, Colo.-based TPAs Benefit Plan Administrators and Hofgard &Co. for a total of $1.6 million in cash and notes.He says the additional administrative capability will aid the marketing ofthe EPO, which Admar plans to start in Colorado in the first quarter of 1993.Admar already has PPOs in the state, but Toral says the company has no plansto start an HMO there.An HMO isn't necessary in Colorado, according to Toral, since Admar can"equal the performance of an HMO with an indemnity-based product."Admar, which also plans an EPO in southern California and is in the midst ofrapid PPO expansion in several states (THE PPO LETTER, 9/21/92, p. 1),expects the major portion of its growth to come internally, Toral says. Headds, however, that further acquisitions are a "possibility."The firm recently agreed to furnish an 18-state preferred provider networkfor National Insurance Services (Tampa), thereby adding 100,000 covered livesand anticipated first-year revenues of $1 million from the PPO andutilization management provisions of the contract.The growth, however, is coming at a price. The company posted a net loss of$296,000 or 4 cents a share in the fiscal second quarter, which ended July31, compared with net income of $57,000 (less than one cent a share) in theyear-ago period as revenues climbed 12% to $2.8 million from $2.5 million.Part of the reason for the decline in the bottom line, Admar says, is anincrease in marketing expenditures.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992CHAMPUS Northern Region Rebidding Offers New Market for PPOsAdhering to mandates contained in the new law that resolved astalemate (THE PPO LETTER, 6/29/92, p. 1), the Department ofDefense is seeking bids that include a PPO option for the firsttime for the 19-state Northern Region CHAMPUS contract.The huge contract contains the requirement, included in theRequest for Proposals (RFP), that "all network providers shalldiscount rates at least 5% below the CHAMPUS allowable amount."The PPO also must include retail pharmacies as well as hospitalsand physicians.Proposals on the one-year pact (with four one-year renewaloptions), which is a "rebid" of a contract that did not previous-ly have a managed-care network component, are due November 18. Abidders' meeting was held in Denver September 23.The Northern Region solicitation is the third of four majorcontracts up for grabs with the Civilian Health and MedicalProgram of the Uniformed Services (CHAMPUS) that involve theCHAMPUS Reform Initiative (CRI) style of managed care.The others are the controversial rebid California-Hawaii pact(THE PPO LETTER, 8/10/92, p. 1), a Washington-Oregon contract nowout for proposals (see article, page 1), and a Florida pact forwhich the RFP still is in development, according to Commander TomCorrato, director of cooordinated care operations for CHAMPUS.There also are smaller projects, to be set up by next May, linkedwith military-base closure sites in Austin and Dallas-Fort Worth,Tex. and Alexandria, La.The Northern Region contract, though, dwarfs all the others interms of sheer size of area covered. It covers the states ofConnecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky (exceptthe Ft. Campbell "catchment area"), Maine, Massachusetts, Michi-gan, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio,Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wiscon-sin.Its managed care "task" includes an enrolled HMO-like plan, usinga "gatekeeper"-like Primary Care Manager, as well as the PPO.There are stringent network access mandates for bidders as wellas a requirement that "PPO networks shall continuously operate inall areas" where "sufficient beneficiary population exists."The PPO developer would have to show why it is not cost-effectiveto implement a network within any of the areas. It also wouldhave to document efforts to contract with providers there.The RFP states that no payment may be required for a noncoveredservice from a network provider unless the beneficiary has agreedin advance to pay for such service.The PPO benefit plan design calls for a beneficiary copayment formost outpatient services of 15% of the fee negotiated by thecontractor for active-duty (AD) families and 20% for retirees andtheir families. For ambulatory surgery, there is no copaymentfor AD and 20% for retirees.On hospitalization, there is no copayment for AD families. Forretirees and dependents, the copayment requirement is $125 perday or 25% of total charges (based on fee schedules negotiated bythe contractor), whichever is less, for "institutional services"plus 20% of "separately billed professional charges."For mental illness and alcoholism treatment, the RFP for the PPOplan calls for no copayment for AD families. For retiree fami-lies, the "cost share" is $50 per day or 25% of total charges(based on negotiated fee schedules), whichever is less, forinstitutional services plus 20% of separately billed professionalcharges.While Corrato says "there is a push for us" to develop mail-orderpharmacy plans for CHAMPUS health-care programs, there is nomail-order requirement in the Northern Region RFP. A pilot ofsuch a plan is salted to be tried in Hawaii.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992Spiegel Looks to Add Physician, POS Networks to Successful PPOSpiegel Inc., which began using a hospital-only PPO network in1989, is "leaning toward" adding the physician portion of thatnetwork next year, says Michael Tulaga, benefits and compensationdirector. And Tulaga says the company might develop a point-of-service (POS) plan in 1994.The Downers Grove, Ill.-based specialty retailer, which spent$16.3 million on employee health care (excluding a couple ofsubsidiaries) in 1991, says it saved more than $1.1 millionthrough using the 52-hospital network of Blue Cross and BlueShield of Illinois. That compares with savings of about $300,000in 1989 and $600,000 in 1990.The high savings in 1991, according to Tulaga, result not onlydirectly from the approximately 20% discounts the network pro-vides but also from the fact that 80% of eligible employees nowuse the network for hospitalization.He attributes the high usage partly to the concentration of thecompany's employees (4,000 out of 5,000) in the well-networkedChicago area. "Employees don't have to go far to [preferred]providers," Tulaga says.Another factor, though, is plan design, he asserts. Spiegelreworked its overall employee benefits when the PPO option wasintroduced to give employees a flexible structure in which theycould choose from three different levels of health-insurancecoverage.A thorough employee communications effort also has helped. Smallstaff meetings explaining the benefit changes with the aid ofslides or videos were accompanied by education about the causesand effects of rising health costs.Together with written materials, Spiegel says, the effort helpedreverse a prior (before the PPO) lukewarm feeling surveyedemployees displayed toward the company's health benefits.Having made its first limited move into managed care from theprevious indemnity plan, which still covers about 1,000 employeesoutside the Chicago area, Tulaga says, the self-insured companynow wants to go further.He says the physician network "could be our next step." ButSpiegel also is looking into developing a POS plan with HMO andindemnity components in 1994 "to help manage overall costs," headds. The company now has HMOs only for hourly employees and justsince this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992PHCS Uses Quality-Based Ranking System to Evaluate PPO ProvidersPreferred Healthcare Systems, Inc. (PHCS) is using a quality-based evaluationsystem to rank its 63,500 PPO providers and to make retention and patient"redirection" decisions, according to Dr. N. Stephen Ober, vice president andcorporate medical director.Preliminary results of the system, Ober told a session of the AmericanManaged Care and Review Association annual conference in San Diego October20, show 90% of the physicians examined ranked in the top two categories.This is a similar result, and indeed the system is similar to that used byunrelated mental-health PPO Preferred Health Care Ltd. in provider profiling(THE PPO LETTER, 9/21/92, p. 7).But the PHCS system generated several questions from attendees about use ofthe findings. The Lexington, Mass.-based PPO, Ober responded to a couple ofthem, shares some of the information with its employer clients but does notmake results available to patients, partly because of liabilityconsiderations.And it doesn't report "incidents" of inappropriate care to the government, henoted, partly because PPOs aren't allowed to access the National PractitionerData Bank.The preliminary findings, he said, showed that 16.7% of its networkphysicians accounted for all the incidents found, and only 2.7% of thedoctors examined had five or more incidents. About 30% of the physiciansranked in the top category and are being rewarded by gaining referrals ofpatients who call the PHCS "hotline" for assistance.Ober said the system depends on using a large amount of data on physicians'practice patterns over time to obtain "meaningful" and comprehensive clinicalinformation on the providers. The idea is to assess the quality of thephysician, not just that of the care provided, he added.The raw data used in the system include medical and pharmaceutical claims,utilization review results, patient surveys, and "administrative reports"(often "ad hoc" documents filed by PHCS' field staff). Using a computerizedmethod and physician reviewers, the data are looked at for indicators ofperformance.The "indicators" are in several areas. Patient satisfaction information comesfrom surveys and administrative reports. The reports also provide rawmaterial for an indicator of administrative efficiency, which takes intoaccount such findings as "upcoding" and claims unbundling. Indicators ofoutcomes of care come from both administrative reports and from data on post-procedure complications.Moreover, the "process of care" is examined, according to Ober, for suchdeficiencies as inappropriate use of assistant surgeons, "procedure/diagnosismismatch," outmoded procedures, and "therapeutic overlap" in the drugsprescribed.In the second phase of the process, PHCS does a "targeted review" using"relative weighting of incidents" to examine "targeted outlier providers" toget a "provider quality score," Ober said. He explained that quality ratingsof 3 to 5 in this phase involve "deviations in practice patterns" with a 5indicating "major deviations."The final phase involves "provider intervention." After using its medical-director and quality-assurance subcommittees to arrive at a consensus on whatto do, PHCS discusses its findings with the targeted providers and gets"feedback" from them.Those who receive a score of 3 get an inquiry letter, are asked foradditional "general information" and "educated" about PHCS quality managementprocesses. A 4 score gets the provider a warning letter, a request foradditional specific information, and an "evaluation." A score of 5, saidOber, results in termination from the network, although there is an appealprocedure.In the preliminary results, only 1% of the physicians received a 5 score,while 4% had a 4, 5% a 3, 60% a 2, and 30% a 1.Ober said the system should be usable for any contracted network, especiallysince it utilizes commonly available data and doesn't require a huge database. The "multiple interventions," which focus on non-punitive actions, hesaid, broaden the impact of the system.In response to questions, he said the system can detect underutilization aswell as overutilization and can even pinpoint when physicians are notadministering needed periodic immunizations. But he acknowledged that PHCSdoesn't yet have the means to use this system for examination of physicians'referral patterns.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992Letter to the EditorDear Editor,The Sept. 21, 1992 issue of THE PPO LETTER somewhat misrepresent-ed my comments regarding [American] Biodyne's provider networkmade at the recent Behavioral Health Tomorrow conference inChicago.It is not Biodyne's goal to narrow its current network. Rather,we are committed to developing and maintaining the highestquality networks. This necessitates a process of selection whichtends to result in a more refined network which is traditionalfor managed care companies. We want to ensure that our patientsare treated by the most qualified providers available and thatthese providers receive valuable support from Biodyne.We are not looking to reward efficiency. We are looking to rewardclinical effectiveness and high quality service. Our unendingcommitment to this goal will guarantee that our provider networksare strong and that our patients receive the most clinicallyappropriate care possible.Jeffrey I. Bragman, Ph.D.Vice President, Quality Management and Clinical ServicesAmerican Biodyne, Inc.South San Francisco, Calif.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992Specialized Needs of Retirees Said to Create PPO OpportunitiesWhile managed health care for retirees remains largely an HMOrather than PPO emphasis, there is potential for substantiallymore provider network activity, particularly in specialty areas.And those opportunities, which some employers already are takingadvantage of, could rise if proposed legislation is enacted.That, at least, appeared to be the consensus of speakers at aconference on managing health care for retirees, sponsored by theWashington Business Group on Health, in Washington, D.C. lastmonth.The biggest component of retiree managed care now is Medicarerisk contracting. About 100 HMOs (no PPOs) participate in thatprogram, which involves Medicare paying the HMOs 95% of itsaverage per-capita cost in return for providing at least Medi-care's standard level of benefits.But there are relatively untapped options for PPOs, even asidefrom the new Medicare SELECT program (see article, page 1). Theseareas especially involve "younger retirees," not Medicare eligi-ble, who usually can be "leveraged" into existing networks, saidDr. Saul Spivack, a consultant with Tillinghast in New York.Some of the opportunities, Spivack said, lie in specialized areasthat reflect the different health conditions and performanceexpectations of retirees as well as their geographical disper-sion. He saw a need for "subnetworks" in such specialties ascardiac, musculoskeletal/orthopedic, cancer, organic braindisorders, neurology, and multidisciplinary diagnostics.For these networks to be successful, he contended, utilizationmanagement must be a high priority. It should include prospectiveidentification of high risk/high cost retirees, retroactiveevaluation of emergency admissions, and on-site concurrentreviews.For younger retirees, regular PPOs are a feasible option foremployers, according to Spivack. His findings are supported by anIntracorp survey, conducted this summer, which showed 51% ofresponding employers used PPOs for pre-Medicare eligible retir-ees, compared with only 24% for Medicare eligible retirees.For the older retirees, Spivack suggested point-of-service (POS)plans of a "soft" nature that pull enrollees through "perceivedvalue" rather than through cutting benefits.Medicare has proposed legislation for retiree POS programs alongthese lines, pointed out Edmund C. Moy, director of the office ofcoordinated care policy and planning at the U.S. Health CareFinancing Administration.The plan, not acted on by Congress this year, would involve thegovernment renting an employer's existing POS network for itsretirees to get continuity and "not reinvent the wheel," Moysaid. A lure for retirees, he explained, would be that networkbeneficiaries get higher benefits than they would under Medicare.While that proposal seems unlikely to get action soon, somecorporations have taken their own actions involving PPOs forretirees. One is Chrysler Corporation. Its financial staffspecialist for health care planning, Christopher Mykrantz, toldthe conference that the automaker has successfully employedseveral directly contracted specialty PPOs for retirees.All of these PPOs use capitated rate payments. A podiatry PPO,started in Michigan in 1986 and extended regionally in 1991,saved 40% the first year and now is limiting the annual costincrease trend to 1.8%.A laboratory PPO, also begun in Michigan in 1986, expanded in1992 to other states, Mykrantz said. It saved 30% the first year,and the cost-hike trend since then has been 1.9%. There also arenew prescription-drug and durable-medical-equipment PPOs that areoff to good starts, according to Mykrantz.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE PPO LETTER via NewsNetNovember 2, 1992PPOs Expected to Participate in New AMCRA Healthcare DatabaseHaving completed its technical and financial feasibility analysis withfavorable results, the AMCRA Healthcare Database (AHD) now is beginning atwo-year development phase in which 250 additional managed care plans willparticipate.Those participants will include PPOs as well as HMOs, says Howard Fomby, aprincipal in Prolifix, the Lenexa, Kan. firm putting together the huge database. He predicted that 400 plans will be participating when AHD beginsactual, self-sufficient operation in 1995.Fomby updated the status and business plan for AHD at a session of theAmerican Managed Care and Review Association (AMCRA) annual conference in SanDiego Oct. 19. AMCRA commissioned the project in 1988 as a means ofquantifying the impact of managed care in such areas as cost, utilization,and quality of care.A more specific set of objectives involves aiding managed care plans inevaluating utilization management, predicting revenue requirements, andreporting data to clients and regulators. Some of these objectives overlapthose of the American Accreditation Program Inc., the PPO-industry plan thathas published similar summary information about its approximately 25accredited PPOs.AHD obtained funding and management aid for its pilot phase from MarionMerrell Dow, Fomby's former employer, in 1991.The just-completed pilot included data from six HMOs selected on the basis ofdiversity of hardware, software, and type of plans. One of them, which Fombydeclined to identify, also submitted PPO data. He did say PPOs will beinvited to be full participants in AHD, which started out as an HMO-onlyproject.Previous unsuccessful private and public efforts to create a comprehensivedata base have been plagued by fragmentation and insufficient participationby individual plans. Their problems, said Robert Thompson, a Health CareHorizons, Inc. vice president who chairs AMCRA's data committee, includedinconsistent data, no way to verify accuracy, and lack of flexibility in datause.Those problems resulted in high cost, the resulting lack of participation,and a "limited payback" to participants, Thompson explained. He asserted thatthe AMCRA project overcomes these problems by collecting raw claims andenrollment data from individual plans and then manipulating them into acommon format for comparability, thereby minimizing the cost to participatingplans.The kind of data to be included, according to Thompson, include average costper member and per month, and service- and procedure-specific utilization,all analyzable demographically.The data base won't analyze financial or administrative expenses and willprotect the confidentiality of individual patient information as well as theidentities of individual plans. There also is no attempt to adjust for plansthat do not furnish data to the data base.AHD is meant for use not only by participating HMOs and PPOs, which would nothave to pay for it, but also by large employers, pharmaceutical companies,actuaries, and government.The concept, Thompson said, is to make it marketable to aid its self-sufficiency after expected grant funding for its development runs out. Headded that AHD now has about half the funding needed for the developmentalphase, in which it plans to start establishing a paying customer base, andexpects to get the rest by the end of the year.During the development phase, AHD will be able to offer both a standardreport and some custom reports, Fomby said. Starting in 1994, he said, thedata base also will allow dial-up access, with CD-ROM access planned for"later." AHD will use encryption so that it can be accessed only with theproper participant program.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-26IA086-000615-B042-26http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020231 text/html 38113HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:37 GMTContent-length: 37926Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh58.html Sample Issue Copyright QUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNet APRIL 24, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES JCAHO Issues Second Call For Indicators (342 words) Medicare Pay System Boosts Satisfaction (516 words) NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health Norms (639 words) Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed Effort (480 words) Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO Guide (324 words) Drug Company Promotes QI Tools (348 words) AIDS Evolution Means QM Changes (2122 words) Developments In Brief (729 words) CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996JCAHO Issues Second Call For IndicatorsThe Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) haslaunched the second phase of its attempt to create a comprehensive catalogueof performance measures - the National Library of Healthcare Indicators(NLHI).On April 16, JCAHO announced a Request for Indicators (RFI) for ambulatorycare, behavioral health care, home care, or long term care indicators, toserve as a resource to organizations interested in measuring performance.JCAHO sent information to more than 1,200 health care organizations forcomments, which will be accepted until May 10.  JCAHO expects indicators forthese settings to be selected by the end of the year and available for use inthe spring of 1997."This RFI gives us a major opportunity to enrich the Library to includemeasures that cover the full mainstream of the delivery system," says DennisO'Leary, MD, JCAHO president.  "This will substantially enhance our abilitiesto support quality improvement in health care organizations while also settingthe stage for using performance measures in the accreditation process."The call for these measures specifies that indicators be classified into oneof four broad categories:  administrative/financial (coordination andintegration of functions); clinical performance (care processes and outcomesfor specific conditions and procedures); health status (functional well-beingof populations); and satisfaction (how well patient, purchaser, andpractitioner needs are met).  After May 10, the Joint Commission will assembleexpert panels to select indicators based on importance and usefulness for eachof the four areas.Last March, the Joint Commission began the first phase of its Library effortwhen it solicited measures applicable to health plans and networks.  The 900suggested indicators have been whittled to about 200, and these will beavailable for use this summer (QMU, 3/20/96).  JCAHO also is planning to issuea call for acute measures sometime next year.  Eventually, indicators will beincluded as part of accreditation surveys, although JCAHO has not specifiedwhen this will take effect.For more information on the RFI and the Library project, call JCAHO's SharonSprenger at 708/916-5968.Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996Medicare Pay System Boosts SatisfactionRecently-published research indicates that patient satisfaction increasedafter implementation of the 1992 Medicare Fee Schedule (MFS) despite fearsthat the new payment approach would compromise quality.Between 1991 and 1993, Medicare beneficiaries' satisfaction with quality,availability, accessibility, and costs of care significantly increased.  Thearea with the greatest rise (costs) was a direct result of the relativevalue-based fee schedule, write the authors of the research.  The informationappears in the Winter 1996 Health Care Financing Review, published on April 5by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which runs the Medicareprogram."With the implementation of the MFS, access, use, and satisfaction have notdeteriorated during the 3-year period included in this study," write theauthors.  "Indeed, we have shown that Medicare beneficiaries are reportingincreased satisfaction with many aspects of their health care .  .  .suggesting that the program has become 'more equitable' over time."Despite the improved satisfaction, the study is lacking, says Uwe Reinhardt,professor of political economy at the Woodrow Wilson School in Princeton NJ."The real distinction to make is between the chronically ill and the healthy,"he says, adding that 90 percent of the elderly are relatively healthy and notheavy users of health services.  "I'd like to see a breakdown of satisfactionscores by level of functioning."The article bases its findings on HCFA surveys conducted from 1991-93 of 7,651continuously-enrolled Medicare beneficiaries (6,337 elderly and 1,314 disablednonelderly).  Researchers exclude any results for beneficiaries who died from1991-1994.  Enrollees in managed care programs and fee-for-service plans arecombined.Of the four parameters measured, satisfaction with quality of care washighest, while satisfaction with costs was lowest.  However, satisfaction withcosts between 1991 and 1993 rose most sharply, from 71.0 to 83.5 (scale 0 to100).  For each of the four categories, scores for the disabled are lower thanthose for the elderly (see chart).Higher satisfaction was reported for persons with the fewest limitations onactivities of daily living, whites, the high-income population, persons inareas with the highest number of physicians per capita, and persons withinsurance supplementary to Medicare.One interesting finding was the reduction from 1991 to 1993 in mammography (40percent to 32 percent) and Pap smears (49 percent to 32 percent).  Medicareintroduced new benefits for both of these preventive services in late 1990.However, the decreases may reflect women screened in 1991 who would not berescreened until after 1993; Medicare officials recommend mammographies everytwo years and Pap smears every three years.In a second study in the same issue of the journal, HCFA official MargoRosenbach found that within the disabled Medicare population, those withmental disabilities are less satisfied with their care than those withnonmental disorders.  The disabled are most satisfied with their care after aninitial treatment or operation (score of 89) and least satisfied without-of-pocket costs of medical care (60).Single copies of the issue of the Health Care Financing Review may bepurchased for $19 by calling HCFA at 410/786-6572.Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996NCQA Drafts Behavioral Health NormsThe first national accreditation standards designed for managed behavioralhealthcare organizations (MBHOs) moved one step closer to reality when theNational Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) announced the completion of adraft set of standards.On April 10, NCQA held a news conference to discuss the proposed standards,which are being circulated to more than 1,000 organizations for comments overthe next 45 days.  After pilot testing the standards in the fall, NCQA hopesto begin review of MBHOs, separate from its standard review of HMOs, earlynext year.  To date, no MBHO has received accreditation from NCQA using HMOstandards.NCQA President Margaret E.  O'Kane acknowledges concerns about the lack ofinformation related to MBHO quality and says, "these standards fill that voidand provide assurance that NCQA will be scrutinizing the quality of behavioralhealth plans every bit as closely as we do that of HMOs."  Others see thestandards as playing a broader role; Harvard Pilgrim Health Plan's John Luddenbelieves that the new standards will promote "integration of managedbehavioral health care to other care, which can lead to a whole series ofimprovement in quality and cost."The draft standards are an outgrowth of the rapid expansion of MBHOs, whoseranks number more than 300 and cover 100 million Americans.  Payers turned toMBHOs in the past decade to control behavioral health expenses; however, thesecost-containment methods have caused widespread public concern that enrolleesare being denied necessary services, shortchanging quality to save money.  Nonational set of accreditation standards exists to ensure that MBHOs' practicesare acceptable.In 1995, NCQA convened a 22-member Behavioral Health Task Force to draft newstandards, recognizing that services covered by MBHOs were distinct from thosecovered by HMOs.  The Task Force initially framed its work in terms ofstandards developed by several large employers.  The draft emulated NCQA's HMOstandards to promote coordination between primary care and behavioral health.In fact, the seven categories of behavioral health standards are quite similarto the HMO version:1.  Quality Management and Improvement.  The most comprehensive of the sevencategories, it covers the structure, process, and outcomes of the MBHO qualitymanagement program.2.  Accessibility, Availability, Referral, and Triage.  This section includesspecific standards for telephone access, geographic distance, and travel timesfor appointments.3.  Utilization Management.  NCQA requires MBHOs to have written protocols"based on reasonable scientific evidence" for authorizing members to useservices.4.  Credentialing and Recredentialing.  NCQA mandates MBHOs to exercise "duediligence" in ensuring that its participating providers maintain propercredentials.5.  Members' Rights and Responsibilities.  Each accredited MBHO must have agrievance procedure that will be scrutinized by NCQA for the opportunity toappeal MBHO decisions on coverage.6.  Preventive Behavioral Health Care Services.  MBHOs must have programs todecrease incidence, prevalence, and residual effects of behavioral healthdisorders among its enrollees.7.  Clinical Evaluation and Treatment Records.  MBHO records must be current,comprehensive, detailed, and organized."The standards are not perfect, but solid," says Leslie Scallet, executivedirector of the Mental Health Policy Research Center in Washington and amember of the task force.  She also believes the standards will promotequality and appropriate practices due to the support of managed careorganizations, "which were stung by bad press and are committed to seeing thestandards work."Managed care organizations with behavioral health programs will be given theoption of NCQA reviewing their behavioral health component under theestablished HMO standards or the new behavioral health-specific standards.Eventually, MBHO survey scores will be released to the public, says NCQAspokesperson Barry Scholl.For more information or for a copy of the draft standards, call NCQA at202/955-3577 or use NCQA's site on the World Wide Web (www.ncqa.org).Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996Vaccine Rate Up Due to Fed EffortChildren receiving all recommended immunizations by age two rose from 55percent to 75 percent in the last four years, according to figures releasedApril 10 by Dept.  of Health & Human Services (HHS) Secretary Donna E.Shalala.Shalala credits the improved vaccination record to a variety of federalgovernment initiatives.  "Just two months after he was sworn into office,President Clinton personally committed his Administration to an historic,comprehensive strategy to immunize our youngest and most vulnerable children,"says Shalala in remarks delivered to the 30th National Immunization Conferencesponsored by the Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC).  "Andtogether, we are making good on that promise."Ten infectious diseases - polio, measles, diphtheria, mumps, whooping cough,German measles, tetanus, spinal meningitis, chicken pox, and hepatitis-B - canbe prevented through childhood vaccines.  Experts recommend that childrenreceive 12 to 16 doses of the various vaccines by age two, accounting for 80percent of all recommended childhood immunizations.Noncompliance with vaccination requirements stems from inadequate numbers ofaccessible services, including public clinics; lack of parental awareness ofthe need to immunize children by age two; and the increasing cost of vaccines.HHS estimates that the full series of immunizations costs $313 per child, upfrom $27 in 1983.One of President Clinton's initial pledges was a government buyout of allvaccines, to be distributed from a warehouse in New Jersey.  Congress failedto pass Clinton's plan, but the federal government made other moves in thepast three years to improve vaccination rates.For example, CDC funding for immunization programs has doubled to about $1billion, and HHS has approved and funded a number of demonstration projects bystate governments to improve immunization rates.  Also a number of states nowrequire childhood immunizations as a condition for receiving benefits underAid for Families with Dependent Children and Women and Infant Childrenprograms.Climbing immunization rates can also be linked to the emergence of HMOs, withtheir traditional focus on preventive health services.  Last year, 21 largeHMOs released 1993 data showing that 79 percent of enrolled children had beenfully immunized by age two, a figure higher than the national rate (QMU,3/1/95).  The goal set by the U.S.  Public Health Service for the year 2000 is90 percent.It continues to be debated whether or not cost is a major obstacle to childrenreceiving immunizations.  Despite the defeat of its plan to distribute allvaccines, the Clinton Administration expanded the Vaccines for Childrenprogram to all 50 states.  The program offers free vaccines to about 60percent of U.S.  children, including the uninsured, Medicaid-eligible, andAmerican Indians/Alaska natives.Despite the improved rates of immunization, considerable variation betweengeographic areas remains.  For example, the compliance rate in Boston is 87percent, but only 52 percent in Detroit.  vBack to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996Satisfaction Poll Marks HMO GuideThe first national survey of consumer satisfaction using measures specified bythe National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a prominent newaddition to a guide on health plans, physicians, hospitals, and healthsystems.The survey, launched earlier this month, will include all patient satisfactionquestions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, a poll of more than170,000 U.S.  households (see chart p.4).  When the data are released in June,users will be able to compare results for their geographic area - zip code,county, state, etc.  - with national averages or benchmarks/best practices.Data will be contained in the sixth edition of the Healthcare Market Guide, aproduct of National Research Corp.  (NRC) of Lincoln NE, a companyspecializing in health care performance assessment.NRC touts its database as the first national measurement of all satisfactionquestions from the NCQA Annual Member Health Care Survey, finalized over ayear ago.  To date, use of these questions has been left to the discretion ofeach managed care plan.  The survey is likely to be a component of NCQA'sreport card prototype Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS)3.0, due to be presented in draft form this summer.The Guide encompasses 16 major categories, including quality attributes suchas best-reputed hospitals and doctors, most personalized care, best communityhealth programs, best image, and lowest costs.  To date, NRC has published theguide every two years, but now will publish an annual volume.  Nationalinformation in the Guide is contained on a computer diskette, says KrisBenson, NRC director of marketing.  She says that plans, hospitals, andphysician groups, in releasing their data, will often compare it to industryaverages and benchmarks found in the Guide; NRC requests that it review databefore public dissemination.For more information about the Guide, call Benson at 800/388-4264.  Costs ofthe product vary according to the data requested.Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996Drug Company Promotes QI ToolsPfizer Inc.  has formed a subsidiary that will link up with providers tointroduce new quality management products.The April 15 announcement of Pfizer Health Solutions Inc.  (PHS), based in NewYork, represents a venture into an area in which pharmaceutical companies havehistorically had little involvement.  "While Pfizer's innovativepharmaceuticals have long been recognized for their contributions to treatingdisease, I am confident that PHS will help strengthen our partnerships withour customers .  .  .  and position Pfizer at the forefront of new solutionsfor improving patient care, whatever the setting," says Karen Katen, presidentof the Pfizer U.S.  Pharmaceuticals Group.PHS has kicked off its agenda by selecting three pilot projects, each testinga different product with a client provider.  The first pilot is the ClinicalManagement System (CMS), a clinical guideline instrument customized to localpractices.  The CMS analyzes physician examination and laboratory testresults, lists possible treatment options, and produces reports for providerson effects of care.Value Health Sciences of Avon CT, which specializes in developing guidelinesand software, helped Pfizer create this tool.  The new system is being testedin diagnosing and treating depression and benign prostatic hypertrophy at theLahey Hitchcock Clinic in Burlington MA.The second product being tested by PHS is a wireless, handheld computer thatallows practitioners to access any part of the medical record instantaneously.This product, developed with WiSE Medical Systems Inc.  of Los Gatos CA (acompany that creates mobile information systems for physicians), is expectedto enhance physician decisionmaking.  It is being demonstrated at severalsites, including Santa Cruz (CA) Medical Center.The third tool tested by PHS is making clinical information available viatelephone around the clock.  The information is maintained through a series of"medical call centers" made up of specially-trained nurses using algorithms toanswer patients' questions.  National Health Enhancement Systems, Inc.  ofPhoenix AZ developed the system; test sites have not yet been selected.For more information on PHS and its related products, call Bob Fauteux atPfizer at 212/573-3079.Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996AIDS Evolution Means QM ChangesThe Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) epidemic presents a stiff andgrowing challenge to quality managers trying to assess and improve processesin AIDS care.  In the March 20 issue, QMU looked at examples of AIDS QM inhospitals, home care organizations, and regulatory agencies.  HMOs, employers,and researchers are also trying their hand at improving the state of the art.NONPROVIDERS EVALUATE AIDS CAREA variety of research projects evaluating the care given to HIV-positivepatients are now under way, including one by the Columbia University School ofPublic Health in New York.  The School contracts with the city's healthdepartment to evaluate AIDS programs funded under the federal Ryan White law,says Peter Masseri, associate clinical professor at Columbia.  Masseri andother staff are conducting interviews with 650 HIV-positive New Yorkers toevaluate how well services are being rendered and what the outcomes of theseservices are.  These verbal interviews take more than two hours each and areconducted every six months.Masseri says initial results of the study will not be ready until the summer.However, he and other researchers will look at utilization of services (at alllevels) and evaluate changes in health status, compared to the patients'needs.  The SF-36 tool, which measures patient self-reported health status,will be used:  "We find the tool to be quite reliable," says Masseri.  Inaddition, other measures of health status, such as CD-4 cell count, will beincluded in the analysis.HMOS LOOK TO COORDINATED CAREAlthough hospitals are extending AIDS care beyond just the acute level, it ismanaged care organizations (MCOs) that portray themselves as providers ofcoordinated care across all levels.  Despite this stated purpose, there ismuch controversy over how MCOs handle AIDS treatment as more and more AIDSpatients (especially Medicaid recipients) enroll in MCOs.The Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) in New York City reports that a recentsurvey finds 95 percent of HMOs unable to refer callers to primary carephysicians experienced in AIDS treatment.  GMHC Senior Policy Associate SusanDooha says this lack of expertise lowers the use of prophylactic therapyneeded by many patients infected with HIV.  Other aspects of medical care areaffected by practitioner inexperience.  A 1995 study published in the Journalof the American Medical Assn.  found that of 134 general practitioners andfamily physicians (not just HMO physicians), only 25.8 percent correctlydiagnosed Kaposi's sarcoma, and 22.7 percent diagnosed oral hairy leukoplakia,conditions common in the AIDS population.GMHC also says they believe there is a lack of specific standards for AIDScare, particularly newer therapies, and HMOs do not monitor care toHIV-positive patients.  Most plan-based report cards, including the HealthPlan Employer Data & Information Set (HEDIS), do not include indicatorsspecifically addressed to AIDS patients.Possibly the hottest quality-related issue surrounding AIDS patients in HMOsis financial incentives.  Because many HMOs pay providers on a capitatedbasis, the incentive to not provide unnecessary services exists.  The practiceof HMOs denying what they consider "unneeded" treatments in order to hold downcosts has the AIDS community in an uproar.  With a lack of standards fortreatment, especially newer therapies, and with the cost of care escalating,the furor is not likely to end any time soon.One HMO that has addressed this issue by revamping its quality managementprogram is the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound of Seattle WA.  Foundedin 1947, this group-model HMO covers more than 500,000 lives in the PacificNorthwest.  It functions as a cooperative governed by consumers.Group Health recognizes the special needs of AIDS patients.  "TQM [totalquality management] for HIV-positive patients is not the same as that forother diseases," says Wayne Dodge, MD, HIV/AIDS program director at GroupHealth.  A more activist patient group plus a bevy of expensive treatmentsavailable before effectiveness is proven creates "a challenge for allproviders," he says.The HMO has a specific TQM structure for AIDS treatment, focused around threegroups committed to a team approach, says Dodge:1.  The core committee, which meets twice a month, serves as the operatingcommittee for AIDS TQM activities.  It is multidisciplinary, consisting ofDodge, the nursing HIV coordinator, a social worker, systems analyst,administrator, and liaison with the local AIDS foundation.2.  The steering committee is also a multidisciplinary panel providing generaldirection and strategic planning to AIDS quality activities.  It meetsquarterly.3.  The prevention subcommittee meets quarterly and specifically supportspreventive activities related to care of AIDS patients.Puget Sound's focus on prevention has guided some of its decisions on AIDSquality management.  The core committee reviewed the administration of Papsmears and recommended this test be performed for all HIV-positive womenenrolled in the HMO, says Dodge.  In addition, prophylactic treatment is nowgiven to all HIV-positive patients with CD4 cell counts below 200 or less than14 percent of white blood cells (the clinical definition of full-blown AIDS)in order to prevent pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), which is common inthe AIDS population.Another Group Health initiative, on physician expertise and AIDS, is containedin an article published in the March 13 New England Journal of Medicine.  MariKitahara, MD, the study's principal investigator, reported that men who werethe first-ever AIDS patient seen by a physician lived 14 months withfull-blown AIDS, compared with 26 months for men who consulted physicians thathad treated at least five cases of the disease previously.  Kitiharacalculated that patients treated by doctors more experienced in AIDS care hada 43 percent lower risk of death after adjustment for CD-4 cell count.Group Health has also developed a Clinical Roadmap, or a set of priorities forHIV care.  "We have sent out flow sheets and pathways to caregivers," saysDodge, adding that later in 1996 the HMO will evaluate how successful theseinterventions are.The problem of how to handle new treatments for AIDS is a difficult one, saysDodge.  "We've got no real answer," he says, although several principles guidethe HMO.  No treatments considered experimental are covered by Group Health,says Dodge, but other new treatments are placed on a "Code 29" list.  Thisdesignation means that a drug is not automatically covered by the HMO, but ifthe treating physician consults with a designated peer at Group Health, it maybe covered if deemed best for the patient.  Dodge says the new proteaseinhibitors are on the Code 29 list.Dodge says that his HMO has a huge advantage in analyzing processes andimprovements in AIDS care.  "We're a totally computerized system that includesall levels of care," he says.  "I can't see how you can do good qualitymanagement any other way."Another managed care organization with an innovative approach to AIDStreatment is the Community Medical Alliance (CMA) of Boston.  The Alliance isan HMO founded in 1989 that manages only the care of AIDS patients andchronically-ill populations with special needs.  Its current enrollment ofmore than 300 includes 18 percent of Boston's Medicaid recipients that areHIV-positive.  The state pays CMA a flat, capitated fee of $4,337.54 perenrollee per month to manage the needs of Medicaid patients with AIDS.CMA's QM structure for AIDS patients revolves around a committee that sets thegoals of the program, says Priscilla Meriot, QI director at the Alliance.Goals are developed in conjunction with the Massachusetts Division of MedicalAssistance (Medicaid agency).  "We have a number of multidisciplinary teamsthat have developed protocols," she says, including:* prophylactic therapy for PCP; * pain management; * screening/treatment forCytomegalovirus retinitis; * screening for tuberculosis; and * Pap smearscreening for cervical cancer."We don't have any critical paths yet," says Meriot, acknowledging that thecomplexity of treating AIDS patients often makes use of paths somewhatdifficult.  CMA has done some benchmarking using information from the medicalliterature as a standard and will be doing more outcomes studies, frequentlyusing functional status as a measure of outcomes, she adds.What have been the major enhancements in the quality of care managed by CMA?Meriot first mentions that more patients live at home instead of ininstitutions, which is a byproduct of coordinated care and early intervention.CMA Medical Director Robert Master, MD, estimates that about 40 percent ofcosts now go to hospital-based care, down from 60 percent to 75 percent whenthe program started.A second improvement is a more satisfied population with a better quality oflife, which Meriot attributes to CMA's educational activities.  In August1995, Master stated there was "virtually no disenrollment from CMA due todissatisfaction" with the program.  Education of both patients and physiciansmakes satisfaction rates higher and hospitalizations lower, he says.  "Youdon't need as much specialty care if you have an educated, empowered patientand a well-skilled and responsive primary care provider."Better prevention of AIDS-related illnesses is a third area of achievement byCMA.  "We're seeing fewer infections and a more delayed onset of certaindiseases," says Meriot.In one example of this type of improvement, the 1992-93 rate of PCP episodeswas 17.2 per 100 patient years, down from 58.7 prior to enrollment in CMA.  Ofthe 113 patients studied, 82 (73 percent) received prophylactic (preventive)care under the management of CMA.  The drugs trimetheprim/sulfamethexazol,aerosolized pentamidine, and dapsone were used in treatment for all but one ofthe 82 patients.  The data appear in an article by Master in the Winter 1996Journal of Ambulatory Care Management.Meriot says the organization doesn't pay for experimental AIDS treatment, butmonitors the progress of patients already enrolled in clinical trials.  Nocategory of drug therapy is automatically paid for; all drug decisions must bereviewed by the QI committee on a case-by-case basis.  Patients or physicianshave the right to appeal any decisions to an ethics advisory committee,although such appeals "are rare," says Meriot.A major thrust started by CMA last year is a redesign of the medical recordand a bolstering of the computer system to help the organization moreeffectively manage patient care.AN EMPLOYER TAKES A ROLEAlthough a portion of the bill for treating HIV-positive patients is borne byemployers, corporations are not usually involved in quality standard settingand monitoring.  One exception is the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) ofMaynard MA, which formed an HIV/AIDS program in 1988."It was really a partnership with HMOs," says Paul Ross, worldwide manager ofthe program.  He says that since 1988, the proportion of DEC employeeschoosing an HMO has increased.  Currently, most employees are covered by oneof 85 HMOs.Ross says that DEC took several steps to manage quality of care given toHIV-positive employees.  First, it hired Clinical Partners, a SanFrancisco-based case management firm with considerable experience in AIDStreatment, to better coordinate care.Second, the company developed standards about five years ago for HIV/AIDStreatment in conjunction with the 85 HMOs.  DEC mandates that HMOs comply withthese standards as part of the contract with the company.  Ross says that thestandards cover patient care, education, and reporting procedures, and "arebroad enough to accommodate the rapid upgrades in HIV/AIDS treatment."DEC is currently working on an evaluation of what effects the standards havehad on care of its employees.  Although results aren't available yet, Rossexpects to see improvements in the continuum of care and education of thestaff, increased AIDS testing of at-risk workers, and a greater proportion ofphysicians with AIDS expertise treating patients.CAN AIDS CARE BE IMPROVED?Most experts agree that while improving AIDS care is possible, it isdifficult.  The most desirable outcome - decreased mortality - is stillelusive.GMHC's Dooha says there have been a number of improvements in recent years."There is definitely better coordination of care," she says, citing a greaternumber of knowledgeable physicians who are more accessible to the public.  Shealso lists the survival of patients with AIDS-related pneumonia and fewer,less expensive hospitalizations as other improvements.Statistics seem to back up Dooha's contentions that care is being bettercoordinated and requiring fewer hospital stays.  The number and rate ofdischarges continue to grow, which represents the rising number ofHIV-positive Americans in the population.  However, the average length ofstay, which was 17.1 days in 1985, dropped to 11.4 days in 1993, the latestyear for which data are available.  For the first time, days of care fellbetween 1990-92, before rising again in 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightQUALITY MANAGEMENT UPDATE via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1996Developments In BriefConference on NCQA.  "Surviving NCQA:  Lessons Learned from Health Plans" isthe theme of a May 13-15 conference held by the American Assn.  of HealthPlans (AAHP) in San Antonio TX.  Participants will hear from health plans thatrecently underwent accreditation surveys from the National Committee forQuality Assurance.  For more information, contact AAHP at 202/778-3269.PRO Contractor Sues Feds.  Following the termination of its contract as thePeer Review Organization (PRO) for Maine and Rhode Island, Medical Synergy issuing the Medicare program.  The Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)cited "significant weaknesses" in the company's proposal to renew thecontracts, which expire June 30.  Medical Synergy President Edward Lynch toldFaulkner & Gray's Medicine & Health that he believes philosophical differenceslie behind the decision - HCFA perceives the company as too tough onproviders.NY Hospitals Receive Funds To Improve Home Care.  Nine New York City hospitalshave received grants totaling $500,000 to devise enhanced ways to helppatients manage their care at home after a hospital stay or outpatientsurgery.  Issues such as recognizing danger signs, coordinating medicationschedules, obtaining answers to medical questions, and finding psychologicalsupport are examples of subjects to be researched by the hospitals.  The April12 grant is part of the Discharge Preparation Initiative of New York's UnitedHospital Fund.HCFA Expands Centers for Excellence Program.  As many as 100 hospitals in 10states will receive the "Participating Centers of Excellence" designation forcardiovascular and orthopedic services from HCFA.  Such a designation is seenas prestigious for hospitals, which must meet HCFA volume and qualitystandards and are paid by Medicare through a "package price" for episodes ofcare.  The initial two services in the program cover coronary artery bypassgraft surgery and outpatient cataract procedures.  Ten states are eligible(AZ, CA, HI, IL, IN, MI, MN, NV, OH, and WI).  Call HCFA's Office of Researchand Demonstrations (410/786-7800) for more information.New HSQB Director Appointed.  Richard W.  Besdine, MD, is the new director ofthe federal Health Standards & Quality Bureau (HSQB), the agency responsiblefor enforcing Medicare and Medicaid quality standards.  The April 9announcement by Bruce C.  Vladeck, administrator of the HCFA (to whom Besdinewill report), notes his extensive academic experience at the University ofConnecticut and Harvard Medical School.  Besdine takes over for Barbara Gagel,who resigned late last year.Healthcare Forum Recognizes Young Leaders.  At its 1996 Healthier CommunitiesSummit in San Francisco on April 22, the Healthcare Forum recognized fourwinners of the International Emerging Leaders in Healthcare award.  The award,given to health care leaders under age 40 who have made achievements inimproving community health (national or local), went to Todd Linden ofGrinnell (IA) Regional Medical Center; Joanne Marqusee of Beth Israel Hospitalin Boston; Arthur Southam, MD, of CareAmerica in Woodland Hills CA; and PaulZucarelli of Partners Health Plan in Tucson AZ.  For more information aboutthe award, call Sally Mudd at the Healthcare Forum (415/356-4312).CA Regulators Accused of Weak Oversight.  A California consumer group hasissued a report asserting that state regulators have not adequately evaluatedconsumer complaints and overall quality of care by HMOs.  The April 11 reportby Consumers Union is critical of the state Dept.  of Corporations' ability tokeep up with the fast pace of HMO growth in California.  It recommends thatthe state review HMOs every year instead of every three years and make reviewstandards available to the public.Pocket Guides on LOS, Costs Available.  Three pocket guides giving the numberof 1992 hospital discharges, average LOS, and average charges for alldiagnosis and procedure groups were recently issued by the Agency for HealthCare Policy & Research (AHCPR).  The three guides are aggregated by 260principal diagnosis categories, 230 procedure categories, and 492 DiagnosisRelated Groups.  For free copies, call AHCPR at 301/594-1410 and ask for theHealthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP-3) pocket guides.Seattle Groups Team Up for QM Effort.  A think tank, the Peer ReviewOrganization, and a business coalition in the Seattle area have combined toform the Quality Measurement Advisory Service.  The Service, funded by theJohn A.  Hartford Foundation, will hold national and local meetings, assistlocal groups in QM projects, and operate an information clearinghouse.  Formore information, call Richard Rubin at 206/682-2811.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-27IA086-000615-B042-41http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh63.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020248 text/html 35380HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:36 GMTContent-length: 35193Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh63.html Sample Issue Copyright REPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNet February 21, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Hospital Hits Cardiac Care Mortality Rate With Heart Risk Assessment Program (460 words) Utah Targets Health Plans, Providers In Mandated, Statewide Report Card Effort (430 words) Committee Outlines Criteria For HEDIS 3.0 Measures (343 words) Quality Boils Down to Cost In Blue Cross Hospital Program (441 words) Outcomes Focus Helps Network Hike Survival Rate Above Norm (568 words) MDs Develop QA Program For Managed Kidney Care (359 words) Risk Assessment Draws Fire; Regulators Say HMO Form OK (684 words) REPORTS & SURVEYS (509 words) QUALITY BRIEFS (498 words) AUTOMATED PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT (413 words) CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Hospital Hits Cardiac Care Mortality Rate WithHeart Risk Assessment ProgramThe risk assessment program includes EKG, cholesterolscreening and blood pressure measurement. Patients receive acoronary risk report on disk, which offers suggestions for avoidingheart attack.To reach more patients and intervene in the early stage of heartdisease - thus boosting performance and outcomes - SarasotaMemorial Hospital implemented the Heart C.A.R.E. program, a cardiacassessment and risk evaluation initiative.Sarasota, Florida's second largest hospital, realized last yearthat it was caring for only 5% of the patients in its service areawho were at risk for heart disease.Announced less than a month ago, Heart C.A.R.E. has receivedoverwhelming response. The hospital has booked patients forscreening through May."It took off like lightening," says April Mason, director ofcardiovascular diagnostic service at Sarasota.Heart C.A.R.E. accomplishes two goals: screening and educatingpatients.The 35-minute screening requires that a patient fast for 12 hours.Evaluators get a detailed family and personal history from thepatient, such as eating and exercise habits. The patient receivesan electrocardiogram (EKG) and cholesterol test. Blood pressuremeasurements, both in the arm and ankle, determine presence ofperipheral heart disease. Measurement of hip-to-waist ratiodetermines level of obesity.The hospital places this information on a computer disk, which thepatient receives as a coronary risk report. The seven-page reportdetails coronary risk overview, fitness profile and cardiovascularfitness recommendations.A learning guide tells the patient ways to prevent heart attacksand heart disease and reduce risk factors.The patient's doctor receives a copy of the coronary risk report.But in many cases, patients don't have a doctor, so the hospitalrefers them to an internist or  cardiologist.Sarasota hopes to measure program outcomes in a year. In anevaluation, the hospital will look at several interrelated factorsof success, such as acuity, intervention and morbidity rates.But hospital officials have already recognized some kinks in thesystem.For instance, because "snowbirds" make up much of Sarasota'spopulation, follow-up becomes difficult. The hospital wants totarget the older, more permanent residents of the Sarasota areathrough churches and businesses.The hospital has targeted people 40 years and older and have paidspecial attention to women, who don't realize they are at risk andhave lesser chances than men for surviving a heart attack. Sarasotawants to lower the mortality rate for that group.Currently, 94% of patients that Sarasota sees has acute heartdisease. The hospital wants to lower that rate. "It's outrageouslyhigh," Mason says. "Some patients come straight from the airport tothe hospital complaining of chest pains."Finally, the hospital hopes to raise from 5% to 45% the percentageof Sarasota residents it treats who are at risk of heart disease.Contact Mike Vizvary at (941) 917-1499.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Utah Targets Health Plans, Providers In Mandated,Statewide Report Card EffortThe state could begin with patient satisfaction andcost comparisons before tackling the more expensive and difficultcomparison of clinical outcomes.Utah lawmakers could bring a statewide quality report cardinitiative a step closer to reality this week, just days afteryielding to providers' demands that an outside vendor evaluate thestate's data collection process.State Sen. John Holmgren (R), who introduced the Health CareQuality bill (SB 171) Jan. 31, says the Senate should vote on themeasure this week. The bill strengthens the role of the Utah HealthData Committee and calls for the committee to publish "comparativeanalyses" of provider performance."I think a year from now you'll see [the report card system] up andrunning," Holmgren says, noting the need for heightenedaccountability in a state of under  2 million people where healthcare is a major $4.5 billion industry.The Utah Assn. of HealthCare Providers "insisted" that comparativequality data collection and analysis be validated by an outsidevendor, says Rick Kinnersley, president of the association of 53hospitals and eight health care systems.Kinnersley says hospitals were "uncomfortable" with the Health DataCommittee's earlier validation of hospital discharge data. Heexpects the state to begin with patient satisfaction and costcomparisons before tackling the more expensive and difficultcomparison of clinical outcomes.Under the Utah Health Data Authorization Act of 1990, the committeemay collect data on cost, quality of care, and access from anyprovider. Hospitals were the first priority; the committee hascollected four years (1992-95) of hospital discharge all-payerdata.Denise Love, committee executive secretary, says the group hascollected some financial data on hospital performance as well.But other efforts were put on hold for a report card initiativethat provides better consumer information at the health plan level.The Utah Health Data Committee's advisory committee is hashing outthe details of the report card to recommend to the full committee.The advisory committee is talking to the provider community aboutwhat data are now collected by plans, and looking at enrolleesatisfaction survey instrument models.Discussions have not begun on specific data measures. Love notesthe committee is considering public dissemination of comparativehealth plan data, perhaps at an aggregate level, while reservingmore detailed information for health plans' internal qualityimprovement efforts.The committee's future priorities may include comparativeperformance reports on health systems, networks, or individualproviders, adds Love, who is also director of the Utah Departmentof Health Office of Health Data Analysis.Contact Kinnersley at (801) 364-1515, and Holmgren at (801)538-1407.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Committee Outlines Criteria For HEDIS 3.0 MeasuresThe National Committee for Quality Assurance Committee onPerformance Measurement approved criteria for HEDIS 3.0 measures,set for release this month. Attributes fall in three categories andinclude:o        Relevance.  x  Meaningful. Decisionmakers should be ableto use the measures to understand clinical or economic differencesamong plans; this will be enhanced if benchmarks or targets areavailable.  x  Health importance. The measure shouldcapture as much of the plan's activities relating to quality aspossible, including type of measure, prevalence and seriousness ofthe related medical condition.  x  Financial importance.  x  Strategically important. The measureshould encourage plans to devote resources to activities that mosteffectively maximize the health of members.  x  Controllability. Health plans should beable to take actions that improve their performance.  x  Variance among plans. There should bepotentially wide variations across plans.  x  Potential for improvement. There should besubstantial room for improvement on the measure.o        Scientific validity.  x  Reproducible. The measure should producethe same results when repeated with the same population and in thesame setting.  x  Accurate.  x  Valid. It should make sense logically,clinically and, where appropriate, financially. It should correlatewith other related measures.  x  Risk adjustable. Factors outside theplan's control should be adjusted for whenever possible and/orstratified to account for differences in populations.  x  Comparability of data sources. The abovedimensions of scientific validity should not be greatly affected ifplans use different data sources.o        Feasibility.  x  Precisely specified. The measure shouldhave clear methods for data collection and reporting.  x  Reasonable cost. The measure should notimpose an inappropriate burden on plans.  x  Confidential. Collecting data for themeasure should not involve any violation of memberconfidentiality.  x  Logistically feasible. The data requiredfor the measure should be available in the time period allowed forcollection and should not be subject to cultural or other barriers,such as a satisfaction survey in English for Spanish-speakingmembers.The committee would not expect all measures to meet all attributes.Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Quality Boils Down to Cost In Blue Cross Hospital ProgramHospitals seeking "Partnerships for Quality" status had tomeet some baseline quality standards, but the first year of theprogram focuses on reimbursement, not performance.Blue Cross of California is touting its recent placement of 85% ofparticipating hospitals within its statewide network as preferred"Tier I" facilities and the rest as "Tier II," but officialsacknowledge the designation boils down to reimbursement rates, notquality.Hospitals within both "Partnerships for Quality" tiers have passeda quality threshold that must be met in order to discusscontracting and rates with Blue Cross affiliate CaliforniaCareHealth Plans, explains Dr. Jeffrey Rideout, vice president andmedical director of quality management for Woodland Hills,Calif.-based Blue Cross of California.Indeed, Rideout says the quality threshold is fairly low in orderto keep most of the network intact. "We didn't want to eliminatemany [participating hospitals], but we wanted to take the firststep to build the logic of quality performance into the contract,"he says.He says Blue Cross plans to become more discriminating over thenext few years as data are validated.Tier I Hospitals Receive Preferred StatusUnder the program, Tier I hospitals receive preferred status withinthe network, prominent mention in marketing materials, and accessto electronic interfacing, quality and outcome support, andutilization management from the company.In contrast, patients face higher copayments at Tier II hospitals.Contracting hospitals responding to a Blue Cross request forproposal on "Partnerships for Quality" provided information onquality and reimbursement rates, then received scores based oncomparisons within six peer categories.The company expects to finalize designations for remaininghospitals by the end of March.Rideout notes Blue Cross runs programs parallel to the affiliatedhospital quality performance program: (1) a quality monitoringprogram for medical groups and IPAs now in its fourth year; and (2)an ongoing member survey on service and access.Last year the medical group program used eight quality indicators,including administrative and grievance rates; voluntary transferfrom one medical group to another for quality or access reasons;and preventive measures.Rideout says Blue Cross hopes to use its size and clout to initiatestatewide quality processes that smaller health plans cannotnegotiate.The hospital program uses 10 quality indicators, including fiveinstitution-specific measures on C-section rates; coronary arterybypass graft (CABG) surgery rates; myocardial infarction with andwithout catheterization; and perinatal mortality.The indicators are supplemented by self-reported quality dataincluding JCAHO accreditation and any existing patient satisfactionsurveys and clinical pathways. Data are risk-adjusted, Rideoutsays, but much of it is "very old" and some is controversial.Contact Rideout at (510) 927-6111.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Outcomes Focus Helps Network Hike Survival Rate AboveNormAn adult liver transplant calls for at least: 25transplants per year; a program in exist- ence two years; atransplanter with two years' post-fellowship experience who hasperformed 50 cases as primary surgeon; an 80% survival rate at oneyear; and a re-transplantation rate lower than 15% within the firstyear.A Minneapolis-based transplant network that focuses on outcomesmeasurement and management achieved a 92% one-year survival ratefor liver transplant patients, topping the 77% national averagereported by the United Network of Organ Sharing.United Resource Networks' 86% two-year survival rate was 14% abovea national average.United HealthCare Corp. of Minneapolis founded United ResourceNetworks in 1989 to manage the catastrophic costs oftransplantation: an end-stage disease management therapy. Thecompany sought out quality transplant facilities in areas withUnited HealthCare HMOs, and packaged services - everything fromhospital and physician costs to organ procurement and  follow-upexpenses - in one contract.United Resource Networks manages transplant outcomes measurement,case management and pricing structures for 285 clients, coveringabout 20 million lives. Most are HMOs, but clients also includecommercial insurers, the state of Colorado, and a couple of large,self-funded employers.Kirk Stapleton, president and founder, credits United ResourceNetworks' work in facilitating access to quality care whilecreating cost-control strategies - along with technologicaladvances - with improved patient outcomes and reduced costs overthe past several years.Stapleton also cites estimated cost savings of 25%-30% pertransplant procedure. "Because we move a lot of volume, we bulkpurchase competitive packages for clients," he says. For example,the company on average pays $178,198 on a $267,234 average bill fora liver transplant at network facilities - an average savings of33% per procedure.Highlights of United Resource Networks' program include:o        Using 38 registered nurses asaccount managers to help clients manage benefits. The companysometimes case manages individual patients.o        Tracking outcomes at six months andone-year for every patient "to quickly identify survival issues."o        Recredentialing transplant sitesyearly. After the company started contracting for services, itbegan looking beyond meeting price to tracking outcomes, usingguidelines from the American Society of Transplant Surgeons. Unlike HCFA, which reviews facilities for compliance only one time,United returns every year to recredential sites. Stapleton notestransplant surgeons change facilities, which can result indifferent patient outcomes at a given site."We drop three to four programs a year on resurvey, looking atspecific organ outcomes," he says. Using 28 participatingfacilities in the United States and two facilities in Canada,United managed about 1,400 transplants in 1995.The combined United/Specialty Care Institutes annual caseloadstands at 2,900. United plans to complete the acquisition ofcompetitor Specialty Care Institutes on July 1.United's outcomes criteria, based on American College of TransplantSurgeons guidelines, is reviewed by the company's medicaldirectors, all practicing transplant surgeons. Criteria are divided between adult and pediatric categories. Anadult liver transplant, for example, calls for at least: 25transplants per year; a program in existence two years; atransplanter with two years' post- fellowship experience who hasperformed 50 cases as primary surgeon; an 80% survival rate at oneyear; and a re-transplantation rate lower than 15% within the firstyear."We won't contract with any program unless it meets our outcomescriteria," Stapleton says. "We're religious about it."Contact Stapleton at (800) 847-2050.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996MDs Develop QA Program For Managed Kidney CareA medical group incorporates a patient advocate's caremodel to develop a treatment path for dialysis patients covered bymanaged care plans.Southern California Permanente Medical Group and the American Assn.of Kidney Patients will jointly develop a quality assurance programfor patients with severe kidney conditions.Few dialysis patients are in managed care programs. In fact,managed care plans cannot by law recruit dialysis patients, but docare for members who develop end-stage renal disease, says RamonHannah, assistant to the associate medical director and physicianmanager of operations.But that soon may change as capitated plans target dialysis care.Worried about what this could mean for kidney patients, theAmerican Assn. of Kidney Patients developed a patient care modelthat lays out rights and benefits for dialysis patients. The modeldemands quality care and education about the disease.The medical group, affiliated with the Southern California regionof Kaiser Permanente, persuaded the kidney group to look at themedical group's award-winning program.The Kaiser program sets several high standards for quality of careand assigns nurse monitors to determine whether these standards aremet.Indicators, such as the amount of dialysis a patient receives, tellwhether patient care is good.The medical group will use the association's patient care model tomake improvements in its program. The improved plan is set forimplementation this spring.Additional goal: prove the medical group is the best place forpatients who need renal disease care and results in the bestpatient outcomes.In measuring whether the program meets these goals, the group willlook at four factors: morbidity, mortality, rehospitalization andrehabilitation rates.The 450 patients enrolled in the group's internal program alreadyhave better outcomes when compared to patients in other localnetworks. The goal is to assure the similar rates for the group's1,200 patients who use contract dialysis services, Hannah says."From a quality assurance perspective, it's a classic example ofsuccess of quality assurance," Hannah says. "If you defineindicators and push providers to improve, good outcomes result. Andgood outcomes does lower costs."Contact Pamela Dean of Kaiser Permanente at (818) 405-5534. Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996Risk Assessment Draws Fire; Regulators Say HMO Form OKAn HMO using a health risk appraisal tool finds that 60%of members completing the survey reported behavioral changes toimprove health status.A major Colorado HMO, stung by bad publicity over a clinicalquality tool that launched a state inquiry, now emphasizes tomembers the survey is  voluntary and, as confidential medicalrecord information, can't be released without member authorization.Kaiser's "Confidential Health Profile" form is a clinical tool thatserves as the "cornerstone" of the HMO's prevention program, "andwe have proof that it makes a difference," says Dr. Ned Calonge,chairman of preventive medicine. The HMO's experience highlightsthe troubles plans can have in collecting data for performanceimprovement.The Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Colorado at a December 1995media briefing announced the ongoing dissemination of aquestionnaire seeking medical and lifestyle information on the321,000-member HMO's adult members.But the Colorado Division of Insurance launched an inquiry when themedia asked whether the HMO could penalize members by requiringmembers supply the information in order to stay in the plan or toreceive treatment, or whether health profile information, such asacknowledging HIV risk factors, could be used by other insurers todeny coverage.State regulators, after review and clarification from Kaiser,concluded that no regulatory concerns exist and that the HMO istaking appropriate action to ensure information remainsconfidential.The state also found no violation of a state insurance regulationthat prohibits the development of sexual orientation questions withsubsequent use of the information for underwriting purposes. TheHMO's questionnaire lists several risk factors for HIV infection orAIDS, including "male homosexual or bisexual contacts," and askswhether factors in the aggregate apply to the member.Although the state required no action, Kaiser officials say theHMO's cover letter accompanying the health profile now states thesurvey is voluntary. And the HMO modified its medical recordrelease form to include members' approval or denial of release ofsurvey information.The questionnaire consists of 40 questions for men and 51 questionsfor women on such topics as smoking, exercise, dietary habits andsexual activity. Members get a computer-generated personal healthrisk profile suggesting ways to reduce risks and quantifying risksthrough a pie chart that shows the number of years a change in eachunhealthy habit would add to life expectancy.A multidisciplinary team of the HMO's physicians and nurses, alongwith a consultant, in 1991 began  developing the survey based ona federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) healthrisk appraisal form. Calonge says it evolved into the "shortest,easiest form possible" through HMO physicians' input and memberfocus groups' recommendations.Survey Helps Create Whole-Life AlgorithmThe CDC looked at predicted mortality for a person over a 10-yearperiod; Calonge says this underestimates risk. The HMO created awhole-life algorithm summarizing risk over a lifetime.Kaiser piloted the form in 1994, then reworded some questions andadded a query on depression.Calonge says the health profile will continue to evolve. The HMOmay, for example, add questions on family history to determinegenetic predisposition to certain cancers, and fine-tune the piechart based on additional epidemiological information."The concept was to quantify risk factors in a way to motivatebehavioral changes," Calonge explains, noting the HMO expectsbehavioral changes among members and greater utilization ofresource programs thanks to the questionnaire. In the pilot study,more than 60% of members completing the health risk appraisalreported behavioral changes or intended behavioral changes, vs. 30%in the group not using the form.Kaiser expects 70% of adult members will complete the healthprofile, up from 40%. The HMO plans to use another mailing in thesecond year, plus handouts in physician offices, to reach thetarget. A 70% level "could really show a programmatic impact," hesays.While confidentiality has not been an issue, Calonge says somemembers object to the form's questions on birth control, sexuallytransmitted diseases, and HIV risk factors. But he says suchqueries are important to a comprehensive health risk appraisal.Contact Calonge at (303) 344-7830.  Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996REPORTS & SURVEYS       With continuous changes in thequantity and types of health care personnel providing services,health plans and providers will increasingly need to monitor andunderstand the various aspects of patient satisfaction, accordingto "Tracking the System: American Health Care 1996." The report,the fifth from the National Committee for Quality Healthcare, sayscurrent patient satisfaction measurement tools "collect informationof questionable rigor." For a copy, call (202) 347-5731. Cost: $15.       A Kaiser Permanente physiciancompleted a study on the effectiveness of fecal occult blood testin detecting colorectal cancers and large polyps. Dr. JamesAllison, in a study published in the New England Journal ofMedicine, documents for the first time that fecal occult bloodtests can detect 1.5 to two times as many cancers and polyps as themost-used test, Hemoccult II. Clinicians and health planners canuse the study data to recommend tests. Contact Kaiser at (510)987-3900.       In a study of nearly 2,000 seriouslyill hospital patients, only about one quarter said they didn't wantCPR used to save their lives - many fewer than researchersexpected, given the poor prognosis of the study group and thelikely outcome of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the event ofcardiac arrest. After adjusting for demographics, severity ofillness and functional status, the Beth Israel Hospital researchersfound that a patient's diagnosis, his or her understanding of theprognosis, and the institution where a patient was hospitalizedwere some of the factors influencing decisions about whether toforgo CPR. A patient's decision not to have CPR was associated witha decrease in the intensity, not the quality, of patient care. Italso did not result in differences in hospital mortality rate. Thestudy was published in The American Journal of Medicine.       Get a look at four methods forconducting an internal quality assessment based on thehealthcare-specific Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award pilotcriteria. A new handbook, "Quality,  Assessment for Healthcare,"details the process,  including planning, preparation andimplementation stages covering management workshops, focus groups,surveys and an assessment based on comprehensive criteria. To orderthe handbook, authored by Barber Associates Inc. consultant NedBarber, call (800) 247-8519. Cost: $29.95, paperback.       "The search for `best practices' tobenchmark the rates of surgery leads to those practices that haveadopted shared decision-making, because learning which rate isright requires the active participation of the patient in thedecision process," say the authors of the "Dartmouth Atlas ofHealth Care." For a copy, call (800) 242-2626.       Hospitals in cities with high levelsof managed care report significantly lower costs, reduced length ofstay and decreased mortality rates, according to a national studyof 11.7 million patients at 3,700 acute care hospitals. The KPMGPeat Marwick study, "The Impact of Managed Care on U.S. Markets,"also finds the presence of managed care has not resulted in highermortality rates or complication rates. The risk-adjusted mortalityrates in high managed care markets were 5.25% below the nationalaverage. For a copy of the study, call (800) 243-1397.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996QUALITY BRIEFS       The National Committee for QualityAssurance next week will release information that will enablepeople to compare information from hundreds of health plans. NCQA'seffort is culled from its national database for HEDIS andaccreditation information. For more information, contact BarryScholl of NCQA at (202) 955-3500.       Watch for HCFA to announce thismonth a Medicare "centers of excellence" program for cardiac and/ororthopedic care, according to HCFA Administrator Bruce Vladeck. Theprogram currently bundles payments to designated coronary arterybypass graft and cataract surgery facilities and gives seniors whochoose such facilities a rebate.       Prudential HealthCare Group formeda special unit, Health Management Programs, to build expertguidelines, collect outcomes data, enhance patient and physicianeducation, provide case management and measure results - all aimedat managing chronic illness. The plan will build on experiencegarnered in its three-city asthma management pilot program inJanuary 1995. Other programs under consideration: diabetes,depression and hypertension. Contact Prudential at (201) 802-4884.       Humana Medical Plan Inc. of SouthFlorida won full accreditation from the National Committee forQuality Assurance. NCQA denied the plan accreditation during itsfirst review of the HMO in 1993.       HEDIS 3.0 should be used to measurethe quality of care a population is receiving and to assess whetherplan efforts are helping to improve public health, for example byreducing tobacco use, according to members of the NCQA Committee onPerformance Measurement. At its last meeting, committee membersexpressed interest in both medical care and other interventions,such as weight loss programs, that the plan implements to improvethe health of its members. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500.       The Colorado legislature shelved abill to implement a mandatory maternity stay after state insurersand managed care plans agree to comply voluntarily with the bill'sprovisions. The bill would have required plans to cover 48 hours ofhospital care following a normal delivery and 96 hours after aC-section. Instead, plans agree to allow 48-hour stays withoutreauthorization and to apply guidelines issued by the AmericanCollege of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the American Academy ofPediatrics when conducting utilization reviews and consideringauthorization requests.       In related news, the American NursesAssn. called for a standard of postpartum care that includesstabilization in the hospital or birth center, home visits and casemanagement by a registered nurse. For a copy of the position paper,"Home Care for Mother, Infant and Family Following Birth," callDawn Johnson at (202) 651-7046.       NCQA received a $636,893 grant fromthe Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop chronic careperformance measures that could become part of the Health PlanEmployer Data and Information Set. NCQA in a previous foundationgrant identified major depression, childhood asthma, diabetes andcoronary artery disease as conditions for which to developperformance indicators. In this phase, the group will develop, testand evaluate the indicators. Contact NCQA at (202) 955-3500, or athttp://www.ncqa.org on the World Wide Web.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT via NewsNetFebruary 21, 1996AUTOMATED PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT       Kaiser Permanente uses thePediAdvice System to help Advice Nurses in Northern Californiaaccess advice protocols for pediatric care and patient histories.The system, a telephone triage tool aimed at getting patients tothe right level of care, runs on a local-area network. Pediatricadvice nurses and front-line nurse managers developed the programin collaboration with a software developer and physicians. CallKaiser at (510) 987-3900.       Informed Access Systems Inc.received a U.S.  patent for its FirstHelp patient assessment andprovider referral system. The patent covers the system's two parts,the patient assessment component, which includes an automated setof proprietary patient assessment algorithms, and the providerinformation component, which consists of a proprietary relationaldatabase containing data necessary to differentiate providersparticipating in a network and to manage patient flow to theirpractices. Contact Informed Access Systems at (303) 443-4600.       The Medical Group Management Assn.and Response Healthcare Information Management Inc. together willdevelop patient satisfaction and outcomes measurement tools. Theproject will benchmark medical practice activities and establish anational repository of patient satisfaction and outcomes data.Contact MGMA at (303) 799-1111.       Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. partneredwith Compass Information Services Inc. of King of Prussia, Pa., forthe exclusive pharmaceutical rights to distribute the COMPASSsystem, a scientific method for measuring the outcome of ongoingtreatment of mental illness. The system measures a patient'sprogress during treatment by gathering information from the patientand clinician at regular intervals. The analysis of the dataprovides a measurement of response to treatment, which enables theprovider, health plan and third-party payer to evaluate theeffectiveness of the treatment. Contact Bristol-Myers Squibb at(609) 252-4000.       MedPlus Inc. and Medicus SystemsCorp. will jointly market the MedPlus ChartMaxx Electronic PatientRecord System, which increases communication of clinical datawithin an integrated delivery network. Contact MedPlus at (513)583-0500.       An emergency department softwarepackage called Rumpelstiltskin helped the St. Luke's- Memorialemergency department in central New York target patient waits forquality improvement initiatives. Call (607) 674-5729 forinformation about Rumpelstiltskin.       The MedStat Group added datacertification, MedScore satisfaction surveys and accreditationreadiness to its performance measurement services. In other news,MedStat signed multiyear license agreements with Trigon Blue Crossand Blue Shield and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of the NationalCapital Area for the MedStat DataScan system. DataScan supportsHEDIS reporting, network management, utilization management.loss-ratio analysis and enterprisewide decision support. ContactMedStat at (313) 996-1180.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-28IA086-000615-B042-57http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020401 text/html 17657HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:42 GMTContent-length: 17470Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh46.html Sample Issue Copyright SMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWS AND DEVELOPMENTS FROM ACROSS THE NATION... Reform moves to state arena, loses some ground. (148 words) Risk managers want OSHA reform issue resolved. (51 words) "Growing pains" predicted for health care industry in 1996. (33 words) Wellness programs reduce employer health care costs. (68 words) Medical fee schedules most popular cost control measure. (64 words) Poll shows general dissatisfaction with health care. (86 words) Carrier expands comp coverage through new endorsements. (88 words) NEWS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN THE STATES... Health Insurance Plan of California brings in some employers, but many workers still uncovered. (126 words) New York slated for comp reform. (160 words) Concern over ADA kills New Jersey HIV exclusion testing. (53 words) Pennsylvania small businesses urge passage of comp reform bill. (131 words) Other Keystone State bills would clarify emergency coverage for HMO members. (131 words) Ohio Blue Cross/Blue Shield to base copayments on negotiated discounts. (77 words) Florida reform helping many to obtain health care coverage. (78 words) South Carolina comp costs will continue to drop. (127 words) Two more managed care providers adopt 24-hour health hotline. (67 words) Texas comp carriers given rate reduction ultimatum. (166 words) HMO controls costs despite difficult market. (43 words) CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Reform moves to state arena, loses some ground.  With the federal government focusing on other issues, health care reformshifted back to the states, where it suffered some setbacks.  Opposition fromsmall business employers and Republican control of more state legislatures putreform issues on hold or reversed them.  Massachusetts' "play or pay" law,which would have taxed employers who did not offer their workers healthcoverage, was tabled for the third time in seven years.  Washington statedismantled a law requiring employers to pay for group health coverage, andVermont opted out of a single-payer system proposal.  Groundwork was laid,however, for expansion of coverage due to a recent U.S.  Supreme Courtdecision in a New York case.  The court found that a surcharge on hospitalbills is not pre-empted by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.  Otherstates are now expected to enact their own surcharges to fund coverage foruninsured individuals.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Risk managers want OSHA reform issue resolved.  Paul Brown, director of government affairs for the Risk & Insurance ManagementSociety, is hoping that Congress will resolve the issue this year.  "We werehappy to see them take up the OSHA reform issue and look forward to continueworking on developing an adequate reform bill," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996"Growing pains" predicted for health care industry in 1996.  According to business futurist Roger Herman, jobs in health care willincrease, but employee turnover will affect productivity.  Employers will haveto offer better pay and benefits to hold onto employees.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Wellness programs reduce employer health care costs.  A study by the Wellness Program Management Advisor shows that such programscan cut costs by as much as 30 percent.  Thirty-eight percent of respondentssaid that health screenings had the greatest effect on costs.  Nutrition, highblood pressure and stress management were also found to reduce costs.  Onlytwo percent of respondents said they saw a rise in health care expenses afterimplementing wellness programs.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Medical fee schedules most popular cost control measure.  Forty states now use medical fee schedules as a method of containing workers'compensation costs, according to a study by the Workers' Compensation ResearchInstitute.  Hospital payment regulation is used by 35 states, and a change ofprovider limit is used by 32 states.  Restrictions on provider changes is thefastest-growing method of cost containment; 13 states enacted suchrestrictions this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Poll shows general dissatisfaction with health care.  Fewer than 2 in 10 respondents were satisfied with the nation's health caresystem, according to a Louis Harris poll.  Twelve percent said they couldn'tget needed treatment in 1995, and 15 percent had to wait at least a week toget an appointment with a physician.  More than 80 percent of respondents saidthe health care system is too bureaucratized.  Responses were somewhat betterthan a poll taken five years ago, when only 1 in 10 said they were satisfiedwith the system.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Carrier expands comp coverage through new endorsements.  ITT Hartford Insurance Group is now marketing two endorsements which enableemployers to broaden workers' compensation coverage.  The first, available atno extra charge to eligible risks, expands coverage in six different areas,including employers liability stop gap and voluntary compensation.  Thesecond, available at 1.5 to 3 percent of the standard premium, expandscoverage in 11 areas, such as business trips to foreign countries and anincrease in employers' liability bodily injury limits.  It also includes thesix areas covered in the first new endorsement.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Health Insurance Plan of California brings in some employers, but many workersstill uncovered.Although the HIPC has enrolled more than 5,000 employers and covers nearly100,000 workers, uninsured employees are still a problem in the Golden State.In Los Angeles County alone, four out of five are workers or their dependents,according to a study by the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.  A largeshare of L.A.  workers are paid too little to afford coverage, and theiremployers have profit margins too small to provide coverage.  "A relativelylarge group of employers are still marginally profitable, and an incrementalincrease in expenses may put them over the edge," said Richard Figueroa, anHIPC state manager.  Of the employers that the HIPC has signed up during itstwo years of operation, only 20 percent were previously uninsured.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996New York slated for comp reform.  In his state of the state address, Gov.  George Pataki called for majorchanges in many of the state's programs and procedures, including workers'compensation and unemployment insurance.  The National Federation ofIndependent Business applauded the governor's message.  "It's not just thestate and local taxes that have dulled small business growth, " said Mark P.Alesse, NFIB's state director.  "Costly employer mandates like workers' compand UI have depressed small business job creation, too.  With real reform thissession, we are confident that small business will respond with substantialnew job opportunities."  The New York Workers' Compensation Action Network,which represents 7,000 businesses statewide, praised the governor's plan toimplement a managed care system, a reform the group has sought for severalyears.  Senate Democratic Leader Martin Connor was not as confident.  "Thegovernor forgets to mention that his health care plans will probably lead tothe closing of many hospitals and thousands of layoffs," he warned.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Concern over ADA kills New Jersey HIV exclusion testing.  The proposed regulation would have enabled group health insurers to test forthe human immunodeficiency virus and deny coverage based on test results(SNCHB 10-23-95).  Insurance Commissioner Elizabeth Randall said that theproposal most likely violated the Americans with Disabilities Act, as well asstate insurance regulations that bar unfair discrimination.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Pennsylvania small businesses urge passage of comp reform bill.  H.B.  2216, up before the state legislature this session, would reduceworkers' compensation costs for smaller employers currently facing increasesunder the proposed "loss cost" filing.  The bill would change calculation ofaverage weekly wages to reflect actual yearly earnings; offset benefits by theamount received in Social Security, pension, and severance benefits; prohibitpayment of disability benefits when the worker is earning wages equal to orgreater than pre-injury wages; provide safe employer discounts of five percenton annual premiums; and permit employers to control medical care for 180 daysinstead of 30 days.  Nearly 5,000 businesses are participating in thecampaign, spearheaded by SMC Business Councils, the Pennsylvania BusinessAssociation and the Chamber Summit.  Small businesses make up over 95 percentof all businesses in the state.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Other Keystone State bills would clarify emergency coverage for HMO members.State Senators Roy C.  Afflerbach and Jim Gerlach have introduced two billsthat would broaden emergency room treatment coverage for members of healthmaintenance organizations.  The Gerlach bill would define an emergency for thepurposes of insurance coverage, and the Afflerbach bill would guaranteeemergency care to stabilize the patient, including 24-hour authorizationaccess for members.  The senators are responding to complaints from patientswhose managed health care providers have refused to pay for emergencytreatment when the symptoms were later determined not to constitute anemergency under the medical insurers definition.  "Common sense tells you thatpeople with perfectly good health insurance don't get up in the middle of thenight and rush to the hospital unless they honestly believe they are having amedical emergency," said Afflerbach.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Ohio Blue Cross/Blue Shield to base copayments on negotiated discounts.  After a long year of complaints and court battles, the Blues have stopped thepractice of basing insured copayments on regular hospital rates rather thanthe discounted rates the Blues actually pay.  And starting the first of thismonth, Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Ohio will incorporate the discounts intocopayment billings.  Still pending is a court case in Toledo, where a federaljudge is still to decide whether the Blues must pay restitution to insureds.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Florida reform helping many to obtain health care coverage.  Since its formation in 1994, the Community Health Purchasing Alliance hasenrolled over 14,000 businesses in the state, covering more than 63,000individuals.  The CHPA is a non-profit group designed to help small businessesof 1 to 50 employees afford to offer health insurance to their workers.Purchasing alliances for small businesses are currently available in 15states.  With more alliances in the process of forming, the number of statesis expected to climb to 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996South Carolina comp costs will continue to drop.  The National Council on Compensation Insurance reports that slow economicgrowth and a move toward trade and service jobs will continue to lower thestate's workers' comp costs.  Key factors are a decline in defense and othermanufacturing industries such as textiles, similar to the changes in theNortheast.  As workers shift to less hazardous jobs, comp costs will continueto decrease.  "Workers' compensation voluntary loss costs fell 13.9 percent in1995 and residual market rates dropped by 1.9 percent," said William D.Hager, NCCI president.  South Carolina's lower unemployment rate has also hada positive impact on comp costs, dropping from 7.5 percent in 1993 to 5.0percent in 1995.  The rate is expected to remain below 5.2 percent over thenext two years.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Two more managed care providers adopt 24-hour health hotline.  Minnesota's Care on Call provides callers with treatment for their symptomsover the phone.  Developed jointly by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesotaand HealthSystem Minnesota, the service puts callers through to registerednurses who use physician-approved guidelines to treat non-emergencyconditions, similar to medical hotlines in other states (SNCHB, 10-9-95).  Thenurses also phone in prescriptions and set up doctor appointments for callers.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Texas comp carriers given rate reduction ultimatum.  The Texas Department of Insurance gave insurers until February 1 to cut orjustify their workers' compensation rates or prepare for possible rollbackhearings.  Letters were sent to 17 insurer groups that write workers' comp inthe state, including Aetna, Allstate, Nationwide, Reliance and Zurich.  Thesegroups have 74 companies that write comp coverage, accounting for a seventh ofthe state's market.  "The carriers have known for months of my concern thatworkers' compensation rates are too high," said Insurance Commissioner EltonBomer, "particularly rates for small businesses."  He added that although someinsurers have reduced their rates due to savings created from a 1989 reformlaw, more than a few have not responded.  "Some carriers have persisted incharging rates that ignore the vastly improved claim situation," Bomer said."TDI's patience has worn thin, and we're carrying out the responsibility theLegislature gave us to challenge excessive rates."  An analysis by TDI showedcomp rates were too high by 4 to 17 percent.Back to Headline List CopyrightSMART'S NATIONAL COMP & HEALTH BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996HMO controls costs despite difficult market.  Foundation Health Corp.  plans to stay healthy even in California's toughclimate.  The health maintenance organization is using physicians in Arizonaand California that actually lose money, but then compensates them byregistering them for shares in Foundation stock.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-29IA086-000615-B042-89http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh45.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020440 text/html 100350HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:42 GMTContent-length: 100162Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh45.html Sample Issue Copyright TB WEEKLY via NewsNet December 25, 1995 & January 1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWS REPORTS . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Infection Control TB and AIDS Programs - Natural Partners or Not? (781 words) Animal Models Mouse Model Useful for Determining TB Pathology (569 words) Conference Coverage (ACTG) "New" ACTG Moves Forward (654 words) Conference Coverage (ACTG) Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG (384 words) Disease Markers Increased Soluble CD14 Useful Marker in TB Patients (305 words) Drug Screening Particle Counting Assay Evaluates TB Drugs (247 words) Epidemiology (TB) Old Infection May Be Responsible for Clustered TB in Arkansas (345 words) Occupational Exposure (TB) Most TB in New York HCWs Due to Recent Infections (588 words) Occupational Exposure (TB) Product Simplifies Compliance with Guidelines for TB Exposure (381 words) Pediatrics Hepatic Toxicity Reversible in TB-Treated Children (238 words) Prophylaxis (TB) Isoniazid-Based Therapy Useful Despite Hepatotoxicity (700 words) Therapy Levofloxacin More Active than Ofloxacin in In Vitro Study (485 words) Transmission (TB) Primary School Teacher in Amsterdam Infects 19 Students (385 words) RESEARCH FROM CONFERENCES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Diagnostics "Accuracy of Chest Radiograph Interpretation in the Diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii Pneumonia, Bacterial Pneumonia, and Pulmonary Tuberculosis in HIV Positive Patients." P.M. Boiselle, I. Tocino, R.J. Hooley, A.S. (261 words) Diagnostics "Differentiation Between Tuberculosis and Malignant Lymphoma in Abdominal Lymph Nodes with Contrast-Enhanced CT." Z.G. Yang, P.Q. Min, Z.Y. He and X.P. Choc. Chengdu, China. (243 words) Diagnostics (TB) "CT in Craniovertebral Tuberculosis." T.B. Buxi, R. Vohra, S. Yerramsetty, P.S. Maini, A.K. Kochbar and V. Madan. New Delhi, India. (217 words) Diagnostics (TB) "Effect of HIV Status on Chest CT Findings In Patients with Tuberculosis." L.B. Haramati, E.R. Jenny-Avital and D.D. Alterman. Bronx, New York. (105 words) Diagnostics (TB) "Imaging and Intervention of Genitourinary Tuberculosis: Revisited." S.H. Kim, Y.K. Jeong, K.M. Yeon and M.C. Han. Seoul, South Korea. (149 words) Diagnostics (TB) "Musculoskeletal Tuberculosis: MR Imaging Manifestations." H.S. Kang, J. Ahn, S.M. Kim and J.W. Ryoo. Seoul, South Korea. (119 words) Diagnostics (TB) "Sites of Tuberculous Involvement in AIDS Patients: Correlation with Gallium Scans." H.M. Abdel-Dayem, S.Y. Naddaf, B. Mina, M.S. Aziz, L. DiFabrizio and J.S. Kempf et al. New York, New York. (162 words) Immunology (TB) "Regulation of the Human Cellular Immune Response in Tuberculosis." J.J. Ellner. Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. (367 words) Infection Control (TB) "Behavioral Factors in Tuberculosis Control." E. Sumartojo. Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia. (368 words) JOURNAL ARTICLE SUMMARIES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Biochemical Fossati, G.; Lucietto, P.; Giuliani, P.; Coates, A.R.; Harding, S.; Colfen, H.; Legname, G.; Chan, E.; Zaliani, A.; Mascagni, P. "Mycobacterium tuberculosis Chaperonin 10 Forms Stable Tetrameric and Heptameric Structures (244 words) Biochemical George, K.M.; Yuan, Y.; Sherman, D.R.; Barry, C.E. "The Biosynthesis of Cyclopropanated Mycolic Acids in Mycobacterium tuberculosis - Identification and Functional Analysis of Cmas-2." Journal of Biological Chemistry, November (234 words) Diagnostics Anderson, C.; Inhaber, N.; Menzies, D. "Comparison of Sputum Induction with Fiber-Optic Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis." American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1570-1574. (257 words) Diagnostics Dunlap, N.E.; Harris, R.H.; Benjamin, W.H.; Harden, J.W.; Hafner, D. "Laboratory Contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Cultures." American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November (235 words) Drug Resistance Rouse, D.A.; Li, Z.M.; Bai, G.H.; Morris, S.L. "Characterization of the katG and inhA genes of Isoniazid-Resistant Clinical Isolates of Mycobacterium tuberculosis." Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, November (237 words) Pediatrics (TB) Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A. "Does the Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin Reaction?." American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, (277 words) Pharmacoeconomics Castelo, A.; Mathiasi, P.A.; Iunes, R.; Kritski, A.L.; Dalcolmo, M.; Demelo, F.F.; Drummond, M. "Cost Effectiveness of Antituberculosis Interventions." Pharmacoeconomics, November 1995;8(5):385-399. (379 words) Screening Taneja, R.; Merritt, S.; Vanek, S.; Passannante, M.; Livingston, D.H. "Tuberculin Screening of Trauma Admissions at a University Hospital: A Preventive Strategy." Archives of Surgery, November 1995;130(11):1223-1227. (349 words) TB/HIV Coinfection Pozniak, A.L.; Macleod, G.A.; Ndlovu, D.; Ross, E.; Mahari, M.; Weinberg, J. "Clinical and Chest Radiographic Features of Tuberculosis Associated with Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Zimbabwe." American Journal of Respiratory (196 words) Therapy (Hepatotoxicity) Vandenbrande, P.; Vansteenbergen, W.; Vervoort, G.; Demedts, M. "Aging and Hepatotoxicity of Isoniazid and Rifampin in Pulmonary Tuberculosis." American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November (275 words) Therapy (Hepatotoxicity) Ozick, L.A.; Jacob, L.; Comer, G.M.; Lee, T.P.; Benzvi, J.; Donelson, S.S.; Felton, C.P. "Hepatotoxicity from Isoniazid and Rifampin in Inner-City AIDS Patients." American Journal of Gastroenterology, November (231 words) MEETINGS REPORT *NEW LISTINGS . . . COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY (808 words) CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Infection ControlTB and AIDS Programs - Natural Partners or Not?Can tuberculosis and AIDS prevention and treatment programs be successfullycombined?The question was debated during a tuberculosis (TB) conference in Paris withresearchers expressing differing views.D.A.  Enarson of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease(IUATLD) argued that tuberculosis and AIDS prevention services are less thancompatible, because they target different groups."Tuberculosis prevention is a medical services related activity whereas HIVprevention is a general population activity," Enarson noted."Because of the difference in the point of implementation of the two programs,attempts to combine them are difficult."Enarson made the remarks at the 1995 annual meeting of the IUATLD Conferenceon Global Lung Health, held in Paris, France.Enarson noted that while the goal of TB and HIV prevention programs is thesame - to prevent infections - the focus must be different."In the case of tuberculosis, prevention is based on a strategy of casemanagement in which infectious cases are found and treated, thereby preventingtransmission from the source (the sick patient)," Enarson noted in an abstractpresented at the conference.  "This is the only means of primary prevention.Persons with the infection who are not sick almost never transmit theinfection to others.  With HIV infection, transmission occurs from an infectedperson who usually has no clinical evidence of the infection."Prevention of transmission of this infection is, in general, based on generalhealth education aimed at behavior modification, Thus, the point ofimplementation of the two programs is quite different:  for HIV, the point ofimplementation must be the general population of subsets of it."R.  O'Brien of the World Health Organization's Global Tuberculosis Programcountered that collaboration between AIDS and tuberculosis programs isessential if services for already-infected persons are to be efficientlyimplement."Isoniazid preventive therapy for co-infected persons may be highly effective,but little work on its programmatic application has been undertaken," O'Briennoted.  "Testing of TB patients for HIV may provide for better patient careand help reduce HIV transmission, but voluntary testing with counselling isnot widely available."O'Brien noted that virtually no home-based care programs for AIDS patientswith TB exist, even though these programs may help alleviate the burden on TBprograms and prevent further TB transmission in households.O'Brien also found efforts to control nosocomial transmission of tuberculosisto be lacking."AIDS and TB programs have unique expertise and orientations which togethercan address the problems," he wrote in an abstract presented to the IUATLDmeeting."Unfortunately, until now these factors have been used as excuses for workingseparately rather than for seeking fruitful collaboration.  However, TB is nowrecognized as the most important opportunistic infection and cause of death inHIV infected persons worldwide.  TB and HIV/AIDS programs can no longer bepermitted to function in isolation and must collaborate to improve care andpreventive services for those suffering from this 'deadly duo'."The World Health Organization's E.  van Praag agreed that home-care programsfor people with AIDS offer unique opportunities to control tuberculosis indeveloping areas."Over the last few years initiatives to set up community-based or home careprograms for people and families living with HIV/AIDS have mushroomedrapidly," van Praag wrote in an abstract of a presentation to the IUATLDconference.  "In countries heavily affected by HIV/AIDS, between 50-100different home care programs can be identified (Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe,Thailand).  These initiatives are a response to needs felt by HIV affectedfamilies, communities and health staff in environments where hospitals canscarcely cope and economic survival and social status of those families haveseriously deteriorated, due to AIDS."More than half of the people with HIV related illness will developtuberculosis.  Early recognition of tuberculosis and chances to completetreatment are again hampered by limited collaboration within various healthcare programs and by AIDS specific issues such as recurrent illnesses andreduced income to afford frequent return visits.  Opportunities exist withinhome care programs where peripheral health and social staff are in closecontact with patients and family care givers to early recognize TB diseaseamong HIV infected and affected family members.  Home care staff could providedrugs, supervise DOT and educate families and communities about HIV and TBprevention and care.  Projects in Ghana, Zimbabwe and South Africa havealready implemented joint TB and AIDS home care programs."Researcher D.A.  Enarson is from the IUATLD, Paris, France.  R.  O'Brien andE.  van Praag are from the Global Tuberculosis Program and the Global Programon AIDS, World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Animal ModelsMouse Model Useful for Determining TB PathologyA murine study suggests that Mycobacterium tuberculosis is far more virulentwhen given by the respiratory route than by the intravenous route.Researcher Robert J.  North of New York's Trudeau Institute earlier reportedthat intravenous inoculation of mice with M.  tuberculosis results in a slowlyprogressive infection in the lungs, despite the acquisition of systemic hostimmunity capable of resolving infection in the liver, spleen and kidneys."The present study was undertaken to determine whether the peculiarsusceptibility of the lungs to M.  tuberculosis infection is even more obviousin mice infected via the respiratory route," North wrote ("M.  tuberculosis isStrikingly More Virulent for Mice When Given via the Respiratory than via theIntravenous Route," Journal of Infectious Diseases, December1995;172:1550-1553).North found that fewer M.  tuberculosis colony-forming units (cfu) given byaerosol were substantially more virulent for mice than much larger numbersinoculated intravenously, as shown by a faster rate of bacillary growth in thelungs and much shorter survival of the host."Earlier death of mice infected by aerosol was associated with fasterdevelopment of lung pathology, even though the number of M.  tuberculosisgiven intravenously resulted in the same number of bacilli initiallyimplanting in the lungs as the number given by aerosol," North wrote.  "Micedepleted of CD4 T cells died of infection much sooner than immunocompetentmice but at about the same time after being infected via either route."North noted that mice infected by aerosol, in contrast with those given M.tuberculosis intravenously were incapable of resolving infection in theirlivers, indicating that they generated and expressed a lower level of systemicimmunity."This interpretation is in keeping with the finding that mice depleted of CD4T cells died at about the same time after infection was initiated via eitherroute and much earlier than immunocompetent controls," North wrote.  "Inaddition, the survival time of mice infected via the respiratory route wasgreatly extended if they were also infected intravenously with a larger numberof M.  tuberculosis.  Thus, a larger number of M.  tuberculosis cfu givenintravenously induces a higher level of systemic immunity than does a smallernumber given by aerosol.  This likely occurs because a larger intravenousinoculum represents a larger quantity of replicating antigen capable ofengaging larger amounts of lymphoid tissue, including that in the spleen."North concludes that bacilli that reach the lungs via the respiratory routehave a growth advantage over those that enter from blood during the initialstage of infection."This may be because microorganisms that enter the lung via the respiratoryroute are ingested by resident alveolar macrophages, whereas those that enterfrom the blood need to be carried into the organ after being ingested bymonocytes, neutrophils, or pulmonary intravascular macrophages."Given that resident alveolar macrophages tend to be less capable than othermacrophages of killing microbial pathogens in general, it is possible thatthis enables M.  tuberculosis to grow more rapidly during the initial stage ofinfection.  Results of the present study support this concept in that M.tuberculosis that entered the lung directly grew faster during the first 20days of infection than did M.  tuberculosis that entered from blood."The corresponding author for this study is Robert J.  North, TrudeauInstitute, Inc., P.O.  Box 59, Saranac Lake, New York 12983. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Conference Coverage (ACTG)"New" ACTG Moves ForwardCan the main clinical trials group in the U.S.  shed its image as a dinosaurtoo large and slow-moving to respond to new developments in AIDS therapies?According to the chair of the group's Adult Executive Committee - Universityof Colorado researcher Robert "Chip" Schooley - recent reorganization hasaccomplished this objective.  Schooley made his remarks during the TwentiethAIDS Clinical Trials Group Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington,D.C.The AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) is the arm of the U.S.  NationalInstitute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division of AIDS (DAIDS)responsible for testing new treatments for HIV disease and its complications.But the group - particularly the division responsible for testing drugs inadults - has been severely criticized for lacking central control and formoving far too slowly to provide answers to pressing questions about AIDStherapies.DAIDS recently completed a top-to-bottom evaluation and reorganization of theACTG.  In a plenary address to the group's first general meeting since thechanges took effect, Schooley acknowledged that many of the criticisms werevalid, but also stressed the group's many achievements."We've been through a lot of self and external evaluation," Schooley said."But there are a lot of things right with this organization.  This is thepreeminent clinical organization in the world.  We have put together atremendous organization to deal with a disease we all are tired of."Schooley noted that four years ago only one drug had been approved for thetreatment of primary HIV infection and that today, largely due to ACTGefforts, there are five such drugs with a sixth on the way."This organization will play a major role in understanding how these drugswork," he said.  "We have a tremendous opportunity to move along quickly."Schooley noted that recent ACTG studies have defined a role for combinationtherapy with the nucleoside analog didanosine (ddI) and for the use of the newprotease inhibitor saquinavir.He promised that the ACTG would make increased use of new laboratory findings"to tell us what we need to do."The "new" ACTG will collaborate more closely with DAIDS, Schooley said.  Butmost importantly, the ACTG will streamline and simplify the process by whichit generates clinical trial protocols."One of the things we were appropriately criticized for was behaving likecivil servants," Schooley said, referring to previous bureaucratic processesthat prevented the rapid testing of new treatments in a clinical setting.The organization of the ACTG has been streamlined so that the adult sectionhas only three committees making research decisions.  These three ResearchAgenda Committees (RACs) are the HIV Disease RAC, the Immunology RAC, and theOpportunistic Disease RAC.  Committees that were once separate RACs - thePharmacology Committee, the Women's Health Committee, and the Patient CareCommittee - will now be established as standing resource committees withineach of the three main RACs.There will be two major changes in how the ACTG functions:  there will becentralized control of both resources and laboratories.Resources will now be controlled directly by those planning and executing theACTG scientific agenda via a Scientific Agenda Steering Committee comprised ofthe various committee chairs.Laboratories previously operated independently of the research committees,receiving their funds directly from DAIDS."Now scientific committees will directly control the labs," Schooley said.  "Ithink this will work very well."But the executive committee chair warned that the ACTG would continue tochange."Four years from now this will be a very different organization than now," hesaid.  "The changes have been good, they have been enabling."He called for the active participation of each investigator."Two thousand people thinking will get more done than just a few executivecommittee members," Schooley said. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Conference Coverage (ACTG)Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTGMany institutions conducting AIDS clinical trials have been unable to find andkeep study participants.A study of 28 institutions participating in U.S.  government-sponsoredclinical trials showed that 18 of the sites (64 percent) failed to meet theirpatient accrual goals.The study, conducted by Washington University researcher Michael Klebert andcolleagues, was presented at the Twentieth AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG)Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington, D.C.  The ACTG Patient CareCommittee, a resource committee of the ACTG executive committee, performed thestudy."Adequate recruitment and retention are essential in conducting successfulclinical trials," Klebert said.Of 35 participating ACTG sites queried anonymously, 28 participated in thestudy.  Except that they tended to be located on the east coast,nonparticipating sites were not significantly different in terms of size orpatient demographics from participating institutions.Surprisingly, the study found that the number of recruitment strategies usedby a study site was not related to meeting recruitment and retention goals.Strategies positively correlated with successful patient recruitment andretention were provision of child care, education of patients, provision ofpeer advocates for patients, and payment via cash or vouchers.  Provision ofsupport groups was negatively correlated with success.More than half of the sites identified study design as a barrier torecruitment.  Nearly 40 percent of the sites said that barriers to successfulrecruitment were lack of outreach and cultural sensitivity.The sites with the worst recruitment/retention problems tended not to combineprimary care with study-protocol visits.  But high proportions of minoritypatients or high proportions of patients using intravenous drugs was notassociated with poor recruitment or retention.The major barriers to patient retention were the use of unpopular or too manydrugs in the study, high frequency of visits, and the availability ofalternative drugs.Based on the study findings, Klebert made several recommendations to improvepatient recruitment and retention:*  Combine primary care and research visits.*  Promote a strong relationship between the study nurse and patients.*  Provide transportation to the study site.*  Ask patients about factors that might interfere with their participation.*  Design studies to address retention problems.*  Study identified problem sites in detail. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Disease MarkersIncreased Soluble CD14 Useful Marker in TB PatientsIncreased levels of soluble CD14 are present in bronchoalveolar lavagesupernatant of pulmonary tuberculosis patients.CD14 was first identified as a marker of cells derived from themonocyte/macrophage lineage, although it was later found on other cells likeneutrophils and B lymphocytes.  The cell surface glycoprotein serves as acellular receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide withlipopolysaccharide-binding protein.Soluble CD14 (sCD14) is present in normal plasma and is found increased inserum of patients with septicemia, polytrauma, and sarcoidosis.  In pulmonarysarcoidosis, increased levels of soluble CD14 have been detected in serum andin bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.  In this study researcher Gerhard Hoheiseland colleagues attempted to determine whether increased levels of CD14 arealso found in pulmonary tuberculosis ("Increased Soluble CD14 Levels inBronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid in Primary TB," Chest, December1995;108:1614-1616).Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in 12 patients with active but untreatedpulmonary tuberculosis and 12 healthy persons.  Cytologic and immunologiccharacteristics were determined.  sCD14 was measured by a sandwichenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay."The level of soluble CD14 in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis wasincreased compared with controls (mean +/- 34.4 +/- ng/mL versus 11.5 +/- 22ng/mL)," Hoheisel et al.  wrote."No correlation was found between sCD14 levels and bronchoalveolar lavagesupernatant of pulmonary tuberculosis patients.  We conclude that similar topatients with sarcoidosis, increased BAL fluid levels of sCD14 are found inpatients with active pulmonary tuberculosis compared with controls.  Moreover,this finding might signal a similar immunopathogenetic process contributing togranuloma formation in both diseases.  Further studies of respective cellsurface markers and endogenous cytokine production seem necessary to determinethe significance and clinical relevance of this finding."The corresponding author for this study is Gerhard Hoheisel, Department ofPneumology, Ruhrlandklink, Tuschener Weg 40, D-45239. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Drug ScreeningParticle Counting Assay Evaluates TB DrugsA particle counting immunoassay developed in Belgium appears to offer a rapidand inexpensive method for screening antituberculosis agents.Researcher J.P.  Van Vooren and colleagues from the University of Brusselsdeveloped the method based on particle counting immunoassay to detectmycobacteria in clinical specimens."We adapted this procedure to test the efficiency of antimicrobial agentsagainst M.  tuberculosis," Van Vooren et al.  wrote in an abstract presentedto the 1995 annual meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis andLung Disease (IUATLD), held in Paris, France.The latex particles used in the technique were coated with polyclonal anti-BCGto detect mycobacterial antigens.Four drug-susceptible, five multi-resistant and three isoniazid-resistant M.tuberculosis strains were inoculated in bottles containing nonradioactiveMiddlebrook 7H9 liquid medium and rifampin or isoniazid.To lessen risk of contamination the mycobacteria were destroyed in anautoclave between culture and subsequent manipulations.  Drug susceptibilitieswere measured and those obtained with the BACTEC system were criticallycompared.  For each of the 12 strains drug sensitivities were found comparablein the two methods and could be determined after five days."We conclude that particle immunoassay gives access to a safe, reproducible,fast and inexpensive nonradioactive procedure to screen drug sensitivities formycobacterial strains," Van Vooren et al.  wrote in an abstract presented tothe IUATLD meeting.The corresponding author for this study is J.P.  Van Vooren, Hopital Erasme,Universite Libre de Bruxelles. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Epidemiology (TB)Old Infection May Be Responsible for Clustered TB in ArkansasFingerprint clustering in large rural geographic areas may not representrecent tuberculosis transmission, according to a report from the U.S.  Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Arkansas Department ofHealth.Researcher C.R.  Braden and colleagues reported the findings at the 1995annual meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and LungDisease (IUATLD).Previous studies have suggested that M.  tuberculosis isolates with similarDNA fingerprints represent recent transmission of tuberculosis (TB) betweenpatients.In this study DNA fingerprinting and conventional epidemiology techniques wereused to identify connections, recent and remote, among clustered patients.M.  tuberculosis isolates obtained from Arkansas residents diagnosed in 1992and 1993 were analyzed by DNA fingerprinting.  For clustered patients, healthdepartment and laboratory records were established by identifying directexposure among cluster members or by placing cluster members in the samelocation when TB transmission could have occurred.A total of 338 culture positive cases of TB were identified.  Fingerprintswere obtained on isolates from 248 (73 percent).  Of these, 137 (55 percent)grouped into 35 clusters.  Fingerprints had from two to 17 bands.  Clustersizes ranged from two to 15 patients and 15 clusters had only two patients.Connections were found for all patients in seven (20 percent) clusters, somein eight (23 percent) clusters and none in 20 (57 percent) clusters.Twelve clusters, including the two largest, had fingerprints with five or lessbands.  Some or all patients were linked in 57 percent of clusters whoseisolates had fingerprints with more than five bands, but only 13 percent ofthose with fingerprints with five or less bands."For most clusters, conventional epidemiologic methods did not identifyopportunities for TB transmission among cluster patients," Braden et al.wrote.  "Fingerprint clustering in a large rural geographic area may notrepresent recent transmission and DNA fingerprint patterns with five or lessbands may lack specificity."The corresponding author for this study is C.R.  Braden, Arkansas Departmentof Health, Little Rock, Arkansas. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Occupational Exposure (TB)Most TB in New York HCWs Due to Recent InfectionsA finding that most tuberculosis cases among health care workers in a New Yorkstudy were due to recent infections suggests that occupational transmission oftuberculosis routinely occurs in facilities without recognized tuberculosis(TB) outbreaks, according to Cornell University's Public Health ResearchInstitute.A number of nosocomial outbreaks of tuberculosis occurred across the UnitedStates during 1990 and 1991, resulting in several deaths among personnel incontact with infected patients.  These outbreaks prompted the issuance of newguidelines for health care workers from the U.S.  Centers for Disease Controland Prevention (CDC)."Since (the implementation of the CDC guidelines) there have been relativelyfew reported outbreaks, which suggests that current control measures may beeffective," researcher Kent A Sepkowitz and colleagues wrote ("TB Among UrbanHealth Care Workers:  A Study Using Restriction Fragment Length PolymorphismTyping," Clinical Infectious Diseases, November 1995;21:1098-1102)."However, it is not known whether the apparently sporadic cases oftuberculosis in health care workers are due to occupationally acquiredinfections or, as a recent study suggested, are more likely due tocommunity-acquired infections.  In addition, the risk for HIV infectedpersonnel is not well defined, although some have suggested that HIV infectedhealth care workers should have the option of being assigned to an areaassociated with a low risk of exposure to tuberculosis."In this study Sepkowitz and colleagues at New York's Cornell UniversityMedical College analyzed cases of tuberculosis using laboratory-based activesurveillance system for TB at six hospitals in New York City (members of theTBNetwork).Cases of tuberculosis identified during 1992 to 1994 were analyzed accordingto the occupational status of the patients.The researchers reviewed medical records and restriction fragment lengthpolymorphism (RFLP) typing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates wasperformed."No known nosocomial outbreaks of tuberculosis occurred at these hospitals inthe study period," Sepkowitz et al.  wrote.  "Occupational status was knownfor 142 of 201 patients whose isolates were available for strain typing.Patients infected by organisms with a clustered strain typing pattern, asdetermined by RFLP analysis, were presumed to have recently acquired disease."RFLP typing revealed that isolates from 13 (65 percent) of 20 health careworkers and 50 (41 percent) of 122 non-health care workers had a clusteredRFLP pattern.Multivariate analysis of 75 patients with known HIV and occupational statusrevealed that HIV status and health care worker status were independent riskfactors for a clustered RFLP strain.The recent transmission rate of 65 percent outlined by Sepkowitz et al.  isgreater than that seen among health care workers with tuberculosis in Bern,Switzerland, San Francisco, California, or the Bronx, New York.Sepkowitz et al.  conclude that many apparently sporadic cases of tuberculosisamong health care workers may be due to unrecognized occupationaltransmission.The authors note, however, that the cases analyzed in their report probablyreflect transmissions that occurred prior to the time hospitals updatedinfection control procedures."Our data suggest that occupational transmission of tuberculosis occurs inhospitals without recognized outbreaks," Sepkowitz et al.  wrote.  "Healthcare workers with HIV infection appear to be at particular risk.  ProspectiveRFLP-based studies will be useful to confirm these findings and may helpdetermine the efficacy of current guidelines for preventing transmission oftuberculosis in health care settings."The corresponding author for this study is Kent A.  Sepkowitz, InfectionDisease Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, NewYork, New York 10021. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Occupational Exposure (TB)Product Simplifies Compliance with Guidelines for TB ExposureUvex Safety, Inc., Smithfield, Rhode Island, has introduced a new family ofN95 disposable particulate respirators designed to help healthcare andemergency medical organizations comply with recently-enacted regulations forrespiratory protection for workers exposed to tuberculosis (TB).The uvex/Pro-Tech N95 respirators enable users of existing uvex HEPA-Techrespirators to update their equipment at about half the cost withoutfit-testing for employees.  Because they have the same physical design, theuvex N95 respirators allow users to switch without a re-fit test if they havebeen trained and fit tested with the HEPA-Tech models.Featuring a 95 percent efficient filter media, the N95 respirators meet thenew NIOSH test criteria for particulate respiratory filters (42 CFR Part 84).In addition, they comply with the new U.S.  Center for Disease Control andPrevention (CDC) guidelines for respiratory protection against occupationalexposure to TB.  Available in three sizes and capable ofqualitative/quantitative fit testing as well as reliable fit checking, theyalso meet all performance criteria in the new OSHA enforcement policies for TBprotection.There are currently two models in the uvex/Pro-Tech N95 product family, bothof which feature adjustable top and bottom head straps as well as a patentedfoam sealing flange.* The Model 4010 is an entry level respirator designed for medicalenvironments that do not permit open exhalation of respiratory aerosols.* The Model 4Al0 includes an exhalation valve that streamlines exhaled air outof the facepiece, making it cooler and more comfortable to wear."Now that OSHA has adopted the CDC guidelines into regulation, the healthcarefield has a new alternative for TB protection," explains uvex industrialhygienist Michael Fuchs.  "In many cases, the new regulations enable employersto make an across-the-board change from existing HEPA respirators to the newN95 models.  But in large facilities and organizations, this can prove to be atime-consuming problem for safety officials."With its new N95 respirators, uvex is making the transition easier and lesscostly for its customers.  Users who have been fit-tested for uvex HEPA-Techrespirators can simply switch to similar sized uvex N95 models with noqualitative or quantitative fit testing ...  at about half the cost of theHepa-Tech 3010 Series.  The switch will be quick and simple."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Pediatrics Hepatic Toxicity Reversible in TB-Treated ChildrenHepatic toxicity in children treated for tuberculosis in Macedonia was lesssevere and long lasting when preventive measures were undertaken.Researcher L.  Jakovski and colleagues from Macedonia's Institute forRespiratory Diseases in Children compared hepatic toxicity during two periods(1974 to 1982 and 1986 to 1994).Their study was presented at the 1995 annual meeting of the InternationalUnion Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD) , held in Paris, France.Investigations were performed before the beginning of treatment and each 15days after treatment was begun (during hospitalization).Of the 1521 patients treated for tuberculosis between 1974 and 1982, 118 haddisturbed hepatic function (7.76 percent).  In the group of 917 childrentreated between 1986 and 1994, 29 had disturbed hepatic function (3.16percent).Jakovski et al.  found that there were 2.5 times fewer hepatic disturbances inthe second group of patients.  The majority of toxicities occurred in the 0-2year old age group during both periods.Combination therapy with isoniazid, rifampin and pyrazinamide was thetreatment regimen which caused the most adverse reactions.During the second treatment period patients were given hepatoprotective drugsand toxic reactions were monitored carefully.In all cases during both treatment periods there was recovery of hepaticfunction.The corresponding author for this study is L.  Jakovski, Institute forRespiratory Diseases in Children, Skopje, Macedonia. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Prophylaxis (TB)Isoniazid-Based Therapy Useful Despite HepatotoxicityProphylactic isoniazid therapy is beneficial to all patients with pulmonaryfibrotic lesions compatible with previous tuberculosis (TB), despite the riskof potentially life-threatening complications such as hepatitis, according toa report from Switzerland.The report warns, however, that it is still unclear whether the benefits ofsuch therapy outweigh possible side-effects.Tuberculosis reactivation is increased among patients with chest X-raysshowing untreated fibrotic lesions suggestive of healed, previous TB(so-called fibrotic lesions)."Prophylactic treatment with a six to 12-month course of isoniazid (INH) hasproven effective in these cases, giving about 70 percent protection rateagainst reactivation of TB," researcher F.P.  Sarasin and colleagues wrote("Isoniazid Preventive Therapy for Pulmonary Tuberculosis Sequelae:  WhichPatients Up to Which Age?"  Tubercle and Lung Disease, 1995;76:394-400)."Nonetheless, whether the benefit of isoniazid outweighs it potentiallylife-threatening side effects (isoniazid-induced hepatitis) in all age groups,and in patients with coexisting diseases that limit life expectancy such assevere chronic heart failure (CHF) or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), a frequent clinical situation, remains unstudied."Earlier studies have focused on recommendations for prophylactic isoniazidamong patients with positive tuberculin skin test reactions only.  None,however, has specifically addressed recommendations regarding persons withfibrotic lesions discovered on chest X-ray.In this study Sarasin et al.  conducted a Markov-based decision analysis modelwhich balances the risk of recurrent TB against TB-related mortality,incidence of isoniazid-related hepatitis, and isoniazid-related death.They also sought to determine the optimal strategy between a six- to 12-monthcourse of prophylactic isoniazid and therapeutic abstention in different agegroups and in patients with severe coexisting diseases that limit lifeexpectancy such as CHF or COPD."The core of our decision tree was a model representing the natural history ofuntreated patients with pulmonary tuberculosis sequelae," Sarasin et al.wrote.  "Over time, they may die from different age- or gender-related causes,or develop early or late TB and die from it.  Whether these patients maybenefit from prophylactic isoniazid involves weighing the trade-offs betweenthe short term risks of isoniazid-related complications and avoidance of TBreactivation, a benefit that may be accrued over the short or the long term,depending on when TB occurs."The Markov decision analysis found that in all groups of patients,prophylactic isoniazid clearly reduced the number of deaths from tuberculosis,whereas very few cases died from isoniazid-related toxicity.  However, becauseisoniazid-related deaths occur early, and TB-related deaths can occur early orlate, the gain in life expectancy was small."Particularly for patients with short survival such as those older than 80years and those with CHF or COPD, the average gain in life expectancy providedby prophylactic isoniazid did not exceed on week," Sarasin et al.  wrote."When the gains in life expectancy provided by prophylactic isoniazid aresmall and may not be considered clinically relevant, the optimal therapeuticdecision becomes a toss-up.  In clinical practice, toss-ups will undoubted beinterpreted differently by the physicians, the patients, and the health careplanners.  While physicians will focus on the patient's attitude toward risk(risk-aversion versus risk-seeking profile) and on therapeutic observance,patients will pay much more attention to the quality of life associated withisoniazid therapy, and specifically the inconvenience of taking medication,office visits, and laboratory tests.  On the other hand, from the healthplanners' vantage point, the potential epidemiologic benefit of preventingseveral future TB cases by treating one patient preventively will be the mostimportant determinant of decision making."The authors conclude that the usually recommended six- to 12-month course ofprophylactic isoniazid is beneficial to all cohort age groups.  They added,however, that recommendations should be modulated for the very elderly andthose with severe disease that limits life expectancy."For this subgroup of patients, frequently encountered in daily clinicalpractice, the decision whether and for how long to give prophylactic therapymight reasonably be left to the judgement of the individual patient and thephysician," they wrote.The corresponding author for this study is F.P.  Sarasin, Clinique de Medecine1, Hopital Cantonal Universitaire, 24 rue Micheli du Crest, 1211 Geneve 14,Switzerland. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1TherapyLevofloxacin More Active than Ofloxacin in In Vitro StudyThe experimental antituberculosis quinolone levofloxacin showed two- tofour-times more antimicrobial activity than ofloxacin in a newly reported invitro study from Japan."Levofloxacin showed greater activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rvphagocytosed in macrophages than ofloxacin," researcher H.  Saito andcolleagues wrote ("In Vitro Antimycobacterial Activity of a New Quinolone,Levofloxacin," Tubercle and Lung Disease, 1995;76:377-380).Levofloxacin, the optically active L-isomer of ofloxacin, exhibits significantbactericidal activity by inhibiting DNA gyrase and has a strong antimicrobialactivity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.The antimicrobial activity of levofloxacin has been found to be eight to 128times greater than that of the corresponding D-isomer and approximately twiceas potent as that of ofloxacin.In earlier studies Saito et al.  reported that some new quinolones includingofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, fleroxacin and sparfloxacin possessed appreciable invitro and in vivo antimycobacterial activity, especially against Mycobacteriumtuberculosis, M.  kansasii, M.  fortuitum, and M.  leprae.In this study Saito et al.  examined in vitro antimicrobial activity oflevofloxacin against various pathogenic mycobacteria, in particular M.tuberculosis and M.  avium complex (MAC).Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of levofloxacin for variousmycobacterial species were determined by the agar dilution method using 7H11medium and compared with those of ofloxacin.  Antimicrobial activity oflevofloxacin against M.  tuberculosis and M.  intracellulare phagocytosed inmurine peritoneal macrophages was measured in terms of reducingcell-associated bacterial colony forming units (CFUs).MICs of levofloxacin against M.  tuberculosis, M.  kansasii, M.  marinum, M.scrofulaceum, M.  avium, M.  intracellulare, M.  fortuitum, and M.  chelonaewere two to four times lower than those of ofloxacin.  Levofloxacin exhibitedhigher efficacy in reducing bacterial CFUs in macrophages than ofloxacin."The present results showed that in vitro antimicrobial activity oflevofloxacin against various mycobacteria was two to four times greater thanthat of ofloxacin, in terms of minimum inhibitory concentration values," Saitoet al.  wrote.Previous investigators have reported that the antimicrobial activity oflevofloxacin against various bacteria other than mycobacteria is generallytwice that of ofloxacin (Hayakawa et al., Antimicrob Agents and Chemother1986;29:163-164; Imamura et al., Antimicrob Agents and Chemo 1987;31:325-327and Tanka et al., J Antimicrob Chemother 1990;26:659-666)."The difference in in vitro activity of levofloxacin from ofloxacin in thesereports is therefore consistent with that in the present study," Saito et al.wrote.  "In the case of M.  intracellulare, significant delay of bacterialgrowth was caused by levofloxacin added at 1 mg/L, but such efficacy was notobserved for ofloxacin at the same concentration.  Levofloxacin and ofloxacinat doses of 10 mg/L prevented the bacterial growth during the whole incubationperiod.  There were significant differences between these two quinolones inthe efficacy in reducing the intra-macrophage growth of M.  intracellulare."The corresponding author for this study is H.  Saito, Department ofMicrobiology and Immunology, Shimane Medical University, Izumo 693, Japan. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Transmission (TB)Primary School Teacher in Amsterdam Infects 19 StudentsA primary school teacher with tuberculous laryngitis in Amsterdam, theNetherlands, infected all of his students with tuberculosis (TB) before hisdisease was detected.All 19 children who had been taught by the teacher became infected with TB andfour contracted active disease, according to a report presented at the 1995Annual Meeting of the International Union Against Tuberculosis and LungDisease (IUATLD), held in Paris, France."Three months after the start of the new school year, the notification ofprimary tuberculosis in two children of the same primary school urged thelocal Municipal Health Service to perform source detection and contacttracing," researcher S.T.  Keizer and colleagues from The Netherlands' HealthService wrote in an abstract presented at the IUATLD conference.Extensive testing was conducted and those with a skin induration of 10 mm ormore were considered infected.  A case of primary tuberculosis was defined asthe combination of a positive Mantoux test and compatible radiographicfindings."A teacher was identified as the source case," Keizer et al.  wrote.  "At thetime of detection he was without symptoms, yet his chest X-ray showed typicalinfiltration of the left upper lobe and his sputum was Ziehl-Neelsen positive.His medical history revealed that he had been suffering from severe hoarsenessfor three months until a benign growth was removed from his vocal cords duringthe summer-holidays.  The pathologist had reported the presence of epithelioidcell granuloma indicating tuberculosis, but this had not reached the attentionof the otorhinolaryngist."Nearly one-third of all 99 children at the school were found to be infectedwith tuberculosis."All 19 children who had been taught by our patient until the summer holidayswere infected," Keizer et al.  wrote.  "Among them were four cases of primarytuberculosis.  In the group (13 children) that had entered his class after thesummer-holidays only one infection was detected.  It is concluded that thisteacher was extremely infectious during the time he was hoarse from atuberculous laryngeal lesion.  The consideration of TB in the differentialdiagnosis of laryngeal lesions needs emphasis for individual and for publichealth reasons."The corresponding author for this study is S.T.  Keizer, TuberculosisDepartments of the Municipal Health Services, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics"Accuracy of Chest Radiograph Interpretation in the Diagnosis of Pneumocystiscarinii Pneumonia, Bacterial Pneumonia, and Pulmonary Tuberculosis in HIVPositive Patients."  P.M.  Boiselle, I.  Tocino, R.J.  Hooley, A.S.Pumerantz, P.A.  Selwyn and V.P.  Neklesa, et al.  New Haven, Connecticut.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  To assess the accuracy ofchest radiographic interpretation in the diagnosis of Pneumocystis cariniipneumonia (PCP), bacterial pneumonia (BP), and pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) inHIV-positive patients and to identify the frequency with which theseinfections mimic each other radiographically.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  Theadmitting chest radiographs of 153 HIV-positive patients with laboratoryproved BP (n=71), PCP (n=73) and pulmonary TB (n=9) and those of 10 HIVpositive patients with no active disease were reviewed retrospectively andindependently by 3 radiologists.  Readers were blinded to clinicalpresentation, CD4 count, original radiographic interpretation, and finaldiagnosis.  For each case, the radiologists listed a single diagnosis followedby an assessment of degree of confidence.  RESULTS:  A confident diagnosis wasmade in 136 of 163 cases (83.4%).  By specific diagnostic category, the medianaccuracies are as follows:  pulmonary TB, 85%; PCP, 75%; BP, 64%; and noactive disease, 100%.  Correcting for random agreement, there was moderateinterobserver agreement.  Fifteen of 153 cases (9.8%) mimicked otherinfections radiographically and were given the same inaccurate diagnosis byall 3 independent observers.  CONCLUSION:  Chest radiographic interpretationallows a confident and accurate diagnosis to be made in the majority of HIVpositive patients with PCP, BP, and TB at the time of hospitalization.  Inapproximately 10% of cases, these infections may mimic each otherradiographically."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics"Differentiation Between Tuberculosis and Malignant Lymphoma in AbdominalLymph Nodes with Contrast-Enhanced CT."  Z.G.  Yang, P.Q.  Min, Z.Y.  He andX.P.  Choc.  Chengdu, China.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  Tuberculosis of abdominallymph nodes is in some countries and can be easily misdiagnosed as malignantlymphoma.  This study evaluates specific imaging criteria for differentiatingtuberculosis from malignant lymphoma in abdominal lymph nodes on contrastenhanced CT.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  The enhanced CT features of 125 sites in50 patients, including tuberculosis (20 patients) and malignant lymphoma (30patients) in abdominal lymph nodes, were retrospectively evaluated in a blindreview for the enhancement criteria of morphology, density, and location.RESULTS:  Approximately 94% of sites of tuberculosis showed a ringlikeenhancement of enlarged lymph nodes, as compared with 4% of the sites ofmalignant lymphoma (P<.01).  Approximately 55% of the patients withtuberculosis had a mass of multilocular appearance compared with 4% of thepatients with malignant lymphoma (P<.01).  Tuberculosis frequently involvedthe mesenteric, omental, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, while malignantlymphoma frequently involved the retroperitoneal space.  But, theretroperitoneal lymph nodes under L-2 were involved with tuberculosis in only8% of the patients, whereas malignant lymphoma involved about 20% (P<.01).Combining all criteria, reviewers diagnosed tuberculosis correctly in 94%,with 93% specificity and 95% sensitivity.  CONCLUSION:  The differentiation oftuberculosis from malignant lymphoma can be made with contrast-enhanced CT onthe basis of characteristic enhancement and sites of involvedlymphadenopathy."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics (TB)"CT in Craniovertebral Tuberculosis."  T.B.  Buxi, R.  Vohra, S.  Yerramsetty,P.S.  Maini, A.K.  Kochbar and V.  Madan.  New Delhi, India.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  A prospective cumretrospective analysis of distinctive CT features in 30 cases ofcraniovertebral tuberculosis (CVTB) and comparison with other common diseasesthat afflict this region are presented.  MATERIALS AND METHODS:  All patientssuspected of having CVTB underwent contrast-enhanced CT of the base of theskull and upper cervical spine.  Cases with either positive smear, culture, orcharacteristic histopathologic changes were evaluated.  Follow-up CT scanswere obtained in 17 patients at an interval of 1-18 months.  RESULTS:  Bonedestruction was seen in atlas in 73.33% of patients, in axis in 56.66% ofpatients, and in basioccipital in 33.33% patients.  In the majority of thepatients, pus and granulation tissue were seen together.  Intraspinalextension was seen in 80% patients; however, it had no correlation with theneurologic complications (seen in 53.33%).  Prespinal and paraspinal locationwas seen in 63.33% and 40% of patients, respectively.  Majority of thepatients had a complex combination of dislocations.  Anterior atlanto-axialdislocation (AAD), atlanto-occipital dislocation, and superior translocationof dens were encountered in 56.66% of cases each, followed by lateral AAD (50%of patients) and rotatory subluxation (40% patients)."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics (TB)"Effect of HIV Status on Chest CT Findings In Patients with Tuberculosis."L.B.  Haramati, E.R.  Jenny-Avital and D.D.  Alterman.  Bronx, New York.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  To describe the chest CTfindings of tuberculosis in HIV positive patients compared with a combinedgroup of HIV negative and untested patients with no known HIV risk factors.CONCLUSION:  Chest CT in HIV positive patients with tuberculosis demonstratedbilateral mediastinal lymphadenopathy significantly more frequently (67% vs20%) and cavitation significantly less frequently (0% vs 80%) than a combinedgroup of HIV negative or untested patients with no known HIV risk factors."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics (TB)"Imaging and Intervention of Genitourinary Tuberculosis:  Revisited."  S.H.Kim, Y.K.  Jeong, K.M.  Yeon and M.C.  Han.  Seoul, South Korea.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "Tuberculosis has again become asignificant public health problem in various parts of the world, and thegenitourinary tract is the most common site of extrapulmonary tuberculosis.The purpose of this exhibit is to illustrate the findings of the genitourinarytract involved with tuberculosis by using conventional and modern imagingstudies.  This exhibit includes the imaging findings of the earlydissemination, progressive destruction and healing, and late sequelae oftuberculosis involving various organs of the genitourinary tract including thekidney, ureter, bladder, testis and epididymis, prostate and seminal tracts,uterus, ovary, and the related peritoneal cavity.  This exhibit alsodemonstrates the long-term results of balloon dilation and stent placement forthe tuberculous strictures of the urinary tract."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics (TB)"Musculoskeletal Tuberculosis:  MR Imaging Manifestations."  H.S.  Kang, J.Ahn, S.M.  Kim and J.W.  Ryoo.  Seoul, South Korea.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "With the increasing incidence of AIDSand drug abuse, tuberculosis has been resurging.  Tuberculosis is especiallyimportant because it is readily treatable, and permanent damage is potentiallypreventable.  MR imaging has been successfully used for the evaluation ofmusculoskeletal tuberculosis.  This exhibit presents various MR imagingmanifestations of musculoskeletal tuberculosis that involves the spine,tubular bones, flat bones, synovial joints, fibrous joints, bursae, tendonsheaths, and muscles.  The role of MR imaging and contrast enhancement in theevaluation of musculoskeletal tuberculosis and the differential diagnosis arediscussed."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Diagnostics (TB)"Sites of Tuberculous Involvement in AIDS Patients:  Correlation with GalliumScans."  H.M.  Abdel-Dayem, S.Y.  Naddaf, B.  Mina, M.S.  Aziz, L.  DiFabrizioand J.S.  Kempf et al.  New York, New York.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 81st ScientificAssembly of the Radiological Society of North America, held November 26 -December 1, 1995, in Chicago, Illinois, "PURPOSE:  Tuberculosis (TB) in AIDSpatients has a more aggressive and different pathologic picture than it doesin non-AIDS patients; this fact influences the methods of diagnosis andtreatment.  Gallium studies have been recommended in the work-up of thesepatients.  The purpose of this study was to review the gallium scans in allAIDS patients with a proved diagnosis of TB to find the sites of involvementand causes of false negative gallium scanning and to provide correlation withchest x-ray findings.  CONCLUSION:  Lymph node involvement with TB infectionin AIDS patients is more common than parenchymal lung involvement.  Themediastinal and supraclavicular areas were involved most often, followed bythe axillary, upper abdominal and inguinal regions.  Anti-TB treatment affectsthe sensitivity of gallium scanning in AIDS patients with TB."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Immunology (TB) "Regulation of the Human Cellular Immune Response in Tuberculosis."  J.J.Ellner.  Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.According to an abstract submitted by the author to The Lancet Conference 'TheChallenge of Tuberculosis', held September 14-15, 1995, in Washington, D.C.,"Pulmonary tuberculosis is characterized by activation of local and systemicimmune and inflammatory cells and mediators.  Somewhat paradoxically, delayedtype hypersensitivity responses to tuberculin purified protein derivative, andin vitro correlates frequently are depressed in patients with tuberculosis.Cross-modulatory cytokines, produced by mononuclear phagocytes, chieflytransforming growth factor-beta (TGF-(beta)), deactivate effector function,depress T-cell activation and may account for depressed delayed-typehypersensitivity (DTH) and increased antibody levels.  Ingestion ofMycobacterium tuberculosis by mononuclear phagocytes stimulates expression ofcytokines.  Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-(alpha)) and TGF-(beta) functionin autocrine circuits producing activating and deactivating signals,respectively, for macrophage effector function.  Lipoarabinomannen (LAM) fromvirulent M.  tuberculosis selectively induces expression of TFG-(beta)relative to TFG-(alpha) by monocytes.  In patients with tuberculosis,TFG-(beta) is expressed in granulomas, and blood monocytes show increasedspontaneous and tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD)-stimulatedproduction of this cytokine.  Moreover, neutralizing antibody to TFG-(beta)reverses depressed PPD-stimulated blastogenesis and interferon-gammaexpression.  Therefore, TFG-(beta) seems a key mediator of immunosuppressionand energy.  Moreover, neutralizing antibody to interleukin-10 partly restoresPPD-stimulated blastogenesis.  Parallel with depressed T-cell responses,patients with pulmonary tuberculosis show increased levels of IgM, IgG, IgG-1,and IgE antibodies directed against M.  tuberculosis.  This finding too mayreflect cross-regulation by TFG-(beta).  Current understanding ofimmunoregulation in tuberculosis provides some clear directions forimmunotherapy.  In dually-infected persons, activation of CD4 lymphocytes andmonocytes by tuberculosis might promote replication of HIV-1.  In fact, serumand cell-derived TNF-(alpha) are increased in HIV infected tuberculosispatients and this cytokine is known to stimulate HIV replication.  Further,monocytes from patients with tuberculosis show increased infectability by HIV;and PPD and M.  tuberculosis stimulate HIV replication in latently infectedmacrophages.  Therefore, M.  tuberculosis and HIV infections may be mutuallyenhancing.  The human immune response can be used to identify candidates for asubunit vaccine.  Increasing evidence supports a primary role forextracellular products of M.  tuberculosis as a target of protective immunity.Epitope mapping of the secreted 30 kD alpha-antigen indicates immunodominanceof certain peptides that could provide the basis for an improved vaccine orDTH skin test."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Infection Control (TB)"Behavioral Factors in Tuberculosis Control."  E.  Sumartojo.  Division ofTuberculosis Elimination, U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,Atlanta, Georgia.According to an abstract submitted by the author to The Lancet Conference 'TheChallenge of Tuberculosis', held September 14-15, 1995, in Washington, D.C.,"Tuberculosis control is directed towards ensuring that patients completetreatment without infecting others.  Relevant Behavioral and social factorsconcern the decisions and actions of individuals who influence treatmentoutcomes, including persons at risk for disease, tuberculosis patients, andhealth care providers.  Relevant issues include health education for patientsand for the public, provider knowledge and practice, the unique needs of HIVinfected persons and others at high risk of tuberculosis, and the quality oftreatment and control services.  Poor medication adherence remains the coreBehavioral problem in tuberculosis control.  Supervised or directly observedtherapy (DOT) is a currently accepted solution but it is not a panacea; wheresuccessful, it is part of an array of other services.  Continuing social andBehavioral research describes factors associated with adherence.  Ethnographicresearch has addressed the knowledge and beliefs of individuals abouttuberculosis.  Findings are that individuals from various cultures associatetuberculosis with stigmatization and rejection, have concerns about theappropriateness and quality of health care, and are often misinformed aboutthe cause and treatment of the disease.  Studies of interventions show theeffectiveness of community health workers, family and community support, andcomprehensive services that include strong case management, efficient clinicpractices, and additional social or health services for patients.  Research isemerging on communication strategies used by providers as they talk topatients, and the impact of poor communication on patient behavior.  Studiesof treatment practices show that some physicians use inadequate regimens, withimplications for the education and supervision of physicians who treattuberculosis.  In the next few years, research will emphasize development oflocally appropriate and effective treatment services.  Behavioral researchmust focus in intervention studies, informed by findings from existingdescriptive research, but also incorporating social and Behavioral theory andresearch methods, and epidemiological research methods.  Critical issues willbe identifying the best mix of services for specific regions and types ofpatients, improving provider communication strategies and provider practices,and ensuring that persons with high likelihood of exposure or HIV infectionseek screening and complete preventive therapy or treatment for tuberculosis."Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1BiochemicalFossati, G.; Lucietto, P.; Giuliani, P.; Coates, A.R.; Harding, S.; Colfen,H.; Legname, G.; Chan, E.; Zaliani, A.; Mascagni, P.  "Mycobacteriumtuberculosis Chaperonin 10 Forms Stable Tetrameric and Heptameric StructuresImplications for Its Diverse Biological Activities."  Journal of BiologicalChemistry, November 3, 1995;270(44):26159-26167.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal ofBiological Chemistry, "The chaperonin activity of sequence related chaperonin10 proteins requires their aggregation into heptameric structures.  Wedescribe size-exclusion chromatography and ultracentrifugation studies thatreveal that while Escherichia coli chaperonin 10 exists as a heptamer, theMycobacterium tuberculosis chaperonin 10 is tetrameric in dilute solutions andin whole M.  tuberculosis lysate.  At high protein concentration and in thepresence of saturating amounts of divalent ions, the protein is heptameric.Human chaperonin 10 is predominantly heptameric, although smaller oligomerswere detected.  These differences in structural assembly between species mayexplain differences in biological activity such as antigenicity.  UsingC-terminal and N-terminal fragments, sequence 1-25 was identified asindispensable for aggregation.  CD spectroscopy studies revealed that (i) aminimum at 202-204 nm correlates with aggregation and characterizes not onlythe spectrum of the mycobacterial protein, but also those of E.  coli andhuman chaperonin 10 proteins; (ii) the interactions between subunits are ofthe hydrophobic type; and (iii) the anti-parallel beta-pleated sheet is themain secondary structure element of subunits in both tetrameric and heptamericproteins."  The corresponding author for this study is:  P Mascagni, UnivNottingham, Dept Appl Biochem & Food Sci, Nottingham LE12 5RD, England.  Forsubscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer SocBiochemistry Molecular Biology Inc, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1BiochemicalGeorge, K.M.; Yuan, Y.; Sherman, D.R.; Barry, C.E.  "The Biosynthesis ofCyclopropanated Mycolic Acids in Mycobacterium tuberculosis - Identificationand Functional Analysis of Cmas-2."  Journal of Biological Chemistry, November10, 1995;270(45):27292-27298.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal ofBiological Chemistry, "The major mycolic acid produced by Mycobacteriumtuberculosis contains two cis-cyclopropanes in the meromycolate chain.  Thegene whose product cyclopropanates the proximal double bond was cloned byhomology to a putative cyclopropane synthase identified from the Mycobacteriumleprae genome sequencing project.  This gene, named cma2, was sequenced andfound to be 52% identical to cma1 (which cyclopropanates the distal doublebond) and 73% identical to the gene from M.  leprae.  Both cma genes werefound to be restricted in distribution to pathogenic species of mycobacteria.Expression of cma2 in Mycobacterium smegmatis resulted in the cyclopropanationof the proximal double bond in the alpha(1), series of mycolic acids.Coexpression of both cyclopropane synthases resulted in cyclopropanation ofboth centers, producing a molecule structurally similar to the M.tuberculosis alpha-dicyclopropyl mycolates.  Differential scanning calorimetryof purified cell walls and mycolic acids demonstrated that cyclopropanation ofthe proximal position raised the observed transition temperature by3(degree)C.  These results suggest that cyclopropanation contributes to thestructural integrity of the cell wall complex."  The corresponding author forthis study is:  CE Barry, Niaid, Rocky Mt Labs, Intracellular Parasites Lab,Tb Res Unit, 903 S 4TH St, Hamilton, MT 59840 USA.  For subscriptioninformation for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Soc BiochemistryMolecular Biology Inc, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1DiagnosticsAnderson, C.; Inhaber, N.; Menzies, D.  "Comparison of Sputum Induction withFiber-Optic Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis."  American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1570-1574.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "Microbiologic confirmation ofpulmonary tuberculosis among patients whose sputum smear is negative isincreasingly important because of greater incidence among immunocompromisedhosts and emergence of drug-resistant strains.  We prospectively comparedsputum induction to fiber-optic bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of suchpatients.  Consecutive patients referred for investigation of possible activepulmonary tuberculosis underwent sputum induction with hypertonic salinedelivered by an ultrasonic nebulizer between 2 and 48 h before transnasalfiber-optic bronchoscopy.  All specimens were examined for acid-fast bacilliwith fluorescent microscopy and cultured for mycobacteria.  Clinicalinformation was abstracted from patient records, and X-rays were reviewed bytwo blinded readers.  Among 101 participants, sputum induction waswell-tolerated without complications and provided adequate samples in 93.Sensitivity of direct acid-fast bacilli smear of specimens from bothtechniques was low.  Sensitivity and negative predictive value of culture frombronchoscopy specimens was 73% and 91% compared with 87% and 96%,respectively, for sputum induction when a specimen was obtained.  Direct costsfor bronchoscopy totaled Canadian $187.60 compared with Canadian $22.22 forsputum induction.  Sputum induction was well-tolerated, low-cost, and providedthe same, if not better, diagnostic yield compared with bronchoscopy in thediagnosis of smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis."  The corresponding authorfor this study is:  D Menzies, Mcgill Univ, Montreal Chest Inst, Dept Med,3650 St Urbain St, Montreal, Pq H2X 2P4, Canada.  For subscription informationfor this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, NewYork, NY 10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1DiagnosticsDunlap, N.E.; Harris, R.H.; Benjamin, W.H.; Harden, J.W.; Hafner, D."Laboratory Contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Cultures."  AmericanJournal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November1995;152(5):1702-1704.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "The purpose of this study was toinvestigate possible laboratory contamination of Mycobacterium tuberculosiscultures which resulted in the misdiagnosis of tuberculosis.  We haveinvestigated three cases in which a patient's culture was positive for M.tuberculosis but there was not a high clinical suspicion for disease.  In eachinstance, another patient with clinically obvious pulmonary tuberculosis hadspecimens cultured concurrently within the same clinical laboratory.  Theisolates from both the obvious cases of tuberculosis and the suspect caseswere obtained through the State of Alabama TB Laboratory, but these isolatesoriginated at a commercial laboratory, a community hospital laboratory, and ata university hospital.  MTB isolates were fingerprinted by probing for theinsertion sequence IS6110.  With each of the three pairs of isolates (case andsuspicious case), identical IS6110 banding patterns were found suggestingidentical MTB strains.  Because the patients were geographically separated, itis strongly suspected that laboratory contamination of M.  tuberculosiscultures resulted in the three suspect cases being diagnosed withtuberculosis.  These findings indicate that positive M.  tuberculosis culturesresulting from laboratory contamination can occur."  The corresponding authorfor this study is:  NE Dunlap, 246 Ohb Uab Hosp, Birmingham, AL 35233 USA.For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  AmerLung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Drug ResistanceRouse, D.A.; Li, Z.M.; Bai, G.H.; Morris, S.L.  "Characterization of the katGand inhA genes of Isoniazid-Resistant Clinical Isolates of Mycobacteriumtuberculosis."  Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, November1995;39(11):2472-2477.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in AntimicrobialAgents and Chemotherapy, "Resistance to isoniazid in Mycobacteriumtuberculosis has been associated with mutations in genes encoding themycobacterial catalase-peroxidase (katG) and the InhA protein (inhA).  Amongthe 26 isoniazid-resistant clinical isolates evaluated in this study,mutations in putative inhA regulatory sequences were identified in 2catalase-positive isolates, katG gene alterations were detected in 20 strains,and 4 isolates had wild-type katG and inhA genes.  Mutations in the katG genewere detected in all 11 catalase negative isolates:  one frameshift insertion,two partial gene deletions, and nine different missense mutations wereidentified.  An arginine-to-leucine substitution at position 463 was detectedin nine catalase-positive isolates.  However, site-directed mutagenesisexperiments demonstrated that the presence of a leucine at codon 463 did notalter the activity of the M.  tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase and did notaffect the capacity of this enzyme to restore isoniazid susceptibility toisoniazid-resistant, katG-defective Mycobacterium smegmatis pi-ii cells.These studies further support the association between katG and inhA genemutations and isoniazid resistance in M.  tuberculosis, while also suggestingthat other undefined mechanisms of isoniazid resistance exist."  Thecorresponding author for this study is:  SL Morris, US FDA, Ctr Biol Evaluat &Res, Mycobacteria Lab, Hfm 431, 8800 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer SocMicrobiology, 1325 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Pediatrics (TB)Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does theProtective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced TuberculinReaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,November 1995;152(5):1575-1578.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "A case-control study was conductedin Saudi Arabia, where the same strain of BCG has been used and surveys hadshown that up to 88% of vaccinated children remain tuberculin negative.Active cases were obtained by surveying the seven tuberculosis centers in 1yr.  Control subjects were obtained from a nationwide survey of normalindividuals.  Vaccination in both groups was ascertained by history and BCGscar.  Relative risk of contracting active tuberculosis in the vaccinatedversus unvaccinated and protection was calculated.  protection was as follows:age group 5 to 14 yr, 82% (55 to 93%); age group 15 to 24 yr, 67% (55 to 77%);and age group 25 to 34 yr, 20% (-6 to 37%).  We document the uninterruptedrecord of protection by BCG administered in the neonatal period and discussthe significance of vaccination timing.  We concur with other studies thatprotection lapsed after about 20 yr.  More importantly, this is the firstlarge study that documents a lack of tuberculin sensitivity despiteprotection.  This challenges the view that sensitization is essential forprotection and supports the 'two-pathway' theory that BCG vaccination couldtrigger either protective (Lister type) or antagonistic (tuberculin or Kochtype) reactions and that the most protective vaccines would have littletuberculin-sensitizing effect because the two pathways are competitive."  Thecorresponding author for this study is:  FA Alkassimi, King Saud Univ, CollMed, Dept Med 38, POB 2925, Riyadh 11461, Saudi Arabia.  For subscriptioninformation for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740Broadway, New York, NY 10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1PharmacoeconomicsCastelo, A.; Mathiasi, P.A.; Iunes, R.; Kritski, A.L.; Dalcolmo, M.; Demelo,F.F.; Drummond, M.  "Cost Effectiveness of Antituberculosis Interventions."Pharmacoeconomics, November 1995;8(5):385-399.According to the authors' abstract of an article published inPharmacoeconomics, "The treatment of tuberculosis (TB) is ranked as the mostcost effective of all therapeutic programmes in terms of cost per year of lifesaved.  Nevertheless, TB kills or debilitates more adults aged between 15 and59 years than any other disease in the world; furthermore, about 2 to 4% ofthe burden of disease, 7% of all deaths and 26% of all preventable deaths aredirectly attributable to TB.  About one-third of the world's population isinfected with the TB bacillus.  In the developing world, more women ofchildbearing age die from TB than from causes directly associated withpregnancy and childbirth.  The death of adults in their prime, who areparents, community leaders and producers in most societies, causes aparticularly onerous burden besides being a serious public health problem.  Inthe poorest countries, where the magnitude of the TB problem is greatest,those TB control strategies that are economically feasible tend to be lesseffective.  Therefore, in low and middle income countries, cost-effectivenessconsiderations aimed at prioritizing resource allocation in the health sectorin general, and in TB control programmes in particular, are of paramountimportance.  Operationally, the main components of a TB control programme are:(i) detection and treatment of TB; and (ii) prevention of TB through BCGvaccination and chemoprophylaxis.  Priority should be given to ensuring thatTB patients complete their prescribed course of chemotherapy.  Adequatetreatment is the most effective way of preventing the spread of TB and theemergence of drug resistance.  This article reviews evidence of theeffectiveness and cost effectiveness of different approaches to TB can,particularly those that are applicable to low income countries, in bothHIV-infected and noninfected patients.  Financial implications and ways toimplement directly observed therapy for TB in large urban areas are discussed,and the need to address some relevant operational issues is highlighted.  Thecurrent role of chemoprophylaxis and BCG vaccination is also reviewed."  Thecorresponding author for this study is:  A Castelo, Univ Fed Sao Paulo, EscolaPaulista Med, Rua Botocatu 740, BR-04023062 Sao Paulo, Brazil.  Forsubscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  AdisInternational Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland10, New Zealand.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1ScreeningTaneja, R.; Merritt, S.; Vanek, S.; Passannante, M.; Livingston, D.H."Tuberculin Screening of Trauma Admissions at a University Hospital:  APreventive Strategy."  Archives of Surgery, November 1995;130(11):1223-1227.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Archives ofSurgery, "OBJECTIVE:  To determine the prevalence of tuberculosis (TB)infection in our trauma service population, namely, those patients who hadpositive Mantoux (purified protein derivative [PPD] [tuberculin]) tests.DESIGN:  Prospective study.  SETTING:  Trauma service at a university hospitalin Newark, NJ.  PATIENTS AND METHODS:  During a 9-month period, 110 admittedtrauma patients underwent screening for TB.  Of these patients, 20 hadundergone recent PPD tests in the last 6 months, of which nine were positive.The remaining 90 patients underwent PPD and delayed-type hypersensitivity skintests (anergy panel); five patients were unavailable for follow-up.  Thepatients also answered questions regarding human immunodeficiency virusstatus, risk factors for TB infection, and clinical symptoms.  RESULTS:  Themean age of the study group was 34 years (age range, 13 to 69 years).Eighty-four percent of these patients were males who belonged to the high-risksocioeconomic, racial, and ethnic groups (poor, nonwhite).  The tests for 15patients (17%) were newly discovered to be positive for PPD.  Eleven percentof the patients with negative PPD tests were anergic, thus raising thepercentage of patients with positive PPD tests to 20%.  The humanimmunodeficiency virus status was known in only 41% of the total patients.All patients with positive PPD tests had a chest X-ray film performed; ofthese patients, positive findings for TB were determined for one patient.Another patient had evidence of abdominal TB at laparotomy.  All patients withpositive PPD tests were given appointments in the pulmonary clinic forfollow-up, and only three of 15 patients kept their appointments.CONCLUSIONS:  Patients who were admitted to the trauma service werepredominantly young males from high-risk groups with a high incidence of TBinfection.  Their admission to the trauma service was a unique opportunity forscreening and implementing existing preventive programs."  The correspondingauthor for this study is:  DH Livingston, Univ Hosp Newark, E-245, 150 BergenSt, Newark, NJ 07103 USA.  For subscription information for this journalcontact the publisher:  Amer Medical Assoc, 515 N State St, Chicago, IL 60610.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1TB/HIV CoinfectionPozniak, A.L.; Macleod, G.A.; Ndlovu, D.; Ross, E.; Mahari, M.; Weinberg, J."Clinical and Chest Radiographic Features of Tuberculosis Associated withHuman Immunodeficiency Virus in Zimbabwe."  American Journal of Respiratoryand Critical Care Medicine, November 1995;152(5):1558-1561.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "In the developing world, thediagnosis of tuberculosis is dependent on clinical and radiologic features asculture facilities are not readily available.  It has been reported thattuberculosis in HIV-positive persons can present with atypical clinical andradiographic features.  The object of this study was to examine how oftenatypical features occur in HIV-positive compared with HIV-negative persons andhow these findings correspond to sputum-smear findings.  Detailed demographic,clinical, and chest radiographic features of tuberculosis were assessed in 202HIV-positive adults and 220 HIV-negative patients admitted consecutively.Using univariate analysis, several of these features were found to besignificantly associated with being HIV-positive, but after multipleregression analysis only, age group (15 to 42 yr), a negative tuberculinresponse, intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, and lack of cavitation but notsputum-smear status remained significant."  The corresponding author for thisstudy is:  AL Pozniak, Kings Healthcare, Dept Genitourinary Med, 15-22Caldecot Rd, London SE5 9RS, England.  For subscription information for thisjournal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)Vandenbrande, P.; Vansteenbergen, W.; Vervoort, G.; Demedts, M.  "Aging andHepatotoxicity of Isoniazid and Rifampin in Pulmonary Tuberculosis."  AmericanJournal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, November1995;152(5):1705-1708.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "We evaluated whether elderlypatients with pulmonary tuberculosis and without apparent preexisting liverdisease are at an increased risk to develop hepatotoxicity from anisoniazid-rifampin regimen and require regular liver function tests incomparison with younger patients.  We analyzed the data of 131 patientstreated in the period 1980-1985 of whom 64 (49%) were at least 60 yr of age.Subsequent increases of transaminases (measured weekly for as long as 4 wkafter the start of treatment and later on when symptoms suggestive ofhepatotoxicity occurred) above baseline values were found more frequently inthe elderly (38 versus 18%, P<0.05) and were also more pronounced in them(P<0.01).  The ratio of the highest transaminase value over the baseline valuewas called the transaminase index (TI).  A TI of at least 5 was found in 22%of elderly and 8% of younger patients (P=NS), but ratios as high as 10 weremostly asymptomatic and always normalized progressively without treatmentadjustment.  Only symptomatic patients with a TI greater than or equal to 10(five elderly and three younger) required temporary or definitive treatmentadjustment.  We conclude that repeated liver function test evaluations aregenerally unnecessary, except for symptomatic elderly and younger patientsalike, in order to detect those with a TI greater than or equal to 10, thusrequiring drug adjustment."  The corresponding author for this study is:  MDemedts, Univ Hosp Gasthuisberg, Herestr 19, B-3000 Louvain, Belgium.  Forsubscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer LungAssoc, 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Therapy (Hepatotoxicity)Ozick, L.A.; Jacob, L.; Comer, G.M.; Lee, T.P.; Benzvi, J.; Donelson, S.S.;Felton, C.P.  "Hepatotoxicity from Isoniazid and Rifampin in Inner-City AIDSPatients."  American Journal of Gastroenterology, November1995;90(11):1978-1980.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Gastroenterology, "OBJECTIVE:  To determine the incidence of hepatotoxicitydue to isoniazid and rifampin in inner-city patients with active tuberculosis.DESIGN:  A hospital-based review of 70 consecutive in-patients in a 770-bed,inner-city hospital.  The patient population is primarily African-American andHispanic.  METHODS:  Fifty-eight men and 12 women were followed from 2-12 wk(median 4 wk).  Patients had to be treated for at least 2 wk to be eligiblefor the study.  Patients were excluded if they had been on anyanti-tuberculous or any other hepatotoxic drug during the 2-month periodbefore their hospitalization.  Aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase,bilirubin, and albumin were obtained at least every 2 wk.  RESULTS:Hepatocellular toxicity, defined as AST and/or ALT greater than 200 IU/L,occurred in eight out of 70 (11.4%) patients.  The mean age of these patientswas 38.9 yr (22-58 yr).  Patients with AIDS were significantly more likely todevelop hepatotoxicity than those with any other risk factor (P<0.01).CONCLUSIONS:  Baseline aminotransferases followed by monitoring may benecessary in AIDS patients."  The corresponding author for this study is:  LAOzick, Columbia Univ, Coll Phys & Surg, Harlem Hosp Ctr, Dept Med, DivGastroenterol, 506 Lennox Ave, New York, NY 10037 USA.  For subscriptioninformation for this journal contact the publisher:  Williams & Wilkins, 351West Camden St, Baltimore, MD 21201-2436.Back to Headline List CopyrightTB WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1MEETINGS REPORT*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEYJanuary 25-27, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "Epidemiology and Prevention ofInfectious Diseases."  Information:  Office of Continuing Medical Education,Room MCB-630, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0742, Phone415-476-4251.January 28 - February 2, 1996, Vail, CO, "Infectious Diseases in ClinicalPractice."  Information:  University of California, Postgraduate Programs,Department of Medicine, 1383 9th Avenue, UCSF Box 0656, San Francisco, CA94143-0656, Phone 415-476-5808.* January 28 - February 1, 1996, Washington, DC, "3rd National Conference onHuman Retroviruses and Related Infections."  Information:  Infectious DiseaseSociety of America 703-299-0200.February 11-16, 1996, Fremantle, Western Australia, "3rd Asia and PacificRegion Social Sciences and Medicine Conference."  Information:  Dr.  LynneHunt, Edith Cowan University, Goldsworthy Road, Claremont 6010, WesternAustralia, Phone 61-9-442-1315, Fax 61-9-383-1786, E-mail:l.halls@cowan.edu.au.  (Omit final period from e-mail address.)February 12-16, 1996, Denver, CO, "Postgraduate Courses on Clinical Managementand Control of Tuberculosis."  Information:  Catheryne J.  Queen, NationalJewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, 1400 Jackson St.,Denver, CO 80206, Phone 303-398-1700, Fax 303-398-1806.February 15-16, 1996, Indianapolis, IN, "TB Symposium:  Pathways toPrevention."  Information:  American Lung Association of Indiana, 9410Priority Way West Drive, Indianapolis, IN 46240, 317-573-3900, Fax317-573-3909.February 16-18, 1996, New York, NY, "Second Annual CME Course for theManagement of the HIV Infected Patient:  A Practical Approach for the PrimaryCare Practitioner."  Information:  Center for Bio-Medical Communication, Inc.,80 West Madison Avenue, Dumont, NJ 07628, Phone 201-385-8080, Fax201-385-5650.* February 26-27, 1996, Rockville, MD, "IBC's 3rd Annual Conference onVaccines:  New Advances in Technologies and Applications."  Information:  IBCUSA Conferences, Inc., 225 Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone508-481-6400.March 1-2, 1996, Chicago, IL, "Tuberculosis and Migration."  Information:International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 68, BoulevardSaint-Michel 75006 Paris, France, Phone 33-1-44.32.03.60, Fax33-1-43.29.90.87.* March 7-8, 1996, Washington, DC, "IBC's Biennial International Conference onMycobacterial Infection:  Pathogenesis, Prevention and Strategies for New Drugand Vaccine Development."  Information:  IBC USA Conferences, Inc., 225Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone 508-481-6400, Fax508-481-7911.March 19-22, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "8th National AIDS Update Conference."Information:  NAUC 96 Conference Registrar, c/o KREBS Convention ManagementServices, 555 DeHaro Street, Suite 200, San Francisco, CA 94107-2348, Phone415-255-1297, Fax 415-255-2244.March 26, 1996, Washington, DC, "Tuberculosis:  What's New in Diagnosis andTherapy."  Information:  Howard University, College of Medicine, Office ofCME, 520 W Street NW, Washington, DC 20059, Phone 202-806-5620, Fax202-806-7934.April 14-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "Federation of American Societies forExperimental Biology - Annual Meeting."  Information:  Experimental Biology1996, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3998, Phone 301-530-7010.April 17-19, 1996, Vancouver, Canada, "The Fourth International NatureGenetics Conference."  Information:  Diana Berger, Conference ServicesManager, Nature America, Inc., 345 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10010-1707,Phone 212-726-9281, Fax 212-696-9594.April 21-23, 1996, Washington, DC, "The 6th Annual Scientific Meeting of theSociety for Healthcare Epidemiology of America."  Information:  Soceity forHealthcare Epidemiology of America, 875 Kings Highway, Suite 200, Woodbury, NJ08096-3172, Attention:  Annual Meeting Registration, Phone 609-845-1720, Fax609-853-0411.April 22-26, 1996, Denver, CO, "Postgraduate Courses on Clinical Managementand Control of Tuberculosis."  Information:  Catheryne J.  Queen, NationalJewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, 1400 Jackson St.,Denver, CO 80206, Phone 303-398-1700, Fax 303-398-1806.* May 3-6, 1996, Washington, DC, "Biomedicine '96:  Medical Research fromBench to Bedside."  Information:  Editor-in-Chief, National Office 6900 GroveRoad, Thorofare, NJ 08086-9447, Phone 609-848-1000, Fax 609-848-5274.May 12-15, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "1996 Annual International Conference."Information:  American Lung Association/American Thoracic Society, Phone212-315-8700, Fax 212-265-5642.May 19-23, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "95th American Society for MicrobiologyGeneral Meeting."  Information:  American Society for Microbiology, 1325Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171, Phone 202-737-3600.June 2-6, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "American Association ofImmunologists/American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology/AmericanAssociation of Investigative Pathology."  Information:  Mr.  Raymond Palmer,Exec.  Dir., AAI, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994, Phone301-530-7178, Fax 301-571-1816.June 10-13, 1996, Hong Kong, "7th International Congress for InfectiousDiseases:  a Collaboration of the World Health Organization, the InternationalSociety for Infectious Diseases and the Dept.  of Microbiology, Faculty ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong."  Information:  Norman R.Stein, Exec.  Dir., ISID, 180 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, Phone617-277-0551, Fax 617-731-1541.August 27-30, 1996, Nagoya, Japan, "14th International Scientific Meeting ofthe International Epidemiological Association:  Global Health in a ChangingEnvironment."  Information:  14th ISM Secretariat, Dept.  of PreventiveMedicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku,Nagoya 466, Japan, Phone 81-52-741-2111, ext.  2074, Fax 81-52-733-6729.October 26-30, 1997, New Orleans, LA, "63rd Annual Scientific Assembly."Information:  American College of Chest Physicians, Phone 708-498-1400, Fax708-498-5460.December 6-9, 1997, New Orleans, LA, "1997 Annual Meeting."  Information:American Association for Respiratory Care, Phone 214-243-2272, Fax214-484-2720.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-30IA086-000615-B042-107http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh48.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020504 text/html 49322HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:02 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:41 GMTContent-length: 49135Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh48.html Sample Issue Copyright TOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet July 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL (362 words) HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED (722 words) INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT (483 words) 6TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT (764 words) HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE (1404 words) WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM (168 words) HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY (1337 words) SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD (1315 words) MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE (607 words) CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993ATC PREVAILS ON CAUSATION ISSUE IN MISSISSIPPI TRIAL    A jury empaneled in the Washington County, MS, Circuit Court onJune 17 returned a defense verdict for American Tobacco Co. in along-fought cigarette wrongful death action, determining 11-1 that theplaintiffs' decedent's death resulted from a blood clot caused by urinarytract surgery and not his lung cancer or emphysema (Wilks et al. v.American Tobacco Co. et al., MS Cir. Ct., Washington Cty., No. 91-12,355(B)(W)).    After eight days of trial that featured primarily medical testimony,the jury deliberated for two and a half hours before returning theverdict.  Anderson Smith's lung cancer was first diagnosed four monthsbefore his death in 1986; no autopsy was ever performed.  The panel alsocleared New Deal Tobacco Co., a regional distributor, of any liability.    Jeanette Wilks, Smith's daughter, lodged her complaint in November1987, seeking $17 million in damages from the defendants.  Smith begansmoking ATC's Pall Malls as a teenager when he entered the U.S. Army in1943.  Smith's habit grew to three packs a day and would endure for 40years; Smith became mentally incompetent during his tenure in theService, and he resided at a V.A. hospital for a number of years.  Wilks'sister subsequently joined the action as a plaintiff.    Presiding Judge Eugene M. Bogen would make various significantrulings during the litigation's course.  In April 1991, he denied summaryjudgment to the defense, finding the plaintiffs' risk/utility theory ofrecovery to be viable.  This ruling ran contrary to an earlierdetermination made in another Mississippi cigarette products suit byJudge Bogen himself, and the state Supreme Court in 1992 refused toreview the inconsistency.    Last May, Judge Bogen granted a plaintiffs' motion and heldcigarettes to be defective and unreasonably dangerous as a matter of lawand found their manufacturers to be absolutely liable on product claims.    Don Barrett of Barrett Law Offices, Lexington, Mississippi, VictorMcTeer of McTeer & Byers, Greenville, Mississippi, and Fred Clark,Greenwood, Mississippi, represent the plaintiffs.    James E. Upshaw of Upshaw, Williams, Biggers, Page & Kruger,Greenwood, Johnny Walls, Greenville, and Bruce Sheffler of Chadbourne &Parke, New York, represent the American Tobacco Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993HIGH COURT LETS PRISONER'S 8TH AMENDMENT ETS EXPOSURE SUIT PROCEED    The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in a 7-2 ruling on June 18 a March1992 Ninth Circuit opinion and permitted a Nevada inmate to pursue anEighth Amendment claim against state prison officials for involuntaryexposure to environmental tobacco smoke (Helling et al. v. McKinney, U.S.Sup. Ct., No. 91-1958).    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    William McKinney, who is serving a life sentence in Nevada, filed a{1983 action in 1987 with the U.S. District Court for the District ofNevada against officials of the Carson City prison.  McKinney, anonsmoker, had a cellmate with a five-pack-a-day habit; his requests tobe housed with a nonsmoking cellmate had been repeatedly denied.    McKinney had asserted that the unabated ETS exposure had constitutedcruel and unusual punishment; a federal magistrate entered a directedverdict for the defense in 1989, finding the plaintiff to have noconstitutional right not to be exposed to ETS.  In February 1991, theNinth Circuit reversed, finding that McKinney should have been permittedto enter evidence regarding the level of his ETS exposure and whethersuch exposure presented a health risk.    The prison officials petitioned the Supreme Court in August 1991,seeking a remand for reconsideration in light of Wilson v. Seiter, a 1991opinion that established the "deliberate indifference" standard forprisoners making Eighth Amendment claims.  The high court granted thepetition the following October.    In March 1992, the Ninth Circuit reinstated its earlier opinion,holding that Wilson only added an additional element that McKinney wouldhave to demonstrate to press his action.  The high court granted thedefendants' certiorari petition the following June; oral argument washeard last Jan. 13.    Justice Byron R. White delivered the opinion of the court, in whichChief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Harry A. Blackmun, JohnPaul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, And David H.Souter joined.  "Petitioners...submit that unless McKinney can prove thathe is currently suffering serious medical problems caused by exposure toETS, there can be no violation of the Eighth Amendment.  That Amendment,it is urged, does not protect against prison conditions that merelythreaten to cause health problems in the future, no matter how grave andimminent the threat....    "We have great difficulty agreeing that prison authorities may not bedeliberately indifferent to an inmate's current health problems but mayignore a condition of confinement that is sure or very likely to causeserious illness and needless suffering the next week or month or year,"the court continued.  "We thus reject petitioners' central thesis thatonly deliberate indifference to current serious health problems ofinmates is actionable under the Eighth Amendment."    The court rejected the stance taken by the United States in itsamicus brief that the harm that ETS exposure causes to any one individualis speculative and that exposure to ETS is not contrary to currentstandards of decency.  As well as having to demonstrate that his exposurehas unreasonably endangered his future health, the court stated, McKinney"must also establish that it is contrary to current standards of decencyfor anyone to be so exposed against his will and that prison officialsare deliberately indifferent to his plight."    The court noted that since the institution of his lawsuit, McKinneyhas been transferred to another prison and is no longer housed with aheavy smoker; and that the Nevada prison system adopted a formal smokingpolicy in January 1992.  The court stated that these realities wouldweigh against McKinney's ability to demonstrate the elements of his claim.    Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent in which Justice AntoninScalia joined.  "Last term," stated the dissent, "the Court held that theEighth Amendment prohibits the use of force that causes a prisoner onlyminor injuries....  Today the Court expands the Eighth Amendment in yetanother direction, holding that it applies to a prisoner's mere risk ofinjury.  Because I find this holding no more acceptable...I againdissent."    Nevada Attorney General Frankie Sue Del Papa argued on behalf of thepetitioners.    Cornish F. Hitchcock of Public Citizen Litigation Group, Washington,DC, argued on behalf of the respondent.    Deputy U.S. Solicitor General John G. Roberts Jr. argued on behalf ofthe amicus curiae.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993INDUSTRY SUES EPA IN NC FEDERAL COURT OVER ETS REPORT    Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and four other industryentities filed a complaint June 22 in the U.S. District Court for theMiddle District of North Carolina against the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency, seeking to have the agency withdraw its January 1993decision and risk assessment classifying environmental tobacco smoke as aClass A carcinogen (Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization Corp. etal. v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency et al., MD NC, No. 6:93CV370).    (The complaint is available from Andrews Document Access Service.Call 1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    Joining the two manufacturers in the suit are Flue-Cured TobaccoCooperative Stabilization Corp., a North Carolina cooperative marketingassociation that purchases flue-cured tobacco from growers and sells tomanufacturers; the Kentucky-based Council for Burley Tobacco Inc., whichrepresents growers and sellers of burley tobacco; Universal Leaf TobaccoCo. Inc., a Virginia processor of leaf tobacco who purchases from growersand sells to manufacturers; and Gallins Vending Co., a North Carolinavendor/distributor.  The complainants asserted that they "have been andwill continue to be directly affected and injured by [the] unauthorizedand unlawful decision to classify ETS as a human carcinogen."    The action, which also named EPA Administrator Carol Browner,asserted that the Agency's actions were violative of the Radon Gas andIndoor Air Quality Research Act of 1986, the Administrative Procedure Actand the plaintiffs' due process rights under the Fifth Amendment.  Theplaintiffs seek a withdrawal of the decision and a declaration that theclassification and risk assessment are arbitrary, capricious, violativeof required procedures and unconstitutional.    The complaint asserted that the EPA's actions overstepped its mandateunder the Radon Act and violated requirements to consult with specificadvisory committees.  The decision, the complaint asserted, "did have asubstantial impact throughout the country, including but not limited tocompelling increased restrictions on smoking by private entities and allentities of government."    The complaint deemed the EPA's conclusions "wrong as a matter of lawand science....  EPA was able to reach its conclusion only bymanipulating and 'cherry-picking' data, ignoring critical statisticalstudies and chemical analyses...and generally altering EPA's models,assumptions and methodologies when use of the Agency's usual models,assumptions and methodologies would not have supported its conclusions."    Submitting the complaint were Dewey W. Wells, Keith W. Vaughan andJeffrey L. Furr of Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice, Winston-Salem, NorthCarolina, on behalf of Philip Morris Inc., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. andUniversal Leaf Tobacco Co. Inc.; James K. Dorsett Jr. and James D. Blountof Smith, Anderson, Blount, Dorsett, Mitchell & Jernigan, Raleigh, NorthCarolina, on behalf of Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative StabilizationCorp., and The Council for Burley Tobacco Inc.; and Richard B. Howingtonof Allman Spry Humphreys Leggett & Howington, P.A., Winston-Salem, NC, onbehalf of Gallins Vending Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 19936TH CIR.: NO ERROR IN DISALLOWING ETS EVIDENCE IN MARITIME ASBESTOS SUIT    The federal trial court which heard the asbestos-exposure claims ofthree merchant seamen did not err by preventing the seamen from arguingthat the shipowner-defendants were liable for exposing them to passivecigarette smoke, as well as asbestos, or by permitting alternate jurorsto participate in jury deliberations, the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals ruled June 3  (Smith v. Gulf Oil Co., 6th Cir., No. 91-3034;Carbone v. American President Lines et al., No. 91-3036/3037; and Reevesv. American Export Isbrandsten, No. 91-3040.)    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    The claims of the three merchant seamen -- Harry Smith, JosephCarbone and Ashton H. Reeves -- were tried with one other case in federalcourt in Cleveland in 1990.  In the first phase of a bifurcated trial,the trial court allowed the shipowner defendants to present evidence ofthe seamen's smoking.  The seamen attempted to counter this defense withevidence that the shipowners had exposed them to dense, secondhandtobacco smoke aboard ships.  The court, however, refused a request by theseamen that it rule that a ship laden with tobacco smoke renders a shipunseaworthy, and it refused another request by the seamen that toinstruct the jury that dense cigarette smoke may support a finding thatthe ship was unseaworthy.    The case was given to a panel of 10 jurors, including four alternateswho were allowed to participate in the deliberations but not to vote.    The jury found that neither Smith, Carbone nor Reeves suffers from anasbestos-related injury.  It awarded $166,000 to the fourth claimant,Moline.  (The judgment in the Moline case was appealed, and the SixthCircuit addressed that appeal in a separate opinion earlier this year inMiller v. American President Lines.)    In their appeal, Smith, Carbone and Reeves argued that the trialcourt had erred in precluding their claim that the presence of tobaccosmoke in the ships rendered the ships unseaworthy and that the shipownerswere negligent in permitting smoking in unventilated areas of the ships.They also alleged error in the court's decision to allow alternate jurorsto participate in jury deliberations.    The Sixth Circuit affirmed.  It said that it need not address "thenovel and difficult question whether a shipowner, by virtue ofmaintaining a ship dense with cigarette smoke generated by its occupants,may have breached its Jone Act duty of care or its maritime law duty tomaintain a seaworthy ship" because the seamen never pleaded that theoryof liability.  Instead, the court said, they presented the theory "in analtogether off-hand manner" during the trial.  "We conclude that thedistrict court was well within its discretion to eliminate the issue asunworthy of trial," the panel said.    The court added that counsel for the seamen suggested that he wasraising the cigarette smoke liability theory only as a "tactical effort"to persuade defense counsel to drop their smoking defense.  "Here,counsel [for the seamen] never seriously suggested that he was preparedto advance this novel arugment with proof," the panel said.    The court added that it was not deciding whether a properly presentedclaim of cigarette-smoke liability would stand as a matter of law.    With regard to the jury issue, the appeals court said that the recordshowed that the parties had stipulated at trial to the unusualarrangement, albeit after the trial court judge had threatened toeliminate consolidated trials for other seamen if the plaintiffs refusedto agree to the arrangement.  It noted that the seamen were representedby able and experienced counsel and that counsel agreed to the juryarrangement during an off-record conference without the judge'spresence.    "Based upon this record, we cannot say that the trial judge's strongwords were enough to overcome plaintiffs' counsel's ability to act in theperceived best interest of his clients," the court said.    It held that the seamen had waived their right, under FRCP 47(b), tohave the alternate jurors discharged after the jury retires todeliberate.    The seamen are represented by the Jacques Admiralty Law Firm inDetroit, by Merrit Green with Green, Ashley & Wegian in Toledo, Ohio andby Dean Robb with Robb, Messing & Palmer in Traverse City, MI.    Defense attorneys involved in the case included Thomas A. Heffernanand Richard C. Binzley with Thompson, Hine & Flory in Cleveland, David G.Davies with Ray, Robinson, Hannian & Carle in Cleveland, and WilliamTousley Smith with Calfee, Halter & Griswold, also in Cleveland.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993HIGH COURT FINDS FOR B&W IN GENERICS WAR ANTITRUST DISPUTE    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 21 affirmed the Fourth Circuit's May1992 determination that Brooke Group Ltd. (nee Liggett Group Inc.) couldnot sustain its claim under the Robinson-Patman Act against Brown &Williamson Tobacco Corp. for predatory pricing in connection with thegeneric cigarette war of the mid-1980s.    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, writing for a 6-3 majority, accepted thetheoretical viability of Liggett's contention that an oligopolist couldengage in predatory pricing tactics, but found that the plaintiff failedto prove the level of industry orchestration that such a claim wouldrequire (Brooke Group Ltd. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., U.S. Sup.Ct., No. 92-466).    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    Liggett, whose share of the domestic cigarette market stood atroughly 2% in 1980, became in that year the first American manufacturerto enter the black-and-white field.  Within three years, generics came toaccount for 65% of Liggett's sales volume; by 1984, Liggett's overallmarket share stood at 4%, and the company had 97% of the overall genericmarket.    B&W entered the market in 1984 with black-and-white packaged product,offering distributors both volume rebates and higher bonuses for stockingtheir generics exclusively.  Liggett responded by increasing its rebates;it would do so four more times to try to beat B&W's terms.  Liggettshortly thereafter lodged a Lanham Act/Robinson-Patman Act complaintagainst B&W in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of NorthCarolina.    Following a 115-day trial, the jury found for Liggett in March 1990.The plaintiff was awarded the costs of engaging in the rebate war, $49.6million, statutorily trebled to $148.8 million.  Six months later, thepresiding judge granted B&W's motion for JNOV, holding that the plaintiffhad failed to demonstrate that the defendant's practices would injurecompetition in the overall U.S. market or that such injury would resultfrom price discrimination.    The Fourth Circuit predicated its May 1992 affirmance on therationale that, as a member of an oligopoly, B&W could not reasonablyexpect to recoup the losses that pursuit of a scheme of predatory pricingwould by necessity involve.    Justice Kennedy's affirmance was joined by Chief Justice William H.Rehnquist, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Justice Antonin Scalia, JusticeDavid H. Souter and Justice Clarence Thomas.  "[W]hether the claimalleges predatory pricing under { 2 of the Sherman Act or primary-lineprice discrimination under the Robinson-Patman Act, two prerequisites torecovery remain the same," wrote the Court.  "First, a plaintiff seekingto establish competitive injury resulting from a rival's low prices mustprove that the prices complained of are below an appropriate measure ofits rival's costs....    "The second prerequisite," the Court continued, "is a demonstrationthat the competitor had a reasonable prospect, or, under { 2 of theSherman Act, a dangerous probability, of recouping its investment inbelow-costs prices."  The Court stated that in the oligopoly context, theplaintiff would have to demonstrate that the below-cost prices wouldlikely cause the plaintiff to leave the market or raise its prices tosupracompetitive levels, and show that the below-costs prices wouldresult in injury to competition, i.e. that the predator would have toraise its prices above competitive levels to cover the costs of thepredation.    "These prerequisites to recovery are not easy to establish," statedJustice Kennedy, "but they are not artificial obstacles to recovery;rather, they are essential components of real market injury.... It wouldbe ironic indeed if the standards for predatory pricing liability were solow that antitrust suits themselves became a tool for keeping priceshigh."    The Court found the likelihood of predatory pricing by a oligopolistto be lowest where "there is no express coordination.  Firms that seek torecoup predatory losses through the conscious parallelism of oligopolymust rely on uncertain and ambiguous signals to achieve concertedaction.... This anticompetitive minuet is most difficult to compose andperform, even for a disciplined oligopoly."    The Court rejected the Fourth Circuit's dismissal of the viability ofpredatory pricing occuring within an oligopoly.  "A predatory pricingscheme designed to preserve or create a stable oligopoly, if successful,can injure consumers in the same way, and to the same extent, as onedesigned to bring about a monopoly.... [W]hen the realities of the marketand the record facts indicate that it has occurred and was likely to havesucceeded, theory will not stand in the way of liability."    Ultimately, however, the High Court determined that Liggett did nothave a case to take to the jury.  "The record in this case demonstratesthat the anticompetitive scheme Liggett alleged, when judged against therealities of the market, does not provide an adequate basis for a findingof liability."  Justice Kennedy found the evidence sufficient to showthat B&W envisioned or anticipated the anticompetitive results of itsactions; that it priced its generics below cost for a year-and-a-half;and that Liggett sustained losses as a result of that pricing.    "[H]owever," the Court continued, "[Liggett's] proof is flawed in acritical respect: The evidence is inadequate to show that in pursuingthis scheme, Brown & Williamson had a reasonable prospect of recoveringits losses from below-costs pricing through slowing the growth ofgenerics.... [N]o evidence suggests that [B&W] was likely to obtain thepower to raise the prices for generic cigarettes above a competitivelevel."    The Court determined that Liggett's market evidence did not supportits theory of the case.  "[T]he price and output data do not support areasonable inference that [B&W] and the other cigarette companieselevated prices above a competitive level for generic cigarettes.... therecord evidence does not permit a reasonable inference that output wouldhave been greater without [B&W]'s entry into the generic segment."    The Court was unmoved by the plaintiff's citation to price behaviorof generic and branded cigarettes through the remainder of the 1980s."All of Liggett's data is based upon the list prices of variouscategories of cigarettes.  Yet the jury had before it undisputed evidencethat during the period in question, list prices were not the actualprices paid by consumers...  Liggett's gap data ignores the effect of'subgeneric' cigarettes... Liggett itself, while supposedly under thesway of oligopoly power, pioneered this development in 1988".    The Court held that "rising prices do not themselves permit aninference of a collusive market dynamic."  Justice Kennedy foundsignificant that Liggett's own officers had "consistently denied thatthey or other firms [priced] their cigarettes through tacit collusion".    The High Court found that the evidence did not even show a likelihoodof supracompetitive pricing, noting that the industry in 1984 faced adecline in demand and substantial excess capacity.  "[T]he situationfacing the cigarette companies in the 1980's would have made such tacitcoordination unmanageable," Justice Kennedy determined.    "We understand that the chain of reasoning by which we have concludedthat Brown & Williamson is entitled to judgment as a matter of law isdemanding," the Court concluded.  "But a reasonable jury is presumed toknow and understand the law, the facts of the case, and the realities ofthe market."    Justice John Paul Stevens authored a dissent in which Justice ByronR. White and Justice Harry A. Blackmun joined.  "The fact that a pricewar may not have accomplished its purpose as quickly or as completely asoriginally intended," wrote Justice Stevens, "does not immunize conductthat was illegal when it occurred...    "That B&W executives were willing to accept [$15 million in losses]during the entire 18 months is powerful evidence of their belief thatprices ultimately could be 'managed up' to a level that would allow B&Wto recoup its investment," the dissent stated.  "[The majority relies] onthe supposition that an 'anticompetitive minuet is most difficult tocompose and perform, even for a disciplined oligopoly'... I wouldsuppose, however, that the professional performers who had danced theminuet for 40 to 50 years would be better able to predict whether theirfavorite partners would follow them in the future than would an outsider,who might not know the difference between Haydn and Mozart."    Philip Areeda, Cambridge, Massachusetts, argued on behalf of thepetitioner.    Robert H. Bork, Washington, D.C., argued on behalf of the respondent.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993WA SMALL CLAIMS CT. REJECTS EX-SMOKER'S CESSATION CLAIMS AGAINST PM    Judge Linda Jacke of the Mercer Island County, WA, District Court onJune 22 dismissed as time-barred the small claims suit lodged againstPhilip Morris Inc. by a Kirkland design engineer who sought to recoup$1154 in expenditures incurred as a result of his quitting smoking(Deskiewicz v. Philip Morris Inc., Mercer Island Cty., WA, Dist. Ct.,No. 16917).    Judge Jacke determined that Alfred Deskiewicz Jr.'s claims against PMbegan to run in the 1970s, when he first unsuccessfully tried to kick aMarlboro habit that lasted 34 years.  Deskiewicz, 51, had argued that hefirst realized that he was addicted to smoking in 1989; his expensesrepresented the costs of doctor's visits, nicotine patches and a healthclub membership in order to lose the weight gained after he quit.    Judge Jacke also determined that the plaintiff failed to prove thathe could not stop smoking without outside aid.  Deskiewicz had made twounsuccesful attempts at quitting before breaking his habit.    Mr. Deskiewicz was self-represented.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993HIGH COURT: JUDGES SHOULD DECIDE RELIABILITY OF SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 28 held that federal judges should beactive gatekeepers charged with insuring that "any and all scientifictestimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but reliable"(Daubert et al. v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., U.S. Sup. Ct.,No. 92-102).    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    The Supreme Court case involved Jason Daubert and Eric Schuller, whowere born with severe and permanent limb-reduction birth defects.  In1984, their parents, individually and as guardians ad litem(collectively, Daubert), filed suit in California state court againstMerrell Dow, alleging that the birth defects had been caused by thecompany's anti-nausea drug Bendectin, which each child's mother had takenduring the limb-development phase of pregnancy.  Eight experts testifiedin support of the allegation that Bendectin had caused both sets of limbdefects.  Merrell Dow elected to remove the cases to the U.S. DistrictCourt for the Southern District of California, based on diversity ofcitizenship.    After preliminary discovery, Merrell Dow moved for summary judgmenton the issue of causation, claiming there exists no scientific proof thatBendectin causes birth defects and, therefore, it could not have causedthe birth defects at issue in this case.  The district court grantedsummary judgment on the basis that none of Daubert's expert testimony wasadmissible "because it lacks the sufficient foundation necessary under[Federal Rule of Evidence] 703."  The evidence was excluded on the basisthat either:  (1) the testimony excluded epidemiological data, or (2) thetestimony included epidemiological data but the expert did not cite aspecific, published, peer-reviewed study that, considered in isolation,proves causation with "statistical significance," i.e., 95% certainty.    Daubert appealed, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed, advancing its ownground for excluding Daubert's expert testimony.  Citing Frye v. UnitesStates (293 F. 1013, 1014 [DC Cir. 1923]), the court held that expertopinion based on a scientific technique is admissible only if it isgenerally accepted as a reliable technique among the scientific community.    Daubert filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the U.S. SupremeCourt, which granted certiorari on Oct. 13.  During a March 30 hearing,Michael H. Gottesman, professor of law at the Georgetown UniversitySchool of Law, argued the case for Daubert.  He urged the court to permitexpert testimony based on animal studies, cell studies, chemicalcomposition studies and the re-analysis of epidemiological studies.  Heclaimed the Ninth Circuit incorrectly adopted a requirement thatscientific evidence appear in peer-reviewed journals.  He said thecorrect law, the Federal Rules of Evidence, would allow the evidence tobe admitted.    Former Solicitor General Charles Fried, currently a law professor atthe Harvard University College of Law, argued the case for Merrell Dow.He called 'scientific knowledge,' as used in Rule 702, "that body ofpropositions which have been produced by the methods and procedures ofscience."  He contended Daubert's propositions "have not been produced bythe methods and procedures of science."    In an opinion written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the Supreme Courtsaid that the trial judge must determine at the outset whether an expertis proposing to testify to (1) scientific knowledge that (2) will assistthe trier of fact to understand or determine a fact is issue.  It said,"This entails a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning ormethodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid and ofwhether that reasoning or methodology properly can be applied to thefacts in issue.  We are confident that federal judges possess thecapacity to undertake this review.  Many factors will bear on theinquiry, and we do not presume to set out a definitive checklist or test."    But the court did find some general observations to be appropriate."Ordinarily, a key question to be answered in determining whether atheory or technique is scientific knowledge that will assist the trier offact will be whether it can be (and has been) tested....  Anotherpertinent consideration is whether the theory or technique has beensubjected to peer review and publication.  Publication (which is but oneelement of peer review) is not a sine qua non of admissibility; it doesnot necessarily correlate with reliability,...and in some instanceswell-grounded but innovative theories will not have been published....Some propositions, moreover, are too particular, too new, or of toolimited interest to be published.  But submission to the scrutiny of thescientific community is a component of 'good science,' in part because itincreases the likelihood that substantive flaws in methodology will bedetected....  The fact of publication (or lack thereof) in apeer-reviewed journal thus will be a relevant, though not dispositive,consideration in assessing the scientific validity of a particulartechnique or methodology on which an opinion is premised....Additionally, in the case of a particular scientific technique, the courtordinarily should consider the known or potential rate of error,...andthe existence and maintenance of standards controlling the technique'soperation," the court said.    "Finally," the panel continued, "'general acceptance' can yet have abearing on the inquiry....  Widespread acceptance can be an importantfactor in ruling particular evidence admissible, and 'a known techniquethat has been able to attract only minimal support within thecommunity'...may properly be viewed with skepticism.  The inquiryenvisioned by Rule 702 is, we emphasize, a flexible one....  Throughout,a judge assessing a proffer of expert scientific testimony under Rule 702should always be mindful of other applicable rules.  Rule 703 providesthat expert opinions based on otherwise inadmissible hearsay are to beadmitted only if the facts or data are 'of a type reasonably relied uponby experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences uponthe subject.'  Rule 706 allows the court at its discretion to procure theassistance of an expert of its own choosing.  Finally, Rule 403 permitsthe exclusion of relevant evidence 'if its probative value issubstantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion ofthe issues, or misleading the jury....'"    The court addressed Merrell Dow's concerns that abandonment of"general acceptance" as the exclusive requirement for admission willresult in a "free-for-all" in which befuddled juries are confounded byabsurd and irrational pseudoscientific assertions.  It said, in thisregard, Merrell Dow "seems to us to be overly pessimistic about thecapabilities of the jury, and of the adversary system generally.Vigorous cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, andcareful instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional andappropriate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence....Additionally, in the event the trial court concludes that the scintillaof evidence presented supporting a position is insufficient to allow areasonable juror to conclude that the position more likely than not istrue, the court remains free to direct a judgment....  These conventionaldevices, rather than wholesale exclusion under an uncompromising 'generalacceptance' test, are the appropriate safeguards where the basis ofscientific testimony meets the standards of Rule 702."    The court added, "We recognize that in practice, a gatekeeping rolefor the judge, no matter how flexible, inevitably on occasion willprevent the jury from learning of authentic insights and innovations.That, nevertheless, is the balance that is struck by Rules of Evidencedesigned not for the exhaustive search for cosmic understanding but forthe particularized resolution of legal disputes."    Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote a partial dissent.  "I donot doubt that Rule 702 confides to the judge some gatekeepingresponsibility in deciding questions of the admissibility of profferedexpert testimony.  But I do not think it imposes on them either theobligation or the authority to become amateur scientists in order toperform that role.  I think the Court would be far better advised in thiscase to decide only the questions presented, and to leave the furtherdevelopment of this important area of the law to future cases," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS $10 MILLION WV PUNITIVE DAMAGE AWARD    The U.S. Supreme Court on June 25 affirmed the determination of WestVirginia's highest court that a $10 million punitive damage award grantedby a jury on a $19,000 slander of title claim was not violative of the14th Amendment's Due Process Clause (TXO Production Corp. v. AllianceResources Group et al., U.S. Sup. Ct., No. 92-479).    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    The litigation arose from the petitioner TXO Production Corp.'s 1984decision to obtain the rights to develop oil and gas resources on a1000-acre West Virginia tract.  TXO approached the rightsholder AllianceResources Group with an offer of $20 per acre and a 22% royalty on alloil and gas revenues in exchange for Alliance's interests; Allianceaccepted the offer in 1985, agreeing to return all consideration paid ifits title was found invalid.    TXO's lawyers subsequently uncovered a 1958 deed executed byAlliance's predecessor in interest that conveyed interests in miningrights.  TXO's lawyers spoke to the recipient of the deed, and hissubsequent transferees, and all understood that the deed solely appliedto mine coal.  The 1958 deed stated on its face that the conveyorretained all oil and gas rights.    Despite this knowledge, TXO thereafter apprised Alliance that a"distinct possibility or probability" existed that its title was flawed.TXO obtained a quitclaim deed to the mineral rights from the lastdeedholder, and unsuccessfully tried to persuade the recipient of the1958 deed to sign a false affidavit indicating that the deed mightcontemplate oil and gas rights.    TXO thereafter sought to renegotiate the agreement, and filed theinstant suit after negotiations failed.  The McDowell County CircuitCourt rejected TXO's claims; moreover, a jury found for Alliance on itscounterclaim for slander of title.  Among the evidence before the jurywas TXO's knowledge of the validity of Alliance's title; the bad faith inwhich TXO acted by challenging the title; the large size of TXO and itsparent company; that the anticipated revenues (and royalties) weresubstantial; and TXO's comparable behavior in other business dealings.The jury based its $19,000 actual damages award on Alliance's defensecosts.    The trial court denied TXO's J.N.O.V. and remittitur motions, and TXOappealed to the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, arguing thepunitive award as unconstitutional per the U.S. Supreme Court's 1991holding in Pacific Mutual Life v. Haslip.    The state high court rejected the appeal, finding the award supportedby each factor in its recognized "reasonable relationship" test, i.e.,the potential harm TXO's actions could have caused; the maliciousness ofTXO's actions; and the penalty necessary to discourage similar conduct inthe future.    "The parties' desire to formulate a 'test' for determining whether aparticular punitive award is 'grossly excessive' is understandable,"wrote Justice John Paul Stevens in an opinion joined by Chief JusticeWilliam H. Rehnquist and Justice Harry A. Blackmun.  "Under respondents'rational basis standard, apparently any award that would serve thelegitimate state interest in deterring or punishing wrongful conduct, nomatter how large, would be acceptable....    "On the other hand, we reject the premise underlying TXO's invocationof heightened scrutiny," the court continued.  "[I]n determining whethera particular award is so 'grossly excessive' as to violate the DueProcess Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, ...we return to what we saidtwo Terms ago in Haslip:  'We need not and indeed we cannot, draw amathematical bright line between the constitutionally acceptable and theconstitutionally unacceptable that would fit in every case.'"    In response to the petitioner's emphasizing that the punitive awardwas 526 times the amount of the actual damages, the court wrote that ithas "eschewed an approach that concentrates entirely on the relationshipbetween actual and punitive damages.  It is appropriate to consider themagnitude of the potential harm that the defendant's conduct would havecaused to its intended victim if the wrongful plan had succeeded, as wellas the possible harm to other victims that might have resulted if similarfuture behavior were not deterred....    "While petitioner stresses the shocking disparity between thepunitive award and the compensatory award," the court continued, "thatshock dissipates when one considers the potential loss to respondents, interms of reduced or eliminated royalties payments, had petitionersucceeded in its illicit scheme."    The court refused to find the award "grossly excessive" in light of"the amount of money potentially at stake, the bad faith of petitioner,the fact that the scheme employed in this case was part of a largerpattern of fraud, trickery and deceit, and petitioner's wealth."    TXO had argued that, unlike in Haslip, the jury was instructed totake "the wealth of the perpetrator" into account in arriving at thepunitive award; this distinction did not alter the majority's finalanalysis.  "[I]n Haslip we referred to the 'financial position' of thedefendant as one factor that could be taken into account in assessingpunitive damages....  We also note that TXO did not squarely argue in theWest Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals that these aspects of the juryinstruction violated the Due Process [Clause], possibly because manyStates permit the jury to take account of the defendant's wealth," thecourt stated.    The court was unmoved by the criticism engendered by the WestVirginia high court's drawing of distinction between classes of "reallymean" and "really stupid" defendants in weighing a punitive award.  "Thatthose terms played little, if any, part in [the West Virginia SupremeCourt's] actual evaluation of the propriety of the damages award isevident from the reasoning in its thorough opinion....  Moreover, twomembers of the court who wrote separately to disassociate themselves fromthe 'really mean' and 'really stupid' terminology shared the views of therest of the members of the court on the merits."    Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who concurred in part and concurred inthe judgment, wrote separately to state that he "was not in fullagreement [with] the plurality's discussion of the substantiverequirements of the Due Process Clause....  To ask whether a particularaward of punitive damages is grossly excessive begs the question:excessive in relation to what?  The answer excessive in relation to theconduct of the tortfeasor may be correct, but it is unhelpful, for we arestill bereft of any standard by which to compare the punishment to themalefaction that gave rise to it."    Justice Antonin Scalia, who concurred in the judgment, wrote aseparate opinion in which Justice Clarence Thomas joined.  Justice Scaliastated that the plurality "makes explicit what was implicit in Haslip:the existence of a so-called 'substantive due process' right thatpunitive damages be reasonable....  I am willing to accept theproposition that the Due Process [Clause] incorporates certainsubstantive guarantees specified in the Bill of Rights; but I do notaccept the proposition that it is the secret repository of all sorts ofother, enumerated, substantive rights."    Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote a lengthy dissent that was joinedby Justice Byron R. White and in part by Justice David H. Souter.  "In[Haslip]," the dissent stated, "this Court held out the promise thatpunitive damages award would receive sufficient constitutional scrutinyto restore fairness in what is rapidly becoming an arbitrary andoppressive system.  Today the Court's judgment renders Haslip's promise afalse one."    "The procedures that converted this commercial dispute into a $10million punitive verdict," the dissent continued, "were whollyinadequate.  Rather than producing a judgment founded on verifiablecriteria, they produced a monstrous award....  In my view, due processdoes not tolerate such cavalier standards when so much is at stake."    Carter Phillips of Sidley & Austin, Washington, DC, argued the casefor the petitioner.    Prof. Laurence Tribe of Harvard University Law School argued the casefor the respondents.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOBACCO INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJuly 1993MARYLAND APPEALS CT. FINDS NO REVERSIBLE ERROR IN CANCER-FEAR EVIDENCE    The Maryland Court of Special Appeals on April 28 affirmed a $407,224judgment against Keene Corp. in an asbestosis case after rejectingKeene's arguments that the trial court had erred in admitting evidence ofthe claimant's fear of cancer and that the claimant presentedinsufficient evidence to overcome Keene's state-of-the-art defense (KeeneCorp. v. Lewis, MD Ct. of Special App., Sept. Term 1992, No. 1479).    (The opinion is available from Andrews Document Access Service.  Call1-800-345-1101 or 215-399-6600 from Pennsylvania.)    Plaintiff William Lewis alleges asbestosis from exposure to asbestoswhile working as a sheet metal worker at the Bethlehem Steel shipyard inBaltimore between 1942 and 1944.    His original suit against 16 defendants alleged mesothelioma andasbestosis, but the claim of mesothelioma was withdrawn after he learnedthat it had been misdiagnosed.  Before the trial, Keene sought to preventall references to cancer or mesothelioma.  The trial court denied themotion to the extent that it would have precluded all evidence concerningLewis' fear or emotional distress at the prospect of contracting cancer,but it also ruled that evidence concerning the prospect of Lewis'contracting cancer would not be allowed absent evidence of the medicalprobability of contracting the disease.    The case went to trial against Keene only.  The jury found Keeneliable on Lewis' strict liability claim and awarded him $402,224 incompensatory damages, and awarded his wife $5,999 for loss ofconsortium.    Keene appealed, arguing that the court erred in allowing referencesto cancer and evidence of Lewis' fear of cancer and in submitting thestrict liability claim to the jury.    Affirming, the appeals court noted that the record of the trialcontains 79 scattered references to the word "cancer" and 41 referencesto the word "mesothelioma."  But, it refused to regard these "incidentalreferences" as grounds for reversing, observing that the both plaintiff'scounsel and the court had told the jury that Lewis was making no claimfor present or future cancer.    The court said that it could locate no testimony by Lewis in therecord concerning a current fear of cancer; the only testimony it couldlocate concerned his relief upon learning that his mesothelioma had beenmisdiagnosed.  "The only evidence that the jury heard in this regard wasessentially positive -- that Mr. Lewis did not have cancer and that hewas making no claim for either present or future cancer.  He gave notestimony as to any present emotional distress but expressed only hisdelight in knowing that he was 'going to be here for a while,'" the courtobserved.    "In summary, then, we do not see in this record a sufficientintrusion of inappropriate evidence to require reversal."    The court also rejected Keene's argument that Lewis presentedinsufficient evidence to show that, at the time of his exposure in theearly 1940s, it had or should have known that its product, as used in theshipyards where he worked, was sufficiently dangerous to require awarning.    The court simply reviewed the relevant state-of-the-art testimonyfrom Kenneth Nelson and from Lewis, and concluded that it was sufficientto show that the product was dangerous when used in ships on which Lewisworked, that Keene should have known of its danger to shipyard workers byFebruary 1943, and that it failed to warn Lewis and others in hisposition of the danger.    Lewis is represented by Shepard Hoffman and Deboarh Hines withConnerton, Ray & Simon in Washington, DC, and by G. Mitchel Mowell ofChestertown, Maryland.  Keene is represented by Ford Davis and JohnBillmyer with Whiteford, Taylor & Preston in Baltimore.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-31IA086-000615-B042-141http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh54.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020606 text/html 115376HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:38 GMTContent-length: 115188Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh54.html Sample Issue Copyright VACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNet December 25, 1995 & January 1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWS REPORTS . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Encephalitis Microsphere Formulation Improves Encephalitis Vaccine (789 words) Emerging Diseases Could Rabies-Like Diseases Enter the U.S.? (1817 words) Cancer Vaccines (Pancreatic Carcinoma) Vaccination with Mutant Ras Peptides Induces T-Cell Response (738 words) Conference Coverage (ACTG) "New" ACTG Moves Forward (654 words) Conference Coverage (ACTG) Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTG (384 words) HBV Vaccines Hepatitis Screening/Vaccination Needed in Hong Kong (563 words) Human Papillomavirus (Vaccine Design) VLPs from One Variant May Help To Prevent Infection (532 words) Immunology Discovery of Tumor Antigens Facilitated by Novel Process (707 words) Industry News (Vaccines) Collaboration Announced To Develop Rabies Vaccine (189 words) Industry News (Vaccines) Survival Improvement Shown in Breast Cancer Trial with Theratope (277 words) Influenza Killer Flu Expected (482 words) Malaria Vaccines SPf66 Vaccine Candidate Is Produced Under GMP Criteria (529 words) Respiratory Syncytial Virus Human RSV Succumbs to Bioengineering Techniques (519 words) RESEARCH FROM CONFERENCES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Cancer Vaccines "Gene Therapy for Brain Tumors by Autologous Vaccination with Engineered GM-CSF Secreting Tumor Cells." J.S. Yu, J.A. Butwick, G. Dkanoff, E.A. Chiocca and X.O. Breakefield. Neurosurgery Service and Molecular (219 words) Immunology "Immunization and Ganciclovir Treatment Delay the Formation of HSV-TK Expressing Brain Tumors in Rats Through Immunologic Suppression." U. Blomer, D. Barha, D.A. Petersen and F.H. Gage. Department of Neurosurgery (223 words) Malaria Vaccines "DNA Vaccines Against Malaria Based on the SSP2 Antigen." R.C. Hedstrom, M. Sedegah, H. Wang, M. Kaur, P. Hobart and S.L. Hoffman. Malaria Program, Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Vical Incorporated, San (290 words) Malaria Vaccines "Malaria Vaccine Trials Against Preerythrocytic Stages of Plasmodium Falciparum in Chimpanzees: 1) Effect on Parasitemia Elicited by Four Vaccine Candidates." P. Millet, A. Luty, G. Dubreuil, E. LeRoy, A. Tartar, W.M. (368 words) Malaria Vaccines "Optimization of Immune Responses to a Plasmodium DNA Vaccine in Aotus Monkeys." R.A. Gramzinski, D.C. Maris, N. Obaldia, R. Rossan, M. Sedegah, B. Wang, P. Hobart, M. Margalith and S.L. Hoffman. Malaria (315 words) Malaria Vaccines "Protective Efficacy Against Sporozoite Challenge With a Combination Sporozoite and Erythrocytic Stage Malaria Vaccine." Y. Charoenvit, R. Wang, T.M. Daly, C.A. Long, G.P. Corradin and S.L. Hoffman. Malaria Program, (299 words) JOURNAL ARTICLE SUMMARIES . . . DECEMBER 25, 1995 & JANUARY 1, 1996 Cancer Vaccines Duda, R.B.; Yang, H.; Dooley, D.D.; Abujawdeh, G. "Recombinant BCG Therapy Suppresses Melanoma Tumor Growth." Annals of Surgical Oncology, November 1995;2(6):542-549. (242 words) HIV Vaccines Honda, M.; Matsuo, K.; Nakasone, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Yoshizaki, H.; Kitamura, K.; Sugiura, W.; Watanabe, K.; Fukushima, Y.; Haga, S.; Katsura, Y.; Tasaka, H.; Komuro, K.; Yamada, T.; Asano, T.; Yamazaki, A.; Yamazaki, S. "Protective (316 words) Haemophilus influenzae Frasch, C.E. "Haemophilus influenzae Type b Conjugate and Combination Vaccines." Clinical Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):376-386. (244 words) Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2 Heineman, T.C.; Connelly, B.L.; Bourne, N.; Stanberry, L.R.; Cohen, J. "Immunization with Recombinant Varicella-Zoster Virus Expressing Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2 Glycoprotein D Reduces the Severity of Genital Herpes in (276 words) Immunology Stephens, H.A.F.; Brown, A.E.; Chandanayingyong, D.; Webster, H.K.; Sirikong, M.; Longta, P.; Vangseratthana, R.; Gordon, D.M.; Lekmak, S.; Rungruang, E. "The Presence of the HLA Class II Allele DPB1*0501 in Ethnic Thais Correlates (201 words) Listeria monocytogenes Miller, M.A.; Skeen, M.J.; Ziegler, H.K. "Nonviable Bacterial Antigens Administered with IL-12 Generate Antigen-Specific T Cell Responses and Protective Immunity Against Listeria monocytogenes." Journal of Immunology, (228 words) Pediatrics (HBV) Hurie, M.B.; Saari, T.N.; Proctor, M.E.; Davis, J.P. "Hospitals' Responses to Universal Infant Hepatitis B Vaccination Recommendations." Pediatrics, November 1995;96(5 Part 1):875-879. (373 words) Pediatrics (Immunization) Askew, G.L.; Finelli, L.; Lutz, J.; Degraaf, J.; Siegel, B.; Spitalny, K. "Beliefs and Practices Regarding Childhood Vaccination among Urban Pediatric Providers in New Jersey." Pediatrics, November 1995;96(5 Part 1):889-892. (350 words) Pediatrics (TB) Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A. "Does the Protective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced Tuberculin Reaction?." American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, (277 words) Peptide Vaccines Mitsuda, S.; Nakagawa, T.; Nakazato, H.; Ikai, A. "Receptor-Linked Antigen Delivery System - Importance of Autologous Alpha 2-Macroglobulin in the Development of Peptide Vaccine." Biochemical and Biophysical Research (255 words) Pneumococcal Shahid, N.S.; Steinhoff, M.C.; Hoque, S.S.; Begum, T.; Thompson, C.; Siber, G.R. "Serum, Breast Milk, and Infant Antibody after Maternal Immunisation with Pneumococcal Vaccine." Lancet, November 11, 1995;346(8985):1252-1257. (376 words) Varicella-Zoster Virus Perry, C.M.; Bryson, H.M. "Oka/Merck Varicella Vaccine: A Review of Its Immunogenicity and Protective Efficacy Against Varicella." Clinical Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):396-416. (450 words) MEETINGS REPORT *NEW LISTINGS . . . COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEY (891 words) CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1EncephalitisMicrosphere Formulation Improves Encephalitis VaccineMouse studies show that it may be possible to make a safe vaccine against adeadly form of viral encephalitis.Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis (VEE) virus - an alphavirus of the familyTogaviridae - is spread by mosquitoes and can cause fatal human infectionsduring epizootics among horses.The most effective vaccine against VEE virus is the live attenuated Trinidaddonkey strain TC-83.  But not only do 20 percent of vaccinated humans andanimals fail to develop neutralizing antibody titers to TC-83, evidencesuggests that the vaccine may cause birth defects and diabetes.  Moreover,there is concern that the vaccine strain could revert to its virulent form.The alternative to TC-83 is the formalin-killed whole virus vaccine C-84.While this vaccine is safe, it is far less effective than the live attenuatedvaccine and requires multiple injections for induction of immunity.Now researcher Terrence E.  Greenway of the University of Alabama, Birmingham,and colleagues have developed a microsphere delivery system for killed VEEvirus that is apparently both safe and immunogenic.  They reported theirresults in the journal Vaccine ("Enhancement of Protective Immune Responses toVenezuelan Equine Encephalitis (VEE) Virus with Microencapsulated Vaccine,"Vaccine, 1995;13(15):1411-20)."The microencapsulated VEE virus vaccine induced systemic immune responseswhich were higher and persisted longer than those induced with the free virusvaccine," Greenway et al.  wrote.  "The microencapsulated virus was moreeffective than the free virus in inducing immune responses protective againstsystemic challenge with virulent VEE virus."Biodegradable polymer microspheres were developed over the last decade as ameans of releasing contraceptive steroids.  Vaccinologists were quick to seethe potential benefits of this technology."Microsphere technology has the potential benefits of reducing the number ofinoculations, enhancing the immune response via both parenteral and oralvaccination routes, and in reducing the total antigen dose required to achieveimmune protection," wrote researcher M.C.  Steinhoff of the Center forImmunization Research, Baltimore, Maryland, in a recent review (Vaccine,January 1994;12(1):5-11).Greenway and colleagues noted that a number of different research teams haveshown poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) or DL-PLG microspheres to be effectivevehicles for augmenting immune responses to antigen administered eithermucosally or systemically.Various types of DL-PLG-based vaccines have already been proven safe inhumans.Greenway et al.  created several versions of DL-PLG microencapsulated VEEvirus and compared their immunogenicity and protective efficacy to that offree virus vaccine in BALB/c mice.Subcutaneous immunization with 50 (micro)g microencapsulated VEE virus yieldedanti-VEE antibody titers up to 32 times higher than that seen with free virus.When the mice that had received the microencapsulated vaccine received asecond booster immunization, their antibody responses remained stablethroughout the 100-day observation period.  Antibody levels began to wane onlyin mice boosted with free virus."At high vaccine doses (i.e.  25 or 50 (micro)g), microspheres prepared witheither methylene chloride or ethyl acetate were equally effective in inducingspecific anti-VEE virus antibody response after both the primary and secondaryimmunization," Greenway et al.  observed.  "However, when a lower dose (12.5(micro)g) of the vaccines was tested, methylene chloride processedmicrospheres induced higher antibody responses after both the primary andsecondary immunization.  ...  The solvent ethyl acetate reduced theimmunogenicity of formalin-fixed, inactivated VEE virus during themicroencapsulation procedure."In addition, the researchers found that formalin-fixed VEE was far better thannon-formalin-fixed VEE for use in the microspheres."Formalin fixation of the whole inactivated VEE virus vaccine prior tomicroencapsulation with the solvent methylene chloride dramatically enhancedthe immunogenicity of the final product, presumably through enhancedconformational stability," they wrote.In the mouse experiments, 80 percent of mice immunized with a single dose of 5(micro)g VEE virus in microspheres prepared with methylene chloride survivedchallenge with virulent VEE virus.  Only 20 percent of mice that received thefree virus vaccine survived challenge."At a high vaccine dose (i.e., 50 (micro)g), the microencapsulated vaccinesafforded 100 percent protection, whereas a similar dose of free antigenresulted in 40 percent survival in one experiment and 100 percent survival ina second experiment," Greenway et al.  wrote."These results, taken together with the protection results after secondaryimmunization with either free or microencapsulated virus vaccine, indicatethat a single immunization with the microsphere vaccine could affordprotection similar to that attained with multiple immunizations with the freevirus vaccine."The researchers are currently exploring the effectiveness of microencapsulatedVEE virus administered by various routes in protecting against aerosolchallenge with virulent VEE virus.The corresponding author for this study is Suzanne M.  Michalek, Department ofMicrobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 35294. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Emerging DiseasesCould Rabies-Like Diseases Enter the U.S.?Rabies-like diseases could cause epidemics in the U.S.  if infected animalsare imported from endemic areas, U.S.  Centers for Disease Control andPrevention (CDC) researchers warn.Although each year rabies kills 40,000 to 100,000 people worldwide, only oneor two deaths occur in the U.S.  due to widespread vaccination of domesticanimals, effective (but costly) post-exposure treatment (PET), and recentprograms to vaccinate wild animals.This reduction in mortality is expensive:  the U.S.  rabies prevention programcosts an estimated $230 million to $1 billion in public and private expensesper year, reported Charles E.  Rupprecht and colleagues of the CDC in a recentpublication ("The Ascension of Wildlife Rabies:  A Cause for Public HealthConcern or Intervention?"  Emerging Infectious Diseases, 1995;1(4):107ff).But little-understood cousins of the rabies virus that exist outside the U.S.are at best only marginally susceptible to rabies vaccine.  Either accidentalor intentional importation of infected animals to non-endemic areas raise theanimal reservoir - for most if not all of these viruses are from variousspecies of bats."Infections with non-rabies lyssaviruses have resulted in rabies vaccinefailures," Rupprecht et al.  noted.  "Such infections raise the specter ofpotentially serious public health consequences if introduced and subsequentlyestablished in susceptible bat populations."Members of the Lyssavirus genus are a group of genetically relatednegative-stranded RNA viruses.  The viruses that cause rabies are therhabdoviridae, found everywhere except for Australia, Antarctica, and someisolated islands.  Other Lyssaviruses include:* Mokola virus.  The reservoir for this virus is unknown, but Rupprecht et al.suggest that it may be some type of insectivore or rodent as it was firstisolated in a species of shrew trapped in 1968 in the Mokola Forest outsideIbadan, Nigeria; bushveld gerbils in Zimbabwe were found to be seropositive.Cases have occurred in Nigeria, South Africa, Cameroon, Zimbabwe, CentralAfrican Republic, and Ethiopia.  There have been two documented humaninfections.  Rabies vaccine does not protect against this virus.* Lagosbat virus.  The reservoir for this virus is thought to be fruit bats.Only 10 cases have been identified thus far, three in domestic animals, inNigeria, South Africa, Zimbabwe, the Central African Republic, Senegal, andEthiopia.  No human deaths are documented.  Rabies virus offers only marginalprotection.* Duvenhage virus.  The reservoir for this virus is not known, but issuspected to be insect-eating bats.  Cases have occurred in South Africa,Zimbabwe, and Senegal.  The virus is named after a man from Pretoria, SouthAfrica who in 1970 developed rabies-like encephalitis after being bitten by abat.  The patient died.  No cases in domestic animals have been identified.Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection.* European bat Lyssavirus 1 (EBLV1).  The reservoir for this virus is aEuropean insectivorous bat, most likely Eptesicus serotinus.  One human casewas documented in 1985, another was suspected in 1977.  Although the virus hasbeen found in more than 400 bats, no cases in domestic animals have beenidentified.  Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection.* European bat Lyssavirus 2 (EBLV2).  The reservoirs for this virus is again aEuropean insectivorous bat, most likely Mytotis dasycneme.  The virus wasfirst identified in a Swiss bat biologist working in Finland who died of arabies-like illness.  Of the five known cases, none have occurred in domesticanimals.  Rabies vaccine offers only marginal protection."The distances between Africa, Eurasia, Pacific Oceania, and the New Worldmitigate against the dispersal, migration, and introduction of healthy batswithout human intervention," Rupprecht et al.  wrote.  "However, severalrecent events illustrate the opportunity for the transoceanic transfer ofrabies-infected bats."These events include:* Research institutions.  There have been two close calls in researchfacilities.  Canadian researchers in 1986 shipped a live big brown bat(Eptesicus fuscus) to German associates.  The bat became ill was diagnosedwith rabies.  In 1994, a Massachusetts research team collected 12 wild bigbrown bats and sent them to Danish researchers.  Six of the bats died ofrabies.* Commercial enterprises.  A big brown bat was captured in Hawaii on acontainer ship carrying automobiles from Michigan.  The bat was rabid.* Legal or illegal importation of animals.  Improperly issued federal permitsin 1994 permitted import to the U.S.  of thousands of bats, mostly Egyptiantomb bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus).  Normally, sales of imported bats or theiroffspring are prohibited by federal law except by research institutions orzoos where contact with the public is limited.  Such bats are normallysubjected to extended quarantine.  The CDC warns people who own imported batsto prevent contact with humans."Although no reports of lyssaviruses isolated from Egyptian fruit bats exist,active surveillance for such viruses has not been conducted," Rupprecht et al.warned.  "These bats are relatively common and widespread throughout the areathat extends from Turkey and Cyprus to Pakistan, the Arabian peninsula, Egypt,and most of sub-Saharan Africa.  Because they may roost by the thousands in awide variety of habitats, there is ample opportunity for interaction withother Chiroptera, such as the widely distributed straw-colored (Eidolonhelvum) or epauletted (Epomophorus wahlbergi) fruit bats; both of thesespecies have been implicated in Lyssavirus epizootiology in Africa."The adaptability of Egyptian fruit bats should be a cause for concern becauseof the potential for survival and interaction among indigenous bat fauna,particularly in the southern United States."Such a disaster would not be the first importation of a lyssavirus to theUnited States.  While folklore recounts tales of bat-spread disease prior toEuropean colonization of the New World, the importation of dogs and red foxesfor the sport of fox hunting led to widespread epizootics.When rabies became a nationally reported disease in 1938, limited surveillancerevealed 9,412 cases per year - mostly in domestic animals - with 47 humandeaths.  Rabies control efforts for pet dogs began in the 1920s and by 1960rabies occurred more often in wild than in domestic animals.From 1961 to 1989, skunks were the primary U.S.  reservoir for rabies but theywere then supplanted by raccoons, probably boosted by transport of infectedanimals from southern states.Along with this change in animal vectors, the human epidemiology of rabies haschanged.  Until 1965, most up to 80 percent of human cases occurred after aknown exposure, usually a dog bite.  But in the last 10 years - with the 1975advent of a more effective canine vaccine - rabies deaths occurred in peoplewho had no history of an animal bite."Almost all the recent human cases occurred after an animal exposure that wasunrecognized by the patient as carrying a risk for rabies infection,"Rupprecht et al.  wrote.  "The apparent source of human rabies has alsochanged:  14 of the 18 cases acquired in the United States since 1980 involvedrabies variants associated with insectivorous bats."As noted above, the cost of rabies protection is high.  Rupprecht et al.noted that the New York State rabies diagnostic laboratory received 3,000submissions in 1989, but received 12,000 submissions in 1993 after theepizootic of raccoon rabies reached the state."The cost per human life saved from rabies ranges from approximately $10,000to $100 million, depending on the nature of the exposure and the probabilityof rabies in a region," Rupprecht et al.  wrote."What's more, most economic analyses do not take into account thepsychological trauma caused by human exposure to rabies, the subsequenteuthanasia of pets, or the loss of wildlife resources during rabies outbreaks.Rabies in wildlife has now reached historically high levels in the UnitedStates, and the costs of preventing human rabies are mounting."Rupprecht, chief of the CDC Rabies Section, and colleagues argue stronglyagainst population reduction of animal vectors for rabies on ecological,economic, and ethical grounds.  They instead promote oral vaccination programsfor wildlife, a concept first proposed in the 1960s by the CDC."Oral rabies vaccination of the red fox with vaccine-laden baits is anintegral aspect of rabies control throughout southeastern Canada and Europe,where more than 75 million doses of vaccine have been distributed over 5million km(2) during the past two decades," they wrote.  "Consequently, rabiesincidence among wild and domestic animals has fallen, as have PETS for humanrabies."However, the shift of the epizootic from foxes to raccoons required anextensive laboratory and field research effort, as the vaccines effective forfoxes were ineffective for raccoons and coyotes."In 1983, a vaccinia-rabies glycoprotein (V-RG) recombinant virus vaccine wasdeveloped that has proven to be an effective oral immunogen in raccoons andvarious other important reservoir species; vaccine advantages include improvedthermostability and an inability to cause rabies," Rupprecht et al.  wrote."When vaccine-laden baits are offered under natural conditions, contact withthem by nontarget wildlife species cannot be totally excluded.  However,studies of V-RG virus have shown no vaccine-associated morbidity, mortality,or gross pathologic lesions in more than 40 warm-blooded vertebrate speciesexamined."An efficacy field trial of the V-RG vaccine took place in Cape May, NewJersey, between spring 1992 and autumn 1994.  Nearly 100,000 fishmeal baitslaced with vaccine were distributed over 56,000 hectares both by hand and byhelicopter.  Overall rabies incidence and rate of spread was significantlyreduced.Although oral wildlife vaccination programs are currently in Massachusetts,New York, Florida, and southern Texas, Rupprecht et al.  noted that there aremany questions yet to be answered:* What is the optimal ratio of animal population density to bait density?* What level of herd immunity will be required to eliminate rabies?* What is the best way to distribute the vaccine bait?* How can the methods successful for foxes and raccoons be adapted to rabiescontrol in species such as skunks, mongooses, and dogs?* Who will fund these programs over time?* What do rabies control and prevention efforts really cost?"Given the problems inherent in wildlife control, the greater issue ofextending these methods to the control of dog rabies in the developing worldwill be a challenge well into the next century," Rupprecht et al.  concluded.The following CDC researchers contributed to this report:  Charles E.Rupprecht, V.M.D., Ph.D., chief of the Rabies Section; Jean S.  Smith, M.S.,research microbiologist; Makonnen Fekadu, D.V.M., Ph.D., research veterinarymedical officer; and James E.  Childs, Sc.D., chief of the EpidemiologySection, Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch, Division of Viral andRickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers forDisease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.The corresponding author for this study is Charles E.  Rupprecht, Centers forDisease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., Mailstop G33, Atlanta, GA30333, USA; fax 404-639-1058; e-mail cyr5@ciddvd1.em.cdc.gov. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Cancer Vaccines (Pancreatic Carcinoma)Vaccination with Mutant Ras Peptides Induces T-Cell ResponsePancreatic carcinoma patients carrying a ras mutation exhibited T-cellresponsiveness after vaccination with the corresponding mutant RAS peptides.Because CD4 and CD8 T cells specific for a single ras mutation have beendescribed, and because mutant p21 RAS can be recognized by human T cells,mutant p21 RAS represents an exclusive tumor-specific antigen.  These findingssuggest that RAS peptide vaccination of cancer patients with a verified rasmutation might be used as a specific immunotherapy.Marianne K.  Gjertsen et al.  vaccinated pancreatic cancer patients exhibitinga ras mutation with a synthetic RAS peptide in an effort to influence theclinical course of the disease ("Vaccination with Mutant RAS Peptides andInduction of T-Cell Responsiveness in Pancreatic Carcinoma Patients Carryingthe Corresponding ras Mutation," The Lancet, November 25,1995;346(8987):1399-1400)."Results indicate that specific T-cell responses against mutations uniquelyharbored in tumor cells can be induced in cancer patients by vaccination,"stated Gjertsen et al.Five patients with histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of the pancreaswith ras mutations were enrolled in this clinical trial.  Peripheral bloodmononuclear cells (1-4x10(9)) were collected by leukapheresis and loaded witha synthetic RAS peptide encompassing residues 5-21 of p21 RAS andcorresponding to the mutation in the patients tumor tissue.Patients were vaccinated on day 0 and boosted on days 14 and 35.  Additionalboosters were given every 4-6 weeks.  None of the patients exhibited any toxicreactions or side-effects after vaccination.None of the patients exhibited T-cell responsiveness to any of the RASpeptides tested before the protocol started, although they showed normalT-cell responses against other test antigens.  Two of the five patientsexhibited T-cell response to RAS peptides in their peripheral bloodmononuclear cells around day 40 after the onset of the vaccination protocol,noted the authors.The T-cell response was transient, and disappeared during the following weeks.Repeated vaccinations did not result in a reappearance of detectableresponding T cells in the peripheral blood.Although puzzled at first by the lack of detectable T-cell response, theauthors determined that the tumor-specific T cells elicited by RAS peptidevaccination were homing to the tumor and being selectively removed fromcirculation.No major therapeutic response was observed in the any of the patients,including the two who exhibited brief T-cell responses.  The authors felt thatthis was due to the terminal stage of the disease in the patients.  All thepatients had large tumor burdens and progressively deteriorating immunesystems, with life expectancies of only three to four months.Tumor tissue taken from the two responding patients after they died showedthat lymphocyte infiltration was prominent and was mainly constituted by Tcells.  This finding was compatible with the explanation that the RAS-specificT cells elicited by the vaccination may have homed in to the tumors of thesepatients, noted the authors.They also noted that vaccination by a single tumor-specific epitope may not besufficient in these circumstances as the therapeutic vaccine may have been toolittle, too late.  Ongoing studies in patients with minimal residual diseasecould provide a clinical setting allowing for more careful evaluation ofimmune responses and the potential for clinical benefits of RAS peptidevaccine, noted the authors."Our method for vaccination is novel," concluded Gjertsen et al.  "We injectedlarge amounts of peptide-pulsed mononuclear cells.  The rational is that afraction of these cells (i.e., pulsed dendritic cells and monocytes) will endup in lymphoid organs, where the actual T-cell stimulation will take place.Two and three rounds of vaccination seemed to be sufficient to break the stateof unresponsiveness to the mutant RAS peptides in [the two] patients [whoresponded]."This study was an extension of preliminary research done by these same authorswhich was presented at the International Symposium on Cancer Vaccines, heldOctober 3-5, 1994.  At that time, they stated "Our results indicate thatimmunotherapy targeted against neoplastic cells carrying ras mutations ispossible, and a protocol based on loading professional antigen presentingcells with synthetic RAS peptides is currently being tested in a clinicalsetting."This research was supported by the Norwegian Cancer Society, the NorwegianResearch Council for Science and the Humanities, and Pronova, Norway.The corresponding author for this study is Dr.  Gustave Gaudernack, Sectionfor Immunotherapy, Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Immunology,Montebello, N-0310 Oslo, Norway. - by Michelle MarbleBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Conference Coverage (ACTG)"New" ACTG Moves ForwardCan the main clinical trials group in the U.S.  shed its image as a dinosaurtoo large and slow-moving to respond to new developments in AIDS therapies?According to the chair of the group's Adult Executive Committee - Universityof Colorado researcher Robert "Chip" Schooley - recent reorganization hasaccomplished this objective.  Schooley made his remarks during the TwentiethAIDS Clinical Trials Group Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington,D.C.The AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) is the arm of the U.S.  NationalInstitute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Division of AIDS (DAIDS)responsible for testing new treatments for HIV disease and its complications.But the group - particularly the division responsible for testing drugs inadults - has been severely criticized for lacking central control and formoving far too slowly to provide answers to pressing questions about AIDStherapies.DAIDS recently completed a top-to-bottom evaluation and reorganization of theACTG.  In a plenary address to the group's first general meeting since thechanges took effect, Schooley acknowledged that many of the criticisms werevalid, but also stressed the group's many achievements."We've been through a lot of self and external evaluation," Schooley said."But there are a lot of things right with this organization.  This is thepreeminent clinical organization in the world.  We have put together atremendous organization to deal with a disease we all are tired of."Schooley noted that four years ago only one drug had been approved for thetreatment of primary HIV infection and that today, largely due to ACTGefforts, there are five such drugs with a sixth on the way."This organization will play a major role in understanding how these drugswork," he said.  "We have a tremendous opportunity to move along quickly."Schooley noted that recent ACTG studies have defined a role for combinationtherapy with the nucleoside analog didanosine (ddI) and for the use of the newprotease inhibitor saquinavir.He promised that the ACTG would make increased use of new laboratory findings"to tell us what we need to do."The "new" ACTG will collaborate more closely with DAIDS, Schooley said.  Butmost importantly, the ACTG will streamline and simplify the process by whichit generates clinical trial protocols."One of the things we were appropriately criticized for was behaving likecivil servants," Schooley said, referring to previous bureaucratic processesthat prevented the rapid testing of new treatments in a clinical setting.The organization of the ACTG has been streamlined so that the adult sectionhas only three committees making research decisions.  These three ResearchAgenda Committees (RACs) are the HIV Disease RAC, the Immunology RAC, and theOpportunistic Disease RAC.  Committees that were once separate RACs - thePharmacology Committee, the Women's Health Committee, and the Patient CareCommittee - will now be established as standing resource committees withineach of the three main RACs.There will be two major changes in how the ACTG functions:  there will becentralized control of both resources and laboratories.Resources will now be controlled directly by those planning and executing theACTG scientific agenda via a Scientific Agenda Steering Committee comprised ofthe various committee chairs.Laboratories previously operated independently of the research committees,receiving their funds directly from DAIDS."Now scientific committees will directly control the labs," Schooley said.  "Ithink this will work very well."But the executive committee chair warned that the ACTG would continue tochange."Four years from now this will be a very different organization than now," hesaid.  "The changes have been good, they have been enabling."He called for the active participation of each investigator."Two thousand people thinking will get more done than just a few executivecommittee members," Schooley said. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Conference Coverage (ACTG)Patient Recruitment and Retention a Problem for ACTGMany institutions conducting AIDS clinical trials have been unable to find andkeep study participants.A study of 28 institutions participating in U.S.  government-sponsoredclinical trials showed that 18 of the sites (64 percent) failed to meet theirpatient accrual goals.The study, conducted by Washington University researcher Michael Klebert andcolleagues, was presented at the Twentieth AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG)Meeting, held December 2-6, 1995, in Washington, D.C.  The ACTG Patient CareCommittee, a resource committee of the ACTG executive committee, performed thestudy."Adequate recruitment and retention are essential in conducting successfulclinical trials," Klebert said.Of 35 participating ACTG sites queried anonymously, 28 participated in thestudy.  Except that they tended to be located on the east coast,nonparticipating sites were not significantly different in terms of size orpatient demographics from participating institutions.Surprisingly, the study found that the number of recruitment strategies usedby a study site was not related to meeting recruitment and retention goals.Strategies positively correlated with successful patient recruitment andretention were provision of child care, education of patients, provision ofpeer advocates for patients, and payment via cash or vouchers.  Provision ofsupport groups was negatively correlated with success.More than half of the sites identified study design as a barrier torecruitment.  Nearly 40 percent of the sites said that barriers to successfulrecruitment were lack of outreach and cultural sensitivity.The sites with the worst recruitment/retention problems tended not to combineprimary care with study-protocol visits.  But high proportions of minoritypatients or high proportions of patients using intravenous drugs was notassociated with poor recruitment or retention.The major barriers to patient retention were the use of unpopular or too manydrugs in the study, high frequency of visits, and the availability ofalternative drugs.Based on the study findings, Klebert made several recommendations to improvepatient recruitment and retention:*  Combine primary care and research visits.*  Promote a strong relationship between the study nurse and patients.*  Provide transportation to the study site.*  Ask patients about factors that might interfere with their participation.*  Design studies to address retention problems.*  Study identified problem sites in detail. - by Daniel J. DeNoon, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1HBV VaccinesHepatitis Screening/Vaccination Needed in Hong KongHepatitis screening and vaccination programs are desperately needed forstudents in Hong Kong, according to a report from the University of Hong Kong.Researcher Ian B.  Marshall wrote that similar programs should be recommendedfor students from Southeast Asia who attend overseas colleges anduniversities, including those in the United States ("Screening and Vaccinationfor Hepatitis B in Hong Kong University Students," CollegeHealth,1995;44:59-62).Hepatitis B is endemic in Chinese populations in Hong Kong, with an overallprevalence of hepatitis B markers of 49.9 percent and an antigen carrier rateof 9.5 percent.  Ninety percent of hepatocellular cancer (HCC) occurs incarriers of hepatitis B."In spite of improvements in treatment, HCC is still the second most commoncause of all cancer deaths in Hong Kong," Marshall wrote.  "Carriers are alsoat risk of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis; combined, these two conditionsare the 10th leading cause of all deaths in the community."Active immunization against hepatitis B is safe and effective, with onlyminor local and general reactions.  Protective antibody levels are produced in88 percent to 100 percent of healthy adults who receive a three-dose course ofvaccination.  Because of this high level of seroconversion and presumedimmunogenicity, routine postvaccination testing is not recommended."In this report Marshall evaluated a campaign to promote screening andvaccination for hepatitis B in students at the University of Hong Kong.Students entering the program appeared to have been highly motivated toreceive vaccination and responded well to a mailed recall.Ninety-eight percent of those eligible had the first dose of vaccine, and morethan 96 percent completed the full course of three vaccinations.  Theprevalence of hepatitis B antigen was 3.59 percent; male students showedsignificantly higher prevalence (4.48 percent) than female students (2.97percent).  Hepatitis B surface antibody prevalence was the same in both sexes(11.8 percent)."These levels are about one third the prevalence levels found in the same agegroup in the general population in Hong Kong," Marshall wrote.  "It isrecommended that students at secondary schools and postsecondary educationinstitutions in Hong Kong be offered serological screening and vaccination forHepatitis B.  A similar policy is recommended for students from Southeast Asiawho attend overseas colleges and universities including those in the UnitedStates."Marshall wrote that further studies are needed to assess the effect such apolicy would have in reducing the prevalence rates for hepatitis B markers inolder age groups."Significant numbers of young people from Southeast Asian countries, whereprevalence levels for hepatitis B are similar to those in Hong Kong, study incolleges and universities overseas, particularly in North America, Australian,and the United Kingdom.  Foreign students studying in the United States havealso been identified as being at higher risk for hepatitis B.  Unless studentsfrom Southeast Asia can provide a vaccination record or laboratory evidence ofimmunity, they should be screened for hepatitis B markers before they enterpostsecondary education programs overseas.  HBsAg carriers should becounseled, and their susceptible household and sexual contacts should receivehepatitis vaccination, as should those foreign students who test negative forhepatitis B markers."The corresponding author for this study is Ian B.  Marshall, University HealthServices at the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong. - by Salynn Boyles, Senior EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Human Papillomavirus (Vaccine Design)VLPs from One Variant May Help To Prevent InfectionThe finding that two human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) variants areserologically cross-reactive is encouraging news for the development of agenital HPV vaccine.Grace Cheng, U.S.  National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland andcolleagues from the U.S.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),Atlanta, Georgia, and the Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark, set outto find whether DNA sequence variants of HPV-16 are distinct serotypes.Cheng et al.  compared the reactivities of women's sera from Zaire (n=97) andDenmark (n=123) ("Divergent Human Papillomavirus Type 16 Variants AreSerologically Cross-Reactive," Journal of Infectious Diseases, December1995;172:1584-1587).For the comparison, they used IgG-specific ELISAs based on virus-likeparticles (VLPs) composed of the L1 major capsid protein derived from anHPV-16 variant commonly found in central Africa (Z-1194) or from a variantthat is common in northern Europe (114K).  Z-1194 was isolated in Zaire from awoman with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and who also was positive forHIV."We have found that among the 220 women whose sera were tested, almost all whohad a serologic response to one HPV-16 L1 variant also responded to theother," wrote Cheng et al.  "Therefore we conclude that strains 114K andZ-1194 are serologically cross-reactive and likely belong to the sameserotype.  This is the case despite a relatively large number of amino aciddifferences in the major capsid proteins of the two strains."The L1s differed in seven amino acids.  In only one serum sample did theresearchers see evidence for a specific reaction to only one, and not theother VLP variant.If data from future research studies, which apply other L1 variants and othersets of sera, substantiate the current findings, this would have severalimplications.The first such implication would be that the lack of serotypic divergencewould suggest individual genital HPV types have not undergone the type ofantigenic drift (such as that seen in influenza viruses) that changesseroreactivity to virons."This implies either that changes in the major seroreactive virion epitopescannot be tolerated or that neutralizing antibodies do not play a dominantrole in controlling genital HPV infection under natural conditions," wroteCheng et al.The results also suggest that an ELISA which is based on a single VLP variantcould be applied for evaluating HPV-16 infection in different populations."Finally, these results are encouraging from the point of view of developing agenital HPV vaccine, since they suggest that VLPs from a single HPV-16 variantmight be effective worldwide in preventing HPV-16 infection," Cheng et al.wrote.Many of the nucleotide sequence variants of HPV-16 that have been identifiedhave been isolated in separate geographic areas (Chan et al., J Virol,1992;66:2057-2066 and 5714-5725; Ho et al., J Virol, 1993;67:6413-6423).Reinhard Kirnbauer, a co-author of the current report, and colleagues haveperformed numerous VLP-based ELISA studies to investigate HPV-16 infection(Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 1992;89:12180-12184; J Virol, 1993;67:6923-6936; JNatl Cancer Inst, 1994;86:494-504).The corresponding author for this study is Dr.  John T.  Schiller, Laboratoryof Cellular Oncology, NCI, NIH, Building 36, Room 1D32, Bethesda, Maryland20892. - by Cathy ClarkBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1ImmunologyDiscovery of Tumor Antigens Facilitated by Novel ProcessElusive tumor antigens can't hide from SEREX (serological identification ofantigens by recombinant expression cloning).The success of recombinant tumor vaccines and other immunotherapeuticmodalities in cancer patients is dependent upon the immune systems recognitionof tumor-specific and tumor-associated antigens.  In spite of extensiveefforts to identify tumor antigens in human neoplasms at the molecular level,too few have actually been pinpointed.Ugur Sahin et al.  modified the strategy of autologous typing to allow for anunbiased search, in addition to the direct molecular definition of,immunogenic tumor proteins based on their reaction with autologous patientsera ("Human Neoplasms Elicit Multiple Specific Immune Responses in theAutologous Host," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, December 5,1995;92(25):11810-13)."By applying this strategy of SEREX to four unselected human tumors ofdifferent origin, we discovered an unexpected frequency of tumor antigens thatelicit specific immune responses in the autologous host," stated Sahin et al."Since the molecular definition of tumor antigens by SEREX of tumor cDNA isfast and has a high yield, it may make sense to first define tumor antigens bySEREX and then to analyze their role in T-cell immunity.  Such a strategycould provide a rapidly expanding basis for additional approaches to theimmunotherapy and gene therapy of human neoplasms."The cDNA libraries from diagnostic biopsies of four patients with malignantmelanoma, brain tumor, renal cancer, and Hodgkin disease, were expressed in E.coli.  In order to test for clones expressing antigens against which theautologous patient had specific antibodies, 1x10(6) recombinant clones fromeach tumor cDNA were screened.  An ELISA modified for the exclusive detectionof human IgG antibodies was used.Of the 5x10(6) clones tested, 109 were found to be reactive with IgGantibodies in the serum sample of the autologous patient.  Cross-hybridizationexperiments determined that the 109 positive clones contained 24 differentinserts.  From four patients, 24 different antigens were discovered, noted theauthors.The autologous typing strategy that was modified by the authors was firstdeveloped by L.J.  Old and reported in the 1981 issue of Cancer Research,41:361-75.In order to determine the occurrence of antibodies against these newly definedtumor antigens, different tumor patients and healthy controls donated bloodfor testing against these antigens.  Antibodies against the tumor antigenswere detected at varying rates only in patients with the same type of tumor.The authors noted that the definition of 24 antigens in four tumors ofdifferent origin suggests that the analysis of B-cell responses against othertumors of the same or new types may identify an unexpected abundance of humantumor antigens.  Their results suggested that tumor immunogenicity in theautologous host is a common phenomenon and not restricted to malignantmelanomas.In addition, the immunogenicity of human tumors seems not to be due to theexpression of a single antigen, but is conferred by multiple antigens.  Theirobservation that antibodies against the new antigens could only be found inthe sera of patients bearing the same type of tumor suggested that tumorgrowth is essential for the development of a humoral immune response againstthe respective tumor antigens, and that antibody production is not anautoimmune effect elicited by tumor-independent mechanisms.The authors noted that their study was different from other studies which usedsera to detect antibodies.  Other studies have relied on low-titer serumantibodies or human monoclonal antibodies generated in vitro from patients'lymphocytes.  Theirs, on the other hand, uses a stringent serologicaldetection system which is limited to antigens that elicit high-titer IgGresponses in the patient in vivo."According to our data, overexpression of antigens in the tumor compared tonormal tissues seems to be the most common reason for immunogenicity,"concluded Sahin et al.  "Our observation that tumor antigens defined by T-cellresponses such as MAGE-1 and tyrosinase can also be detected by theserological approach suggest that an integrated immune response against tumorantigens may exist that involves both CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells as well as Bcells."The corresponding author for this study is Michael Pfreundschuh, MedizinischeKlinik and Poliklinik, Innere Medizin I, Universitat des Saarlandes, D-66421Homburg, Germany. - by Michelle MarbleBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Industry News (Vaccines)Collaboration Announced To Develop Rabies VaccineMicrobix Biosystems Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and MallinckrodtVeterinary, Inc.  announced December 12, 1995, that they have reached anagreement which will provide Microbix with funding to pursue the research anddevelopment of its novel non-replicative recombinant rabies vaccines.Under the terms of the agreement, Mallinckrodt Veterinary, Inc.  has providedMicrobix with an initial funding fee and will provide additionalmilestone-based support to pursue the continued research, development andregistration of these vaccines.  Following the satisfactory completion of theresearch and development program, both parties have agreed to enter into aroyalty-bearing worldwide licensing agreement for the use of the rabiesvaccine and Microbix will retain a portion of the manufacturing rights for theproduct.The unique properties of this recombinant vaccine is anticipated to offersignificant advantages in terms of cost of production, safety and flexibilityin administration.  Paul D.  Cottone, President and CEO of MallinckrodtVeterinary, Inc.  said, "This technology provides an excellent opportunity todevelop a product which will better meet the needs of our customers for rabiesprevention, through improved efficacy, routes of administration, and its usein multiple species."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Industry News (Vaccines)Survival Improvement Shown in Breast Cancer Trial with TheratopeDr.  Grant MacLean, Medical Oncologist and principal investigator forBiomira's clinical study at the Cross Cancer Institute in Edmonton, Alberta,Canada, presented results of Biomira's Phase II clinical trials of Theratopetherapeutic vaccine, in patients with metastatic breast cancer.The meeting "Novel Vaccine Strategies:  Immunotherapeutic Strategies forCancer" Conference was held in San Diego, California.  Theratope is anon-toxic therapy designed to stimulate the immune system of cancer patientsto respond against the cancer.  The study was conducted over a 2-1/2 yearperiod at the Cross Cancer Institute in Edmonton and Guy's Hospital in London,United Kingdom (U.K.).Among 48 women in a randomized clinical trial, MacLean reported that 24 whoreceived Theratope in its standard investigational program had a statisticallysignificant increase in survival over 24 women in the other study group whodid not receive the standard immunomodulation prior to Theratope treatment.The women on the standard Theratope program have a projected median survivalof 19.7 months versus 12.6 months for the other study group, with statisticalsignificant at P=0.018.In addition to increased survival, the women on the standard Theratope programhad statistically significant higher levels of antibodies against a specificmolecule, Sialyl-Tn (STn), found on the surface of breast cancer cells, thanwas observed with those who received the alternate Theratope program.Since receiving the analysis of the data, Biomira has been consulting withclinical investigators and scientists about these results and will becontacting regulatory officials in the U.S., Canada and Europe to discusstheir recommendations for the next steps to take Theratope therapeutic vaccineto commercialization for women who suffer from metastatic breast cancer.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1InfluenzaKiller Flu ExpectedInfluenza could develop a new form and trigger a worldwide epidemic at anytime, experts caution.At a conference of more than 200 infectious disease specialists, work hasstarted on a plan to prepare for what some believe is an inevitable pandemic,or worldwide epidemic, of killer flu.John LaMontagne of the U.S.  National Institutes of Health (NIH) said at theconference that the flu virus is "dynamic and very resourceful" and can changerapidly into forms that overwhelm natural human defenses.  "We anticipate wewill have another pandemic, but we don't know when," he said.Dr.  Dominick Iacuzio of the U.S.  National Institute of Allergy andInfectious Diseases (NIAID) said concern about another pandemic led to hisorganizing the conference.  "It has happened before, and it can happen again,"he said.The last major worldwide flu epidemic was in 1968, the so-called "Hong Kongflu."  New strains of the flu virus typically sweep through the internationalpopulation every ten to 40 years."Some experts say we are overdue," said Iacuzio.Alan Hansen of the World Health Organization (WHO) said modern transportationmakes it possible for new flu viruses to touch every continent within a matterof weeks - it once took many months.In 1918-1919, a new viral strain infected more than 2 billion people andkilled an estimated 20 million to 40 million.  The "Asian flu" in 1957 wasalso new and caused 750,000 deaths in the United States alone.Iacuzio said the Bethesda, Maryland, conference was called to helpinternational experts identify the gaps in what is known about the flu virusand its control.A formal report is being prepared, but these findings will be among theconclusions, he said:* Increased surveillance, particularly in remote Asian areas, is needed forearly detection of new flu viral strains.  If a potentially new form of theflu is found early enough, said Iacuzio, the pandemic could be blunted byrapidly producing a new vaccine.* Some experts believe the concentration of proteins used in the flu vaccinecould be reduced, thus making more doses available.  "We don't know theanswers to this," said Iacuzio, and that knowledge could be critical if thereis a sudden, worldwide need for vaccine.* Final work on vaccines that can be applied as nose spray or nose drops mustbe completed.  These so-called "cold-adapted vaccines" use modified live virusand have been shown to be effective in some studies.  Iacuzio said theiravailability in a pandemic could save many lives by protecting people againstthe disease.* Antivirals, drugs used to treat the flu infections, could provide physicianswith important new weapons in treating patients already infected.  Iacuziosaid candidate drugs are being tested, but are not available.  Such drugs needto be speedily developed, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Malaria VaccinesSPf66 Vaccine Candidate Is Produced Under GMP CriteriaThe malaria vaccine candidate SPf66 can be reproducibly manufactured, which isessential for performing large-scale trials.For large morbidity and mortality trials to study SPf66 (being considered forthe World Health Organization) to be interpretable, the product must be wellcharacterized, meet standardized release criteria and perform consistently,noted W.R.  Ballou, Department of Immunology, Walter Reed Army Institute ofResearch, Washington, D.C., and colleagues.Ballou et al.  presented their findings at the 44th Annual Meeting of theAmerican Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, San Antonio, Texas,November 17-21, 1995 ("Characterization of the Peptide Polymer SPf66 MalariaVaccine, abstract 325, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,1995;53(2):194-195)."Our data indicate that SPf66 can be reproducibly manufactured and provide arational basis for developing reference standards for in-process and finalproduct release criteria," wrote Ballou et al.  in their presentationabstract.The methods of analysis the researchers used included the following:  massspectroscopy, reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography, sizeexclusion chromatography, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, amino acidanalysis, sequence analysis, assessment of free thiols and determination ofcounter ions."These analyses indicate that SPf66 exists as a mixture of monomeric andmultimeric species, but in our hands, the ratios of these species areremarkably consistent from lot to lot," Ballou et al.  wrote.Although the manufacturing process for SPf66 has the potential to producepeptide with substantial variability from lot to lot, Ballou et al.  producedseveral lots of SPf66 under good manufacturing practices (GMP) for thespecific purpose of product characterization and to establish standardizationcriteria.In a related report, Ballou et al.  said they established an assay that may beapplicable in making sure that vaccine lots are uniform ("Analysis of Potencyof the SPf66 Malaria Vaccine," abstract 324, American Journal of TropicalMedicine and Hygiene, 1995;53(2):194).The assay also may be suitable for comparing differences with new SPf66formulations.Data about immunogenicity from numerous clinical trials of SPf66 have hadseroconversion rates that varied significantly.  This variability could not beeasily explained by differences in the populations that were vaccinated, notedBallou et al."We have established a potency assay in BALB/c mice in which the read out isantibody response following intraperitoneal immunization at various dilutionsof vaccine," wrote Ballou et al.  "SPf66 can be shown to have a very steepdose response curve in this system which permits comparison among variousvaccine formulations."Using this model, the researchers showed that a low molecular weight componentpurified from SPf66 peptide by size exclusion chromatography essentially isnonimmunogenic.  The low molecular weight component does not bind well toaluminum hydroxide and comprises a substantial portion of SPf66.  Thevariability in its content among clinical lots may have contributed to thedisparate results obtained in human vaccine studies, Ballou et al.  said."Whether vaccine potency as measured by this assay in any way correlates withefficacy has not been established, but this system may be useful as a releaseassay to insure comparability among vaccine lots and to compare differenceswith new SPf66 formulations," wrote Ballou et al. - by Cathy ClarkBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Respiratory Syncytial VirusHuman RSV Succumbs to Bioengineering TechniquesBioengineered production of infectious human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)provides immediate applications for the development of a live attenuatedvaccine.RSV is considered the most important pediatric viral respiratory pathogenworldwide.  It is responsible for considerable morbidity and mortality andlacks an approved vaccine or effective antiviral therapy.  In addition to thelack of a good animal model (other than the chimpanzee), RSV does not growwell in culture.  Both of these problems have impeded research, making thedevelopment of a vaccine difficult.Peter L.  Collins et al.  produced infectious human RSV from cloned cDNAparticles in vitro paving the way for development of live attenuated vaccinestrains ("Production of Infectious Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus fromCloned cDNA Confirms an Essential Role for the Transcription Elongation Factorfrom the 5' Proximal Open Reading Frame of the M2 mRNA in Gene Expression andProvides a Capability for Vaccine Development," Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, December 5, 1995;92(25):11563-67)."An exciting possibility is that RSV might be engineered in ways that enhanceits immunogenicity and induce a level of protection greater than that providedby natural infection," noted Collins et al.  In addition "RSV can be evaluatedas a possible vector for protective antigens of other respiratory tractpathogens.  An RSV vector also might have utility in transient gene therapy ofthe respiratory tract."The cloned RSV was produced by the intracellular coexpression of fiveplasmid-born cDNAs.  One encoded a complete positive-sense version of the RSVgenome, and each of the other four encode a separate RSV protein.  If any ofthese were deleted, RSV was not produced.  The cDNA segments were synthesizedby reverse transcription (RT)-coupled PCR (RT-PCR) from intracellular RSV mRNAor virion-derived genome RNA.They noted that the strategy for producing infections RSV from cDNA-expressantigenome involved its coexpression with those RSV proteins that werenecessary and sufficient to complete two important processes:  1) the abilityto produce an antigenomic nucleocapsid capable of RNA replication and 2) torender the progeny genomic nucleocapsid competent for both RNA replication andtranscription.  Transcription by the genomic nucleocapsid would then provideall of the other RSV proteins and initiate a productive infection.Recently, this approach was successfully accomplished with two rhabdoviruses,rabies and vesicular stomatitis virus, by M.J.  Schnell et al.  (EMBO J.,1994;13:4195-4203) and N.D.  Lawson et al.  (PNAS, 1995;92:4477-81).The possibility also exists that defined mutations can be introduced intothese infectious RSV clones.  This could have multiple applications toward theunderstanding of the molecular biology and pathogenesis of this particularlydifficult to study virus."It may be possible to insert foreign sequence into the RSV genome forcoexpression," concluded Collins et al.  "Genes of interest for evaluationinclude those encoding cytokines, antagonists thereof, or proteins rich inT-helper-cell epitopes.  This offers the possibility of modifying andimproving the immune response quantitatively and qualitatively."The corresponding author for this study is Peter L.  Collins, Laboratory ofInfectious Disease, 7 Center Drive, MSC 0720, NIAID, National Institutes ofHealth, Bethesda, MD 20892-0720, USA. - by Michelle MarbleBack to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Cancer Vaccines"Gene Therapy for Brain Tumors by Autologous Vaccination with EngineeredGM-CSF Secreting Tumor Cells."  J.S.  Yu, J.A.  Butwick, G.  Dkanoff, E.A.Chiocca and X.O.  Breakefield.  Neurosurgery Service and MolecularNeurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,Massachusetts; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 25th Annual Meetingof the Society for Neuroscience, held November 11-16, 1995, in San Diego,California, "We have developed an ex vivo gene therapy paradigm for thetreatment of brain tumors using granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulatingfactor (GM-CSF).  The murine B16 melanoma and the GL 261 glioma lines wereinfected with MFG recombinant retrovirus containing the mouse GM-CSF cDNA.The tumor lines were confirmed to secrete GM-CSF by ELISA.  Subcutaneousvaccination of syngeneic mice with irradiated GM-CSF-secreting B16 melanomacells completely protected animals from subsequent intracranial B16 tumorinoculation.  Histologic evaluation revealed the presence of neutrophils,eosinophils and lymphocytes in the intracerebral inoculation site.  Incontrast, animals vaccinated with irradiated B16 cells or not vaccinatedsuccumbed to intracranial tumor within 3 weeks after inoculation.  Treatmentof established intracranial B16 melanoma tumors with subcutaneous injection ofirradiated GMCSF secreting B16 cells increased median survival as compared toinjection of irradiated B16 cells or no treatment.  In addition, treatment ofintracerebral glioma with subcutaneous vaccination with irradiated,GM-CSF-secreting autologous cells also increased survival compared tocontrols.  Histologic examination revealed a dramatic perivascular lymphocyticinfiltrate beginning 3 days after treatment with GM-CSF transduced cells whichwas not found in controls."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Immunology"Immunization and Ganciclovir Treatment Delay the Formation of HSV-TKExpressing Brain Tumors in Rats Through Immunologic Suppression."  U.  Blomer,D.  Barha, D.A.  Petersen and F.H.  Gage.  Department of NeurosurgeryUniversity of California at San Diego, San Diego, California; The SalkInstitut, La Jolla, California.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 25th Annual Meetingof the Society for Neuroscience, held November 11-16, 1995, in San Diego,California, "Immunity to tumors develops following ganciclovir (GCV) treatmentof brain tumors expressing the Herpes Simplex Virus-thymidine kinase (HSV-TK)gene.  To study if HSV-TK by itself might contribute to the anti-tumorimmunogenicity, the growth of non-immunogenic D74 tumors, wild type (D74-w.t.)and TK-modified D74 (D74-TK) brain tumor cells, were studied in naive rats andrats previously treated and cured of 9L, tumors by HSV-TK and GCV treatments.Formation of the D74-TK tumors were significantly reduced in both naive andpretreated rats, even though the in vitro growth rate of these tumors wassimilar.  Analysis of immune cells infiltrating the tumors revealed asignificant increase in the CD4 positive cells in TK-modified tumor cells inthe previously treated rats.  Furthermore the regression of the D74-TK tumorswas greater in the previously treated rats.  These findings suggest that evenin non immunogenic tumors, the expression of HSV-TK slows the tumor formation,that can be associated with the immune response.  This immunity could beexploited by vaccination strategies to increase tumor regression seen withHSV-TK and GCV treatments.  Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft(BL-389 1/1)."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Malaria Vaccines"DNA Vaccines Against Malaria Based on the SSP2 Antigen."  R.C.  Hedstrom, M.Sedegah, H.  Wang, M.  Kaur, P.  Hobart and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Vical Incorporated, SanDiego, California.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meetingof the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We recently reported that Plasmodium yoelii CSPDNA vaccines induced specific antibodies and nearly complete CD8(+)CTL-dependent protection against sporozoite challenge in BALB/c mice.Preliminary studies have now shown that a full-length P.  yoelii SSP2 (PySSP2)DNA vaccine protected approximately 50% of A/J mice.  In an effort to improveupon the results with PySSP2, we constructed two DNA vaccine plasmids both ofwhich contained a truncated PySSP2 gene lacking the 5' terminal region of thegene thought to encode the native signal peptide:  one contained an in-framefusion with a mammalian (tPA) signal peptide while the other one remainedsignal minus.  The ability of both plasmids to express PySSP2 in vitro wasdemonstrated by immunoblot analysis of the cell pellet and culture supernatantmaterial from transiently transfected COS-7 cells.  An immunoreactive band ofan expected molecular mass was detected with anti-PySSP2 Mab (NYS4) in bothfractions from cells transfected with the tPAPySSP2 plasmid but only in thecell pellet material of the COS-7 cell cultures transfected with the signalminus plasmid.  The ability of these plasmids to induce protective immunity isbeing evaluated in multiple strains of mice.  So far, both BALB/c and A/J micehave produced antibodies after a single immunization with the tPA-PySSP2 DNAvaccine as determined by IFAT; the immunoreactive pattern on sporozoites wassimilar in appearance to that obtained with NYS4.  Mice immunized with thesignal minus construct have not yet produced measurable antibodies tosporozoites.  Initial protection studies and the results of the ongoingimmunogenicity and protection studies will be presented."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Malaria Vaccines"Malaria Vaccine Trials Against Preerythrocytic Stages of PlasmodiumFalciparum in Chimpanzees:  1) Effect on Parasitemia Elicited by Four VaccineCandidates."  P.  Millet, A.  Luty, G.  Dubreuil, E.  LeRoy, A.  Tartar, W.M.Eling, A.J.  Georges and P.  Druilhe.  Centre International de RechercheMedicale de Franceville (CIRMF), Franceville, Gabon; Institut Pasteur, Roux,Paris, France; University Hospital Nijmegen, Department of Parasitology,Nijmegen, The Netherlands.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meetingof the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We report here the effect on blood stagedevelopment of the vaccination of 5 non-splenectomized chimpanzees with 4Plasmodium falciparum liver stage proteins:  Liver Stage Antigen 1 (LSA-1) and3 (LSA-3), Sporozoite Threonine and Asparagin Rich Protein (STARP), andSporozoite And Liver Stage Antigen (SALSA).  LSA-1 is specific to liver stageswhile LSA-3, SALSA, and STARP are also expressed by the sporozoite.  Toactivate multiple immune mechanisms using the same antigen, 3 types ofimmunization per chimpanzee were used:  immunization by lipopeptides only, bypeptides associated with the adjuvant Moutaulde ISA 31 (SEPIC, Paris France),and by recombinant proteins associated with the some adjuvant.  One chimpanzeeper vaccine candidate was used; a control animal was immunized with adjuvantonly.  After the course of vaccination each chimpanzee received a dosecontaining 120,000 sporozoites intravenously at day 0.  The control animaldeveloped a parasitemia of 270 parasites/(micro)l at day 7.  Parasitemiadecreased rapidly to 15 parasites/(micro)l the next day, and no parasites weredetectable at day 10.  The 2 chimpanzee vaccinated with LSA-1 and SALSAdeveloped identical parasitemias (270 parasites/(micro)l at day 7).Interestingly, the chimpanzee vaccinated with STARP developed a 3 fold greaterparasitemia at day 7.  In marked contrast, the chimpanzee vaccinated withproducts from the protein LSA-3 developed a 3 times lower parasitemia than thenon-protected animals at day 7 (80 parasites/(micro)l).  According to the timeof maturation of liver stage of P.  falciparum (minimum of 6 days),parasitemia observed 7 days after sporozoite inoculation is directly linkedwith merozoites from the hepatic stage, and not from blood-stagemultiplication.  Thus, the decreased parasitemia observed for the LSA-3vaccinated animal could be linked with a protective immune mechanism.Although this experiment does not allow to prove vaccine efficacy, interest ofsuch research using limited a number of Apes will be discussed with referenceto these observation."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Malaria Vaccines"Optimization of Immune Responses to a Plasmodium DNA Vaccine in AotusMonkeys."  R.A.  Gramzinski, D.C.  Maris, N.  Obaldia, R.  Rossan, M.Sedegah, B.  Wang, P.  Hobart, M.  Margalith and S.L.  Hoffman.  MalariaProgram, Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; ProMed/GorgasMemorial Laboratory, Panama City, Panama; Vical Incorporated, San Diego,California.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meetingof the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "We have demonstrated that intramuscular (IM)immunization with a plasmid DNA vaccine encoding the Plasmodium yoelii CSPprotein (PyCSP) induces high antibody levels and cytotoxic T cells againstPyCSP, and induces a CD8(+) T-cell dependent protection in 85% of BALB/c mice.In preparation for development of DNA vaccines designed to produce protectiveantibodies against P.  falciparum erythrocytic stage antigens, we conductedstudies to optimize antibody responses in Aotus monkeys after immunizationwith the PyCSP DNA vaccine.  Groups of 3 monkeys were immunized at 3 weekintervals with 125, 500, or 2000 (micro)g PyCSP DNA.  IM alone (tibialisanterior), IM after pre-treatment with 0.25% bupivacaine, and intradermal (ID)routes were compared.  Only monkeys immunized by the ID route producedantibodies against sporozoites.  Antibody titers, obtained by indirectfluorescent antibody test (IFAT) against air-dried sporozoites and by ELISAusing a PyCSP recombinant protein, peaked at 3 weeks after the third ID doseand were reduced 50% by 7 weeks after the third dose.  There was a trendtoward a dose response with peak geometric mean IFAT titers of 806, 508, and403 for the 2000, 500, and 125 (micro)g doses respectively.  In a secondexperiment antibody responses to a 500 (micro)g dose at multiple sites (2 or6) were found superior to responses generated by a single site administration.These data clearly demonstrate that ID immunization generates significantlybetter antibody responses to the PyCSP DNA vaccine than IM immunization, andsupport the use of the ID route for the initial studies of the efficacy of DNAvaccines in inducing protective antibodies against P.  falciparum erythrocyticstage antigens."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Malaria Vaccines"Protective Efficacy Against Sporozoite Challenge With a CombinationSporozoite and Erythrocytic Stage Malaria Vaccine."  Y.  Charoenvit, R.  Wang,T.M.  Daly, C.A.  Long, G.P.  Corradin and S.L.  Hoffman.  Malaria Program,Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; Department ofMicrobiology and Immunology, Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;Institute of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.According to an abstract submitted by the authors to the 44th Annual Meetingof the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, held November 17-21,1995, in San Antonio, Texas, "Recent reports indicated that immunization ofmice with GST-PYCI, a recombinant protein based on the Plasmodium yoelii MSP-1protects against challenge with infected erythrocytes, and immunization ofmice with MAP4 (QGPGAP)4 P2P30, a multiple antigen peptide based on the P.yoelii CS protein protects against sporozoite challenge.  The current studieswere designed to determine if:  (1) GST-PYC2 (a modified GST PYC1) protectsagainst sporozoite challenge, and (2) if immunization with GST-PYC2 plus MAP4(OGPGAP)4 P2P30 would provide additive or synergistic protection.  Groups of10 mice were immunized with individual or combined vaccine emulsified inTiterMax adjuvant and challenged with P.  yoelii sporozoites.  One of 10 miceimmunized with GSTPYC2 was completely protected against sporozoite challenge.The remaining nine mice had significantly lower levels of parasitemia on thelast day of follow up (day 14) than did control mice (P<0.01 ).  Immunizationwith the combined vaccine reduced by 50% the level of parasite specificantibodies as compared to that induced by the individual components.Nonetheless, 50% of the mice immunized with the combined vaccine, 40% of themice immunized with MAP4 (QGPGAP)4 P2P30 vaccine, and 10% of the miceimmunized with the GST-PYC2 vaccine were fully protected.  This modestincrease in protection in the combination group was not statisticallysignificant, but may have been a reflection of additive activity of antibodiesagainst each immunogen.  These studies provide a foundation and direction forwork designed to optimize the construction, delivery, and assessment ofmulticomponent malaria vaccines."Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Cancer VaccinesDuda, R.B.; Yang, H.; Dooley, D.D.; Abujawdeh, G.  "Recombinant BCG TherapySuppresses Melanoma Tumor Growth."  Annals of Surgical Oncology, November1995;2(6):542-549.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Annals ofSurgical Oncology, "BACKGROUND:  Melanoma is the fastest rising cancer in theUnited States.  Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) has been genetically engineeredto actively express and secrete the cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2).  Both BCGand IL-2 have known potent antitumor and immunomodulatory properties.METHODS:  This recombinant BCG (rBCG 3A) has been tested as an intratumoralinjection and a vaccine therapy in conjunction with irradiated tumor cellsagainst melanoma in the murine B16 melanoma model.  RESULTS:  The transfectionprocess did not adversely alter the function of the wild-type (WT) BCG.  rBCG3A and WT BCG are equally effective intratumoral and vaccine therapies againstmelanoma when compared with normal saline control groups.  Tumor burdens weresignificantly smaller (P less than or equal to 0.01 and 0.05) for thetreatment groups for both intratumoral and vaccine administration of therapy.Immunization with rBCG 3A and WT BCG 14 days before a B16 challenge resultedin an similar to 45% smaller tumor burden when compared with controls.CONCLUSIONS:  Novel therapies based on the immunogenic properties of melanomacombined with molecular technologies may offer promise for an effective andsafe treatment of melanoma."  The corresponding author for this study is:  RBDuda, Harvard Univ, Beth Israel Hosp, Sch Med, Div Surg Oncol, 330 BrooklineAve, Boston, MA 02215 USA.  For subscription information for this journalcontact the publisher:  Raven Press, 227 East Washington Sq, Philadelphia, PA19106.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1HIV VaccinesHonda, M.; Matsuo, K.; Nakasone, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Yoshizaki, H.; Kitamura, K.;Sugiura, W.; Watanabe, K.; Fukushima, Y.; Haga, S.; Katsura, Y.; Tasaka, H.;Komuro, K.; Yamada, T.; Asano, T.; Yamazaki, A.; Yamazaki, S.  "ProtectiveImmune Responses Induced by Secretion of a Chimeric Soluble Protein from aRecombinant Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guerin Vector CandidateVaccine for Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 in Small Animals."Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States ofAmerica, November 7, 1995;92(23):10693-10697.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Proceedings ofthe National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, "Arecombinant Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vector-basedvaccine that secretes the V3 principal neutralizing epitope of humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV) could induce immune response to the epitope andprevent the viral infection.  By using the Japanese consensus sequence ofHIV-1, we successfully constructed chimeric protein secretion vectors byselecting an appropriate insertion site of a carrier protein and establishedthe principal neutralizing determinant (PND)-peptide secretion system in BCG.The recombinant BCG (rBCG)-inoculated guinea pigs were initially screened bydelayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin reactions to the PND peptide,followed by passive transfer of the DTH by the systemic route.  Further,immunization of mice with the rBCG resulted in induction of cytotoxic Tlymphocytes.  The guinea pig immune antisera showed elevated titers to the PNDpeptide and neutralized HIVMN, and administration of serum IgG from thevaccinated guinea pigs was effective in completely blocking the HIV infectionin thymus/liver transplanted severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)/hu orSCID/PBL mice.  In addition, the immune serum IgG was shown to neutralizeprimary field isolates of HIV that match the neutralizing sequence motif by aperipheral blood mononuclear fell-based virus neutralization assay.  The datasupport the idea that the antigen-secreting rBCG system can be used as a toolfor development of HIV vaccines."  The corresponding author for this study is:M Honda, Natl Inst Hlth, Ctr AIDS Res, Shinjuku Ku, Tokyo 162, Japan.  Forsubscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Natl AcadSciences, 2101 Constitution Ave NW, Washington, DC 20418.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Haemophilus influenzaeFrasch, C.E.  "Haemophilus influenzae Type b Conjugate and CombinationVaccines."  Clinical Immunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):376-386.According to the author's abstract of an article published in ClinicalImmunotherapeutics, "Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) conjugate vaccinesrepresent a new technology wherein an immunogen is targeted to a specificimmune response mechanism.  Covalent attachment of the Hib polysaccharide to aprotein carrier converts the T cell-independent polysaccharide antigen into aprotein-like T cell-dependent antigen.  The polysaccharide alone is poorlyimmunogenic in infants (less than or equal to 12 months old), and conjugationto a protein carrier results in a protein-like antibody response to the Hibpolysaccharide in infants.  Conjugate vaccines induce mostly IgG antibodiesand immunological memory.  Later vaccination or natural exposure then inducesa booster response to the Hib polysaccharide.  These conjugate vaccines havedramatically reduced the incidence of Hib disease in many industrializedcountries, and also reduce nasopharyngeal carriage of Hib in unvaccinatedchildren in populations in which the vaccine is used.  The Hib conjugates havenow been combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine toreduce the number of injections required for infants.  Finally, the conjugatetechnology that has permitted the near elimination of Hib disease has now beenextended to other invasive encapsulated bacterial pathogens."  Thecorresponding author for this study is:  CE Frasch, Ctr Biol Evaluat & Res,Div Bacterial Prod, 1401 Rockville Pike, HFM-428, Rockville, MD 20853 USA.For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  AdisInternational Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland10, New Zealand.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2Heineman, T.C.; Connelly, B.L.; Bourne, N.; Stanberry, L.R.; Cohen, J."Immunization with Recombinant Varicella-Zoster Virus Expressing HerpesSimplex Virus Type 2 Glycoprotein D Reduces the Severity of Genital Herpes inGuinea Pigs."  Journal of Virology, December 1995;69(12):8109-8113.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal ofVirology, "Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is an attractive candidate for alive-virus vector for the delivery of foreign antigens.  The Oka vaccinestrain of VZV is safe and effective in humans, and recombinant Oka VZV (ROka)can be generated by transfecting cells with a set of overlapping cosmid DNAs.By this method, the herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) glycoprotein D (gD2)gene was inserted into an intergenic site in the unique short region of theOka VZV genome.  Expression of gD2 in cells infected with the recombinant Okastrain VZV (ROka-gD2) was confirmed by antibody staining of fixed cells and byimmunoblot analysis.  Immune electron microscopy demonstrated the presence ofgD2 in the envelope of ROka-gD2 virions.  The ability of ROka-gD2 to protectguinea pigs against HSV 2 challenge was assessed by inoculating animals withthree doses of uninfected human fibroblasts, fibroblasts infected with ROkaVZV, or fibroblasts infected with ROka-gD2.  Neutralizing antibodies specificfor HSV-2 developed in animals immunized with ROka-gD2.  Forty days after thethird inoculation, animals were challenged intravaginally with HSV-2.Inoculation of guinea pigs with ROka-gD2 significantly reduced the severity ofprimary HSV 2 infection (P<0.001).  These experiments demonstrate that the Okastrain of VZV can be used as a live virus vector to protect animals fromdisease with a heterologous virus."  The corresponding author for this studyis:  J Cohen, Niaid, Clin Invest Lab, Med Virol Sect, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA.For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer SocMicrobiology, 1325 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1ImmunologyStephens, H.A.F.; Brown, A.E.; Chandanayingyong, D.; Webster, H.K.; Sirikong,M.; Longta, P.; Vangseratthana, R.; Gordon, D.M.; Lekmak, S.; Rungruang, E."The Presence of the HLA Class II Allele DPB1*0501 in Ethnic Thais Correlateswith an Enhanced Vaccine-Induced Antibody Response to a Malaria SporozoiteAntigen."  European Journal of Immunology, November 1995;25(11):3142-3147.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in European Journalof Immunology, "In this study, we examined the correlation between thefrequency of allelic variants of the class II human leukocyte antigen (HLA)DR, DQ and DP gene loci and the quantitative humoral immune response observedin 71 Thai volunteers, subsequent to vaccination with a conjugated subunitvaccine.  This vaccine was designed to induce antibodies directed against theimmunodominant repeat region of the Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite(CS) protein.  The presence of the DPB1*0501, a relatively common allele inAsian populations, was found to be associated with high vaccine-induced CSrepeat-specific antibody responses in the volunteers.  Given the increasingfocus on the use of subunit vaccines in the control of infectious diseases,consideration of the influence of class II allele frequencies in ethnicallydiverse recipient populations may be important."  The corresponding author forthis study is:  HAF Stephens, Mahidol Univ, Siriraj Hosp & Med Sch, DeptTransfus Med, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.  For subscription information for thisjournal contact the publisher:  VCH Publishers Inc, 303 NW 12TH Ave, DeerfieldBeach, FL 33442-1788.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Listeria monocytogenesMiller, M.A.; Skeen, M.J.; Ziegler, H.K.  "Nonviable Bacterial AntigensAdministered with IL-12 Generate Antigen-Specific T Cell Responses andProtective Immunity Against Listeria monocytogenes."  Journal of Immunology,November 15, 1995;155(10):4817-4828.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Journal ofImmunology, "The development of effective vaccine strategies for intracellularpathogens, including bacteria, viruses, and parasites, is one of the majorfrontiers of scientific research.  For the studies described here, the murinemodel of Listeria infection was used to evaluate the adjuvant effects of IL-12when used as an immunization component.  These studies revealed that typicallynonimmunogenic doses of heat-killed Listeria monocytogenes, or solublelisterial Ag preparations, elicit intense Th1-type Listeria-specific T-cellresponses when administered i.p.  along with recombinant murine IL-12.  Inaddition to the Ag-specific production of IL-2 by CD4(+) peritoneal cells thatwas elicited, several other correlates of protective responses were noted,including dramatic induction of CD3(+) and alpha beta TCR(+) cell populationsin the peritoneal cavity and increased expression of class II MHC andproduction of IL-12 (upon in vitro restimulation) by peritoneal macrophages.Protection studies demonstrated that the T-cell responses elicited by aIL-12-potentiated, heat-killed L.  monocytogenes vaccine were sufficient toeffectively protect mice against challenge with a large dose of virulentListeria."  The corresponding author for this study is:  MA Miller, EmoryUniv, Sch Med, Dept Microbiol & Immunol, 1510 Clifton Rd, Rollins Res Bldg,Atlanta, GA 30322 USA.  For subscription information for this journal contactthe publisher:  Amer Assoc Immunologists, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD20814.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Pediatrics (HBV)Hurie, M.B.; Saari, T.N.; Proctor, M.E.; Davis, J.P.  "Hospitals' Responses toUniversal Infant Hepatitis B Vaccination Recommendations."  Pediatrics,November 1995;96(5 Part 1):875-879.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Pediatrics,"OBJECTIVE:  To assess the extent to which hospitals in a midwestern statewith low acute hepatitis B virus (HBV) morbidity offered hepatitis B (Hep B)vaccine to all infants, whether offering infants Hep B vaccine was associatedwith hospital geographic location or size, as measured by the number ofbirths, and how hospital staff resolved key programmatic issues.  METHODS:The managers of hospital newborn nurseries (n=110) were surveyed by mail.  Thewritten response rate was 72%; all of the nonresponders were interviewed bytelephone.  The outcome measured was the number of hospitals offering Hep Bvaccine to all infants by geographic region and hospital size.  RESULTS:Sixty-five percent of the hospitals routinely offered Hep B vaccine to allinfants; these hospitals accounted far 80% of reported Wisconsin births.  Inunivariate analysis, the decision to offer infants Hep B vaccine wasassociated with both hospital size and hospital location.  After controllingfor size, hospitals in the northeastern region were eight times more likely(relative risk, 8.21; 95% confidence interval, 1.30, 51.79) to offer infantsHep B vaccine than hospitals in the southeastern (referent) region.  Regionaldifferences in reported rates of acute HBV infection do not explain thisfinding, because morbidity in the northeastern region (1 per 100,000) is amongthe lowest in Wisconsin.  Although more than 80% of hospitals with Hep Bvaccination programs required written informed consent for vaccination, hadstanding orders for administering Hep B vaccine to infants whose mothers'hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) test results were known, and hadmechanisms to notify the infants' physicians that the infants had beenvaccinated, only 38% had standing orders for testing mothers whose HBsAg testresults were unknown.  CONCLUSIONS:  Hospitals are not necessarily deterredfrom implementing infant Hep B vaccination programs by low community HBVmorbidity.  Hospitals should develop policies to assure that parturient womenwith unknown HBsAg status are screened and their infants are appropriatelytreated."  The corresponding author for this study is:  MB Hurie, WisconsinImmunizat Program, 1414 E Washington Ave, Room 167, Madison, WI 53703 USA.For subscription information for this journal contact the publisher:  AmerAcad Pediatrics, 141 North-West Point Blvd, Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Pediatrics (Immunization)Askew, G.L.; Finelli, L.; Lutz, J.; Degraaf, J.; Siegel, B.; Spitalny, K."Beliefs and Practices Regarding Childhood Vaccination among Urban PediatricProviders in New Jersey."  Pediatrics, November 1995;96(5 Part 1):889-892.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Pediatrics,"BACKGROUND:  In 1991, the fourth largest measles outbreak in the nation (824cases) occurred in the Jersey City, New Jersey area.  Data from a subsequentintervention trial in Jersey City demonstrated that vaccinations were morelikely to be delayed for children who had received care from private ratherthan public clinic providers.  In addition, failure to administer multipleindicated vaccines at a single visit was associated with vaccination delay,and reluctance to administer multiple vaccines was more common among privateproviders.  These findings prompted an investigation of vaccination beliefsand practices among urban pediatric providers.  METHODS:  A telephone surveyof vaccination beliefs and practices was administered to all pediatricproviders in both private and public clinics in the Paterson and Jersey Cityareas.  RESULTS:  Private providers were less likely than public clinicproviders to consider vaccinating children during emergency room visits(relative risk [RR] = 2.2; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.2-4.2) or hospitaladmissions (RR = 13.2; 95% CI = 1.9-92.7) and less likely to believe that allrecommended vaccine doses should be administered simultaneously (RR =infinite; lower 95% confidence limit = 3.0).  Private providers were lesslikely to consider administering live-virus vaccines to children with minoracute illnesses and low-grade fever (RR = 2.2; 95% CI = 1.2-3.8) orkilled-virus vaccines to children with minor acute illnesses without fever (RR= 3.4; 95% CI = 1.4-8.5) or with low-grade fever (RR = 2.2; 95% CI = 1.2-3.9).Private providers were more likely to believe that multiple injections shouldbe avoided because of potential psychological and physical trauma to the child(RR = 4.0; 95% CI = 1.3-12.3).  CONCLUSIONS:  Adherence to Standards forPediatric Immunization Practices by pediatric providers could improve vaccinecoverage rates among urban children."  The corresponding author for this studyis:  GL Askew, Boston Univ, Boston City Hosp, Sch Med, Div Gen Pediat, 818Harrison Ave-Mat 422, Boston, MA 02118 USA.  For subscription information forthis journal contact the publisher:  Amer Acad Pediatrics, 141 North-WestPoint Blvd, Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Pediatrics (TB)Alkassimi, F.A.; Alhajjaj, M.S.; Alorainey, I.O.; Bamgboye, E.A.  "Does theProtective Effect of Neonatal BCG Correlate with Vaccine-Induced TuberculinReaction?."  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,November 1995;152(5):1575-1578.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in American Journalof Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, "A case-control study was conductedin Saudi Arabia, where the same strain of BCG has been used and surveys hadshown that up to 88% of vaccinated children remain tuberculin negative.Active cases were obtained by surveying the seven tuberculosis centers in 1yr.  Control subjects were obtained from a nationwide survey of normalindividuals.  Vaccination in both groups was ascertained by history and BCGscar.  Relative risk of contracting active tuberculosis in the vaccinatedversus unvaccinated and protection was calculated.  protection was as follows:age group 5 to 14 yr, 82% (55 to 93%); age group 15 to 24 yr, 67% (55 to 77%);and age group 25 to 34 yr, 20% (-6 to 37%).  We document the uninterruptedrecord of protection by BCG administered in the neonatal period and discussthe significance of vaccination timing.  We concur with other studies thatprotection lapsed after about 20 yr.  More importantly, this is the firstlarge study that documents a lack of tuberculin sensitivity despiteprotection.  This challenges the view that sensitization is essential forprotection and supports the 'two-pathway' theory that BCG vaccination couldtrigger either protective (Lister type) or antagonistic (tuberculin or Kochtype) reactions and that the most protective vaccines would have littletuberculin-sensitizing effect because the two pathways are competitive."  Thecorresponding author for this study is:  FA Alkassimi, King Saud Univ, CollMed, Dept Med 38, POB 2925, Riyadh 11461, Saudi Arabia.  For subscriptioninformation for this journal contact the publisher:  Amer Lung Assoc, 1740Broadway, New York, NY 10019.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Peptide VaccinesMitsuda, S.; Nakagawa, T.; Nakazato, H.; Ikai, A.  "Receptor-Linked AntigenDelivery System - Importance of Autologous Alpha 2-Macroglobulin in theDevelopment of Peptide Vaccine."  Biochemical and Biophysical ResearchCommunications, November 2, 1995;216(1):399-405.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Biochemical andBiophysical Research Communications, "We have hijacked a process of thereceptor-mediated endocytosis to transport peptide antigens into antigenpresenting cells (APCs) for the purpose of increasing the level of antigenpresentation (named Receptor-Linked Antigen Delivery System (R-LADS)).  Bycoupling an endogenous plasma proteinase inhibitor alpha2-macroglobulin (alpha2M) to a synthetic peptide having a partial sequence of HIV-1 envelopeprotein, alpha 2M was made to carry the peptide into APCs as a part of thenormal alpha 2M cycle, which resulted in an increased production of specificantibodies against the peptide (Mitsuda, S., Nakagawa, T., Osada, T.,Shimamoto, T., Nakazato, H.  and Ikai, A.  (1993) Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.Commun.  194, 1155-1160).  We demonstrate here that this procedure becomes amore efficient tool for antibody production when autologous transporterprotein was used.  By using murine alpha 2M (m alpha 2M) instead ofheterologous human alpha 2M (h alpha 2M) when mice were experimental animals,we were able to dramatically enhance the production level of anti-HIV-1peptide antibodies and shorten the period which is needed for antibodyproduction.  We aim to develop effective peptide vaccines by further improvingthis system."  The corresponding author for this study is:  S Mitsuda, TokyoInst Technol, Fac Biosci & Biotechnol, Dept Sci Biol, Midori Ku, 4259Nagatsuta CHO, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226, Japan.  For subscription informationfor this journal contact the publisher:  Academic Press Inc Jnl-CompSubscriptions, 525B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, CA 92101-4495.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1PneumococcalShahid, N.S.; Steinhoff, M.C.; Hoque, S.S.; Begum, T.; Thompson, C.; Siber,G.R.  "Serum, Breast Milk, and Infant Antibody after Maternal Immunisationwith Pneumococcal Vaccine."  Lancet, November 11, 1995;346(8985):1252-1257.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in Lancet,"Pneumococci are a leading cause of severe bacterial disease in infants andchildren world wide.  A possible means of protecting infants in the first fewmonths of life is immunisation of the mother during prospectively assessedpneumococcal pregnant women to determine the amount pneumococcal antibodytransmitted to the infants in serum and milk and the half-life of thepassively acquired antibody.  Healthy pregnant women in Dhaka, Bangladesh,were randomized to receive pneumococcal or meningococcal vaccine with routineprenatal tetanus immunisation at 30-34 weeks of gestation.  Serum and breastmilk specimens from the mothers and sera from infants were collected up to 22weeks of age and assayed for specific serum IgG, IgG1, and IgG2 and for milkIgA antibodies to pneumococcal serotypes 6B and 19F.  55 mothers and 56infants were followed from birth to five months.  Women who receivedpneumococcal vaccine had geometric mean antibody increases of 2.6 and 3.4 totypes 6B and 19F, respectively, The mean infant/maternal antibody ratios were0.56 and 0.59 (range 0.11-1.46) for these serotypes.  Infant cord antibodytitres correlated with maternal titres.  Infant/maternal IgG ratios correlatedwith the interval between immunisation and birth and were higher for specificIgG1 than for IgG2.  Infants of pneumococcal vaccine recipients had geometricmean antibody concentrations of 6.8 and 7.5 (micro)g/mL to serotypes 6B and19F in cord blood; in cord blood and in all subsequent serum specimens theconcentrations were 2-3 fold higher than in control infants.  The medianhalf-life of passive antibody was about 35 days; at five months of age 63-71%of infants of pneumococcal vaccine recipients had antibody concentrationsgreater than 0.15 (micro)g/mL.  Breast milk IgA antibodies for pneumococcalserotype 19F, but not for type 6B, were significantly higher in vaccinerecipients up to five months after delivery.  If maternal pneumococcalpolysaccharide antibodies do not interfere with active immunisation of theinfant with new glycoprotein conjugate pneumococcal vaccines, passive-activeimmunisation of infants can be a feasible strategy for developing regions."The corresponding author for this study is:  MC Steinhoff, 624 N Broadway, RM125, Baltimore, MD 21205 USA.  For subscription information for this journalcontact the publisher:  Lancet Ltd, 42 Bedford Square, London, England WC1B3SL.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1Varicella-Zoster VirusPerry, C.M.; Bryson, H.M.  "Oka/Merck Varicella Vaccine:  A Review of ItsImmunogenicity and Protective Efficacy Against Varicella."  ClinicalImmunotherapeutics, November 1995;4(5):396-416.According to the authors' abstract of an article published in ClinicalImmunotherapeutics, "Oka/Merck varicella vaccine is a live attenuated vaccineproduced from the Oka strain of the herpesvirus varicella zoster virus (VZV).The Oka strain of VZV is recognized as having low virulence while elicitinghumoral and cell-mediated responses to VZV.  In numerous studies, Oka/Merckvaricella vaccine achieved a seroconversion rate of >95% in healthy childrenand adolescents.  In immunocompromised children with leukaemia in remission,seroconversion was achieved in 80% of vaccinees 12 months after vaccination.Cell-mediated immune responses generally closely paralleled humoral immuneresponses.  The vaccine is also immunogenic in healthy adults.  In healthychildren, a high level of protection was conferred by Oka/Merck varicellavaccine, and in the only double-blind placebo-controlled study conducted todate the vaccine was 98% effective in protecting healthy children againstvaricella during 2 varicella seasons.  In children with leukaemia, Oka/Merckvaricella vaccine was 80% effective in protecting against mild varicella andconferred 100% protection against moderate and severe varicella.  In healthyadults, the rate of protection against varicella was reported to beapproximately 50%.  All observed cases of varicella in healthy andimmunocompromised vaccinees were mild and there were no reports of aydisease-related complications.  Interestingly in children and adolescents withleukaemia, the incidence of herpes tester was lower in children who receivedOka/Merck varicella vaccine than in similar children who had natural immunity.Mild varicelliform rash (occasionally accompanied by fever) has been observedin healthy children, adolescents and adults who have received Oka/Merckvaricella vaccine.  Pain at the injection site was the adverse effect mostfrequently reported in one large study of the vaccine in healthy children.  Inchildren with leukaemia, vaccine-associated rash has been reported in up to50% of vaccinees.  When Oka/Merck varicella vaccine was administered tohealthy children in combination with measles, mumps and rubella vaccine therewas no increase in the incidence of skin rashes compared with that caused bymeasles, mumps and rubella vaccine in combination with placebo.  Thus,Oka/Merck varicella vaccine is a highly immunogenic vaccine that confers ahigh level of protection against typical varicella in healthy children andadolescents, and in children and adolescents with leukaemia.  While results offurther long term studies investigating the persistence of protective immunityagainst varicella are awaited with interest, available darn indicate thatOka/Merck varicella vaccine is a major advance in the prevention of thiscommon and highly infectious disease."  The corresponding author for thisstudy is:  CM Perry, Adis Int Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag 65901,Auckland 10, New Zealand.  For subscription information for this journalcontact the publisher:  Adis International Ltd, 41 Centorian Dr, Private Bag65901,, Mairangi Bay, Auckland 10, New Zealand.Back to Headline List CopyrightVACCINE WEEKLY via NewsNetDecember 25, 1995 & January 1MEETINGS REPORT*NEW LISTINGS  .  .  .  COMPILED BY KENNETH KIMSEYJanuary 15-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "BioEast '96."  Information:BioConferences International, 4405 E.  West Highway, Ste.  501, Bethesda, MD20814, Phone 301-652-3072, Fax 301-652-4951.January 26-27, 1996, Palmetto, FL, "7th Annual:  Until There Is a Cure."Information:  AIDS Manasota, Inc.  Conference, 2080 Ringling Blvd., Suite 302,Sarasota, FL 34237-7030, Phone 941-954-6011, Fax 941-951-1721.* January 28 - February 1, 1996, Washington, DC, "3rd National Conference onHuman Retroviruses and Related Infections."  Information:  Infectious DiseaseSociety of America 703-299-0200.* February 11-15, 1996, Bethesda, MD, "Advances in AIDS Vaccine Development:Eighth Annual Meeting of the National Cooperative Vaccine Development Groups(NCVDGs) for AIDS."  Information:  Marta Glass 303-402-0121 or Elaine Matzen301-496-6177 or Susan Wescott 301-496-8200.February 16-18, 1996, New York, NY, "Second Annual CME Course for theManagement of the HIV Infected Patient:  A Practical Approach for the PrimaryCare Practitioner."  Information:  Center for Bio-Medical Communication, Inc.,80 West Madison Avenue, Dumont, NJ 07628, Phone 201-385-8080, Fax201-385-5650.* February 26-27, 1996, Rockville, MD, "IBC's 3rd Annual Conference onVaccines:  New Advances in Technologies and Applications."  Information:  IBCUSA Conferences, Inc., 225 Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone508-481-6400.March 1-5, 1996, Panama City Beach, FL, "Protease and their Inhibitors inCancer."  Information:  American Association for Cancer Research, PublicLedger Bldg., Ste.  816, 150 S.  Independence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA19106-3483, Phone 215-440-9300, Fax 215-440-9313.* March 7-8, 1996, Washington, DC, "IBC's Biennial International Conference onMycobacterial Infection:  Pathogenesis, Prevention and Strategies for New Drugand Vaccine Development."  Information:  IBC USA Conferences, Inc., 225Turnpike Road, Southborough, MA 01772-1749, Phone 508-481-6400, Fax508-481-7911.March 18-20, 1996, Washington, DC, "Fourth Annual Vaccines:  New Technology &Applications."  Information:  Cambridge Healthtech Institute, 1037 ChestnutSt., Newton Upper Falls, MA 02164, Phone 617-630-1300, Fax 617-630-1325.March 19-22, 1996, San Francisco, CA, "8th National AIDS Update Conference."Information:  NAUC 96 Conference Registrar, c/o KREBS Convention ManagementServices, 555 DeHaro Street, Suite 200, San Francisco, CA 94107-2348, Phone415-255-1297, Fax 415-255-2244.April 14-18, 1996, Washington, DC, "Federation of American Societies forExperimental Biology - Annual Meeting."  Information:  Experimental Biology1996, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3998, Phone 301-530-7010.April 18-19, 1996, Vancouver, BC, Canada, "Genetic Susceptibility."Information:  Diana Berger, Conferences Services Manager, 345 Park Ave., S.,New York, NY 10010-1707, Phone 212-726-9280, Fax 212-696-9594, Email:conference@natureny.com.* May 3-6, 1996, Washington, DC, "Biomedicine '96:  Medical Research fromBench to Bedside."  Information:  Editor-in-Chief, National Office 6900 GroveRoad, Thorofare, NJ 08086-9447, Phone 609-848-1000, Fax 609-848-5274.May 4-9, 1996, Cairns, north Queensland, Australia, "Third InternationalConference in the Series 'Options for the Control of Influenza.'" Information:Influenza '96 Conference Secretariat, GPO Box 128, Sydney, NSW, 2001,Australia, Phone 61-2-262-2277, Fax 61-2-262-2323.May 6-12, 1996, Taos, NM, "Discovery and Development of Tumor Vaccines."Information:  Cambridge Symposia, 1037 Chestnut St., Newton Upper Falls, MA02164, Phone 617-630-1399, Fax 617-630-1395.May 15-18, 1996, Philadelphia, PA, "87th Annual Meeting American Associationfor Cancer Research."  Information:  AACR, Public Ledger Bldg.  & ChestnutSt., Ste.  816, Philadelphia, PA 19106.May 19-21, 1996, Philadelphia, PA, "32nd Annual Meeting American Society ofClinical Oncology."  Information:  ASCO, 435 North Michigan Ave., Ste.  1717,Chicago, IL 60611-4067.May 19-23, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "95th American Society for MicrobiologyGeneral Meeting."  Information:  American Society for Microbiology, 1325Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005-4171, Phone 202-737-3600.June 2-6, 1996, New Orleans, LA, "American Association ofImmunologists/American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology/AmericanAssociation of Investigative Pathology."  Information:  Mr.  Raymond Palmer,Exec.  Dir., AAI, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994, Phone301-530-7178, Fax 301-571-1816.June 8-12, 1996, Columbia River Gorge, WA, "Inducible Genomic Responses."Information:  American Association for Cancer Research, Public Ledger Bldg.,Ste.  816, 150 S.  Indepndence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106-3483, Phone215-440-9300, Fax 215-440-9313.June 10-13, 1996, Hong Kong, "7th International Congress for InfectiousDiseases:  a Collaboration of the World Health Organization, the InternationalSociety for Infectious Diseases and the Dept.  of Microbiology, Faculty ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong."  Information:  Norman R.Stein, Exec.  Dir., ISID, 180 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, Phone617-277-0551, Fax 617-731-1541.July 7-12, 1996, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, "XI InternationalConference on AIDS."  Information:  Conference Secretariat, XI InternationalConference on AIDS, P.O.  Box 48740, 595 Burrard St., Vancouver, BritishColumbia, Canada V7X 1T8, Phone 604-631-5210, Fax 604-631-5210, Email:aids96@hivnet.ubc.ca.August 11-16, 1996, Jerusalem, Israel, "10th International Congress ofVirology."  Information:  Secretariat, 10th Intl.  Cong.  of Virology, P.O.Box 50006, Tel Aviv 61500, Israel, Phone 972-3-514-0000, Fax972-3-5175674/514-0077, Telex 341171 KENS IL, E-mail:virology@kenes.ccmail.compuserve.com.  (Omit final period from e-mailaddress.)August 27-30, 1996, Nagoya, Japan, "14th International Scientific Meeting ofthe International Epidemiological Association:  Global Health in a ChangingEnvironment."  Information:  14th ISM Secretariat, Dept.  of PreventiveMedicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku,Nagoya 466, Japan, Phone 81-52-741-2111, ext.  2074, Fax 81-52-733-6729.October 9-15, 1996, Hilton Head, SC, "3rd International Conference onEngineered Vaccines for Cancer and AIDS."  Information:  Cambridge Symposia,1037 Chestnut St., Newton Upper Falls, MA 02164, Phone 617-630-1399, Fax617-630-1395.October 14-16, 1996, Jerusalem, Israel, "Fifth International Conference onHuman Antibodies and Hybridomas."  Information:  John Herriot, HAH '96Conference, Meetings Management, The Chestnuts, 1st Floor, 18 East Street,Farnham, Surrey GU9 7SD, UK, Phone +44 (0)1252 726066, Fax +44 (0)1252 723303.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-32IA086-000615-B043-21http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/hh74.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020641 text/html 36590HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:45 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMTContent-length: 36403Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/hh74.html Sample Issue Copyright WASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNet February 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Insurance Bill Targeted by Opponents (363 words) Medicaid Proposal Evolving; Medicare Reform Still Stalled (289 words) Certain Nurses Can Unionize Under New NLRB Rulings (169 words) IRS Issues Family Leave Rule For Cafeteria Plans (291 words) Medicare Supplemental Suit Alleges Systematic Overbilling (252 words) Medicare to Add Procedures To Bundled Payment Pilot (154 words) Statewide Payment Areas For Medicare Docs Eyed (245 words) Feds Seeks Recoupment Of Provider Device Fraud (272 words) INSIDE THE BELTWAY (287 words) STATE HEALTH WEEK Pennsylvania to Mandate 438,000 Into Medicaid Managed Care (367 words) Arkansas Hospitals, State Agree on Medicaid Payment Hikes (301 words) Louisiana to Require Copayments To Help in Medicaid Shortfall (408 words) Arizona Eyes Waiver to Integrate Medicare, Medicaid Services (314 words) Maryland Hospital Cuts OK'd After Record Profits Reported (269 words) Mass. Providers Claim Vendor Owes Millions; State to Intervene (391 words) STATE BRIEFS (354 words) CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Insurance Bill Targeted by OpponentsCongress returns today to tackle a spring agenda laden with healthcare possibilities, the most notable being a pending Senateinsurance reform bill that conservatives are targeting fordestruction.Conservatives wary of Sen. Nancy Kassebaum's (R-Kan) insurance bill(S 1028), scheduled for debate later this spring, are designing a"mutually assured destruction" campaign, says one lobbyist. Theyare mulling introduction of controversial amendments such asmedical malpractice and medical savings accounts, and pushingalternative legislation to expand COBRA or reform only the groupinsurance market; S 1028 would dip into the individual market.S 1028 opponents also may try to temper the effect of the bill byattaching legislation (S 539) allowing tax-exempt status for staterisk pools; states with pools up and running would be exempt fromthe Kassebaum insurer mandates.In the House, GOP staffers want to move ahead with Rep. BillThomas' (R-Calif) portability bill (HR 1610), but party leaders arestill deciding when to proceed, how to divide up committeejurisdiction, and whether to add other health tax items.S 1028's provision allowing portability for individual-marketpurchasers leaving group plans is the subject of dueling actuarialstudies. The independent American Academy of Actuaries and thenon-partisan Congressional Research Service (CRS) last week said inseparate reports that the provision would hike premiums between1%-5%, while the Health Insurance Assn. of America (HIAA), whichopposes the provision, maintained rates would rise 10%-20%.The discrepancy is rooted in different assumptions about statereactions to the bill. The academy and CRS assume most states willregulate individual-market premiums to protect new entrants but letcarriers charge high-risk persons up to 100% more than the averagerate. HIAA assumes states won't allow any rate variation.A sleeper amendment is Senate Budget Committee Chair PeteDomenici's (R-NM) initiative to establish parity between mentalhealth and other health benefits. Actuaries say big bucks are atstake, but GOP members are wary of making waves.Meanwhile, ERISA expansion legislation is scheduled for an earlyMarch vote; an administrative simplification bill will be marked upin April. Those issues, as well as antitrust, could come to a headshould insurance reform gather steam, sources say. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicaid Proposal Evolving; Medicare Reform StillStalledA month ago, Medicare reform was front and center, while Medicaidtalks were stalled. Today, the political winds are blowing in theopposite direction.Congressional leaders and a bipartisan group of National Governors'Assn. (NGA) members are working to refine and expand theNGA-approved Medicaid proposal that has quickly drawn criticismfrom most Democrats and liberal interest groups. Reform proponentsare pushing GOP leaders to draft and attach Medicaid and welfarelegislation to a bill extending the debt limit, which expires March15.However, a bill hasn't yet been drafted, and governors already arestill tweaking the NGA outline. The original proposal would havegiven states total flexibility on amount, scope and duration ofbenefits, but governors are mulling floor thresholds for quality,such as minimum HMO requirements in each state.The governors also may also nix their proposal to reduce themaximum state matching percentage from 50% to 40%, set some minimumdefinition of "disabled," and increase the proposal's federallydefined benefits package. Also subject to discussion are theproposed repeal of state schemes to maximize federal matching funds(WHW 11/6/95, p. 2) and whether to repeal the existing Medicaidstatute.Medicare reform has an outside chance of being tacked onto debtceiling legislation, but House leaders are said to be "skeptical"of initiating another reform push. House leaders trying to keep theissue alive have floated $168 billion in seven-year savings thatare more modest than previous proposals.The latest plan would keep Part B premiums at 25%; delay theMedicare capitation payment floor by a year; let the feds overseeprovider networks; reduce Part A payment cuts to hospitals, skillednursing facilities and home health providers; and exempt physicianoffice labs from federal standards. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Certain Nurses Can Unionize Under New NLRB RulingsNurses who work as professional, non-supervisory employees have theright to unionize and engage in other concerted activity withoutthe fear of being fired, under two National Labor Relations Board(NLRB) rulings issued earlier this month.The American Nurses Assn. cheered the decisions, saying they removea tactic employers have used to impede union organizing byregistered nurses (RNs). The American Hospital Assn. opposes thedecisions, fearing they will encourage unions to organize nurses.NLRB ruled that charge nurses at Providence Hospital in Anchorage,Alaska, are not "supervisors" and therefore are protected by theNational Labor Relations Act. That law bars supervisors fromunionizing. Charge nurses are those in charge of a unit or floor.In a companion case, NLRB ruled that licensed practical nurses atTen Broeck Commons, a New York nursing home, oversaw the work ofcertified nursing assistants in a routine manner, without beingsupervisors under the federal law.The rulings have favorable implications for nurses about 60 othernurses' cases before the NLRB. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996IRS Issues Family Leave Rule For Cafeteria PlansThe IRS recently proposed guidelines for employers offeringflexible benefit programs whose workers take leave under the Familyand Medical Leave Act (FMLA), as well as guidance for firms inwhich ex-workers and/or dependents choose COBRA coverage.Final regulations for FMLA, enacted in 1993, were issued in January1995, but were generally silent on treatment of flexible benefitprograms, also called cafeteria plans. The law allows workers totake up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family reasons or illness.The new rules stipulate that firms offering Sec. 125 cafeteriaplans - in which workers are given an allotted pot of pre-tax moneyto choose from an array of health plans and other benefits - cancollect health plan premium contributions from employees takingunpaid FMLA leave in three ways: (1) pre-pay, in which workerswould pay before leave begins; (2) pay-as-you-go, in which workerspay on the same schedule as if they were not on leave; and (3)catch-up, in which employees pay upon returning to work.For cafeteria plans offering flexible spending accounts (FSAs) "into which employers put pre-tax dollars for workers' medical ordependent-care costs - the IRS proposes FSAs be subject to the samerules as other health plans for workers on family leave. Thus,workers may revoke their health plan selections while on leave, butfirms must allow reinstatement upon their return. Those electingcontinuation coverage during leave are subject to normal uniformcoverage laws.Separately, the IRS specified when firms can charge COBRAparticipants the family rate. The guidance says if a worker andspouse elect COBRA together, the employer may charge 102% of thefamily premium; if only a spouse or dependent child does, 102% ofthe individual rate applies. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicare Supplemental Suit Alleges Systematic OverbillingAsserting that hundreds of thousands of Medicare supplementalinsurance policyholders nationwide have been systematically andintentionally overcharged, physician-patient advocates this monthfiled a class action suit against the Prudential Insurance Co. Byanv. Prudential, No. 600650/96 (N.Y. Sup.Ct., filed Feb. 8, 1996).The case is said to be the first of its kind, but if it succeeds,similar suits may be filed against other insurers, says YvonneArcher, executive director of the League of Physicians andSurgeons, which supports the suit. Medicare supplemental insuranceprovides benefits that Medicare doesn't cover, includingcopayments, deductibles and prescription drugs.At issue in the New York lawsuit are deluxe versions of policiessponsored by the American Assn. of Retired Persons (AARP) and soldby Prudential. Such policies allow members to seenon-Medicare-participating physicians and pay the differencebetween the Medicare allowable fee and an MD's "usual andprevailing" charge.The plaintiffs, represented by the New York-based law firm Landy &Seymour, say Pru didn't pay that difference and intentionallycharged it to AARP members. The amount sought in the suit is thepremium difference between the Pru plan and a less-comprehensiveversion that doesn't fill the gap between Medicare payments and MDfees, plus punitive damages and attorneys' fees.The insurer says the suit is "without merit." AARP is not involved,although Archer blames it for overlooking the alleged overcharges.Still unclear is the actual number of people and dollars at stake.That information will be determined during the discovery stage ofthe suit. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Medicare to Add Procedures To Bundled Payment PilotHCFA plans to expand its Medicare bundled payment"centers-of-excellence" demonstration in the next two months byadding several orthopedic and four cardiology procedures.The HCFA has already tested the program on bypass and cataractsurgery, but those demos are expiring this year.Under the upcoming cardiology pilot, the agency will pay facilitiesa negotiated bundled rate to cover hospital and physician servicesfor heart bypasses, angioplasties, valve replacements andcatheterization. The orthopedic demo will cover total hip and kneejoint replacements.Hospitals can participate in either the cardiology or theorthopedic demo, or both. The bundled payment will account foroutlier cases; separate payments won't be made for particularlyexpensive patients.HCFA hasn't decided on the number of sites, but most likely willchoose facilities in a region comprised of several contiguousstates. HCFA plans to select hospitals by late 1996 and have thefirst sites operating by the spring of 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Statewide Payment Areas For Medicare Docs EyedHCFA is considering moving to additional statewide payment areasfor the Medicare physician fee schedule in 1997 - a move that wouldpay rural doctors higher fees, comparable to those of their citybrethren. Insiders say action appears imminent.If HCFA proposes such a change in its annual fee update thissummer, "it will become a hot issue" for docs, says Randy Teach,director of the Washington office of the Medical Group ManagementAssn. Such a proposal would create winner and loser states, asituation that could cause Congress to jump in and legislate asolution.Currently, the national fee schedule contains 210 geographicpayment areas, based on the locales Medicare claims processors usedunder the old charge-based payment system. The Physician PaymentReview Commission (PPRC), which advises Congress on Medicarephysician payments, recommends revamping payment areas and creating35 statewide fee schedules; the other 15 states should havemultiple schedules based on metropolitan areas.HCFA may be listening. In the past, the agency claimed it didn'thave the authority to redefine payment areas across the board,although it allowed a handful of states to establish statewide feeschedules if widely supported by physicians.But the agency recently decided it has such authority, and isanalyzing a just-completed study by Health Economics Research thaturges retaining current payment divisions only in areas wheremedical prices are much higher than the state average. The finding:Only 14 states would retain multiple fee schedules. GBack to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Feds Seeks Recoupment Of Provider Device FraudThe providers who allegedly billed Medicare for  experimentalmedical devices knowing it was illegal were undaunted by the threatof government retaliation, a Senate panel was told this month.A former device industry executive, suing providers on behalf ofthe government under the whistleblower provision of the FalseClaims Act, told the Senate Permanent Subcommittee onInvestigations that some providers risked patients' lives, tamperedwith files, and lied on forms to ensure Medicare payment.The lawsuit claims providers improperly billed Medicare forexperimental devices and related care. HCFA began officiallycovering such devices last fall.Hospital lawyers contend the whistleblower is not the originator ofthe allegations - a key requirement to win such cases. The fedsdenied encouraging the whistleblower to sue.Meanwhile, some hospitals are starting to get letters from thegovernment demanding records of Medicare claims for experimentaldevices and related medical care to figure out how much hospitalsowe Medicare, sources say.And in a new revelation, every hospital scrutinized by the feds forimproper Medicare claims for experimental medical devices allegedlysubmitted these claims, at least half knew the claims wereinappropriate, and almost 30 hospitals tried to cover it up, HHSDeputy Inspector General Jack Hartwig told the Senate panel.In response, he said the IG and HCFA are calculating overpaymentsto providers and plan to seek repayment; evidence of allegedcriminal conduct will be investigated; fraud that has beenidentified is being addressed by the Justice Department; and HHS isaddressing weaknesses in accounting and tracking of investigationaldevices, in hospital oversight, and in obtaining informed patientconsent. Physicians also are being probed. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996INSIDE THE BELTWAY        Some seniors join Medicare HMOs toretain employer-provided health benefits, according to a GAO report(GAO/HEHS-96-63). HMOs tend to join Medicare where HMO marketpenetration is well-established and capitation payments are high,notes GAO. Call (202) 512-6000.        HCFA has slapped intermediatesanctions on Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts for"knowingly" supplying misleading marketing information in itsMedicare HMO application. In freezing the HMO's Medicare enrollmentand marketing functions, HCFA levied its first intermediatesanction on an HMO. Before sanction rules were issued in 1994,HCFA's only recourse was to yank an HMO's contract.        HHS awarded $2.5 million in grantsfor childrens' emergency medical services. Call (301) 594-1364.        Medicaid recipients reported badhealth more frequently in 1995 than the prior year, used hospitalrooms twice as often as other groups, and were at least twice aslikely than those with private insurance to have hypertension,cancer, migraines, emphysema, diabetes and heart failure, reportsthe National Health Survey. Call (610) 366-1310.        Physicians, optometrists,psychiatrists, labs and durable medical equipment suppliers engagedin Medicare nursing home billing fraud on a "frequent andwidespread" basis, says a new GAO report (GAO/HEHS-96-18).Unscrupulous providers often operate their schemes in volume,inappropriately receive beneficiary information from nursing homes,and are not flagged by Medicare's automated systems.        Postpartum programs should includestabilization in the birth location, home visits and registerednurse case management, says the American Nurses Assn. Congress mayentertain  maternity stay legislation this spring. Call (202)651-7023.        Elimination of the tax subsidy foremployer-provided health benefits would hurt the oldest and sickestworkers, according to the Center for Health Expenditures andInsurance Studies in the winter issue of Inquiry. Call (716)264-9122.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Pennsylvania to Mandate 438,000 Into Medicaid ManagedCarePennsylvania this month announced plans to mandate 438,000 Medicaidrecipients into HMOs in a five-county area around Philadelphia.The initiative, dubbed "HealthChoices," is the first step of astatewide mandatory program to be phased in over the next threeyears. The state has operated a limited mandatory managed careprogram for 100,000 Philadelphia-area Medicaid recipients since1986.Pennsylvania received a Sec. 1915(b) Medicaid waiver from HHS toimplement "HealthChoices" in 1993 under then-Gov. Robert Casey (D).But the plan was criticized by some groups for lacking Medicaid HMOregulations, and its implementation was delayed. A class-actionlawsuit was filed and is still pending.Incoming Gov. Tom Ridge (R) made a number of changes toHealthChoices before the state issued a draft request for proposals(RFP) this month.HMO bids will be awarded in the summer, open enrollment will beginAug. 6, and the program will become operational Nov. 1.Enrollment will be phased in, with certain groups such as AFDCrecipients joining Nov. 1; remaining eligibles will be folded in onJuly 1, 1997. Medicaid recipients targeted for 1997 entry mayvoluntarily join HMOs sooner.Recipients who don't select an HMO within a certain time periodwill be randomly assigned one.Changes Made to Address CriticismsTo address a number of criticisms lobbed at the initialHealthChoices proposal, the department will:o       Ban HMO direct marketing, such asdoor-to-door solicitation, and instead have a benefits consultantconduct enrollment activities.o       Carve out behavioral health servicesfor a separate procurement process. County governments will begiven the first rights of refusal to manage mental health-substanceabuse treatment benefits before a private capitated contractor ispicked.o       Require HMOs to submit encounterdata and comply with Medicaid HEDIS (WHW 2/5/96, p. 2).o       Capitate HMOs, build in an allowableprofit margin, and link performance and outcome measures to profitlevels. This addresses concerns raised about the PhiladelphiaMedicaid program, whose private contractor was found by the HHSInspector General to have made excessive profits. That contract andprogram terminates Oct. 31.o       Make direct payments to hospitalsfor disproportionate share and graduate medical education, insteadof including them in HMO capitation payments. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Arkansas Hospitals, State Agree on Medicaid Payment HikesArkansas hospitals and state officials recently sidestepped apotential Medicaid payment lawsuit by  negotiating an $11million-$12 million payment hike that will take effect April 1,pending HCFA's expected approval.At the heart of the three-part deal negotiated last month is a 16%increase in the maximum amount Medicaid pays per day for inpatientservices. The increase adds up to a $5 million hike for hospitals.The per-diem cap has been $584 since 1991, but after the ArkansasHospital Assn. argued that 25% of its members' costs were abovethat level, the Department of Human Services agreed to raise thecap to $675.Second, the agreement would reduce Medicaid hospital copayments,which in most instances are unpaid by recipients and absorbed byhospitals. The copayment is currently 50% of hospital costs for thefirst inpatient day, but that would be lowered to 10% of eachinpatient day.Because the average Medicaid hospital length of stay in Arkansas isunder four days, state hospitals stand to gain $6 million from thereduction in copays. That new policy also contains an economicincentive for hospitals to reduce inpatient stays, notes JamesTeeter, president of the state hospital association.The third part of the deal is an increase in the Medicaid paymentto hospitals for patients eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.Currently, Medicaid contributes the difference between the Medicaredeductible, which is $736, and 50% of the Medicaid hospital per-daypayment. The new Medicaid contribution would be the Medicaredeductible minus only 10% of the Medicaid per diem.HCFA hasn't yet received the Arkansas Medicaid proposal, butTeeter, who says the hospitals would sue the state otherwise, isconfident the payment hike will be approved. Arkansas Medicaidofficials, state legislators and Gov. Jim Guy Tucker (D) are allbehind the deal. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Louisiana to Require Copayments To Help in MedicaidShortfallLouisiana this month proposed requiring Medicaid recipients to makenominal copayments for all health care services to help offset astate budget crunch.The copayments are expected to generate $21 million annually, inaddition to $10 million currently collected in prescription drugcopayments. Louisiana's Medicaid program is projecting a $450million shortfall this fiscal year, which ends June 30, and a $330million shortage in the following fiscal year, says David Hood,undersecretary of the Department of Health and Hospitals.More than half the states have adopted cost sharing in theirMedicaid programs, sources say. Louisiana is still looking at othercuts and savings to balance the Medicaid program budget.The proposed copays are subject to a two-week public comment periodthat began Feb. 13. State officials will make changes after thatand finalize the copayment schedule, effective May 1.As proposed, Louisiana Medicaid recipients would begin makingsliding-scale copayments, based on ability to pay. Copays would be$0.50 to $3 for physician office visits, labs and X-ray services;$25 for inpatient hospital admissions; 5% coinsurance forambulatory surgery; and $2 for alcohol and drug abuse treatment.Children and categorically needy HMO enrollees would be exempt fromcopayments. In addition, copays would not be required forpregnancy, emergency, hospice, family planning and nursing homeservices. Thus, about 50% of the state's Medicaid population wouldbe exempt.Following the lead of other states, the program will let providersdecide how to collect the copayments.In addition to the copays, the state is addressing the Medicaidbudget crunch by:o       Reopening prior-year cost reportsfor state hospitals. The department found additional allowablecosts that state hospitals are due from Medicaid, and will getadditional federal matching federal funds for that purpose. Whilethis move will only provide "one-time" funds, that amount will besufficient to solve all but $38 million to $40 million of thisyear's shortfall, according to Hood.o       Looking at changing the way nursinghomes are reimbursed by Medicaid, a move that could save anywherefrom $45 million to $105 million in fiscal 1997, Hood says.o       Collecting about $25 million inoverpayments to psychiatric hospitals, nursing homes and othertypes of providers.The state Medicaid program is looking at piloting a managed careprogram and a separate voucher system on a regional basis for theupcoming fiscal year, but won't move to a statewide managed caresystem anytime soon, Hood adds. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Arizona Eyes Waiver to Integrate Medicare, MedicaidServicesArizona, the first state to develop a statewide capitated managedcare system that combines Medicaid acute and long-term careservices, is preparing to amend its existing Sec. 1115 waiver tofully integrate Medicare and Medicaid services.The state began its Medicaid managed care program in 1982 and addedthe long-term care component in 1988. The program providesinstitutional, residential and in-home services to elderly anddisabled Medicaid recipients who would normally be put in a nursinghome. Arizona contracts with counties and HMOs for the managed careprogram.As of Oct. 1, 1995, the program served 20,919 recipients. Nearlyhalf of those were elderly. About 97% of the Medicaid elderlymembers in the long-term care program are "dual eligibles," whoalso are covered by Medicare.But coordination with Medicare services and linkages between acuteand long-term care have been hindered by conflicts between Medicareand Medicaid regulations, says a new report by the National Academyfor State Health Policy.Although the majority of elderly enrollees are dual eligibles andreceive Medicare services separately, some Medicaid long-term careprogram contractors are also Medicare HMOs. If the long-term caresystem contractor isn't a Medicare HMO, the contractor mustcoordinate care with Medicare providers, the academy notes.The state hopes HCFA approval of the waiver request will allowintegration of Medicare and Medicaid, and full integration ofacute, behavioral health and long-term care.Arizona's capitation payment structure has created incentives forprogram contractors to serve enrollees in their own homes or inresidential settings, the national academy notes.As a result of the long-term care program's success, theHCFA-imposed cap on the number of members who can receive home andcommunity-based services has been increased from 5% when theprogram first began to 40% in 1995, says the academy.For details on Managed Care & Long-Term Care: The Arizona Long-TermCare System, call (207) 874-6524. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Maryland Hospital Cuts OK'd After Record Profits ReportedDetermining that hospitals in Maryland enjoyed record profits lastyear, state officials recently decided to pare back hospitals'revenue stream in an attempt to pass on savings to patients.Maryland is one of two states that set hospital rates for bothpublic and private payers.Hospital net profits increased 93% in the state last year, from$145.5 million in 1994 to $281.3 million in 1995, according to theMaryland Health Services Cost Review Commission, which regulateshospital rates. As a percentage of total revenue, net profits wentfrom around 3.4% to 6.2%, says the commission.While those rewards "can be attributed, in no small way," toincreased efficiency, the numbers also suggest that the staterate-setting system "may simply be too generous" to hospitals, saysCommission Chair Charles Fisher.As a result, the panel engaged in what executive director RobertMurray called a "contentious" negotiating session with hospitalsand approved a $170.5 million cut in the projected rate increase.In other words, while hospitals had been scheduled to get a 6.5%rate increase in April, that bump will instead be around 4.4%. Lastyear the commission made a similar 1.4 percentage point baselinereduction.Among other commission findings:o       Hospital costs grew 1.63% in 1995,below the national average of 1.75%. It's the 19th straight yearMaryland hospitals have outperformed the country in holding downcosts.o       Hospital charges per case, theactual bill paid by patients and carriers, increased 3%.o       The amount of uncompensated careincreased 2.1% to $404.4 million. As a percent of revenue,uncompensated care costs fell to 8% from 8.22%. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996Mass. Providers Claim Vendor Owes Millions; State toInterveneMassachusetts mental health providers are prepared to sue thestate's Medicaid managed mental health contractor for $6 million to$9 million in allegedly unpaid claims unless the providers' demandsare met. The state has promised to help the providers.The providers, who may sue Mental Health Management of America forbreach of contract, say the vendor trapped them in a "Catch 22" toavoid paying claims for mental health and substance abusetreatment. The contractor required preauthorization numbers onclaims and required claims to be submitted within 90 days ofservice, then allegedly didn't furnish the preauthorization numberspromptly enough for providers to meet the 90-day deadline."Claims processing was not [Mental Health Management's] strength,"admits Bruce Bullen, commissioner of the state Division for MedicalAssistance, which oversees Medicaid."We'll work this through with providers," he says. "We'll make sure[the firm] is responsible for complying with the contract. But itdoesn't mean we'll pay all claims."Bullen noted that Mental Health Management "performed in a superiorfashion in some areas, like quality management."Nevertheless, Massachusetts didn't renew Mental Health Management'sMedicaid managed care contract. Mental Health Management, owned byFirst Financial Management Corp. of Atlanta, got the MassachusettsMedicaid contract for managed behavioral health care in 1992.John Kahn, a lawyer representing Mental Health Corp. ofMassachusetts, an organization of 65 mental health agenciesallegedly owed money, asked the contractor to process theproviders' unpaid claims, and suspend requirements related to priorapproval, billing within 90 days, a 365-day payment appeals processand claims identification numbers.Kahn says Mental Health Management will meet with the providersnext week on the dispute.Mental Health Management broke new ground in providing this type ofcomprehensive managed mental health care to Medicaid, so naturallythere were growing pains, says Ron Preston, HCFA's associateregional administrator.But that's not why the firm's contract wasn't renewed, hemaintains. "Other applicants had more solid applications," Prestonsays.State officials say providers fear Mental Health Management willdisappear without making good on claims owed. "We want to make surethey do everything in compliance," since the contract will beclosed out in June, says Bullen, whose agency is auditing thecompany.The Medicaid behavioral health vendor was unavailable for comment.Mental Health Management was paid $11.5 million in administrativeexpenses under the Medicaid risk-bearing contract. Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON HEALTH WEEK via NewsNetFebruary 26, 1996STATE BRIEFS        Ten states enacted laws governingthe administration and financing of child mental health services in1995, and 15 passed laws governing treatment, says the NationalConference of State Legislatures. For example, New Mexicoeliminated restrictions on behavior modification, Tennessee bannedrelease of childrens' mental health records to persons accused ofchild abuse or neglect, and Missouri required school districts toeducate children placed by mental health or social serviceagencies. For details on "Children, Youth and Family Issues," call(202) 624-5400.        D.C. Mayor Marion Barry (D) proposedan 11% Medicaid funding cut in his fiscal 1997 budget. The districtplans to expand its use of managed care.         Kentucky Gov. Paul Patton (D)proposed to phase out the state's tax on physicians. The tax ispart of the 1994 health reform statute, which some lawmakers wantto pare back this session.         Low-income Wisconsin residents wouldreceive health care coverage if they needed it while moving off ofwelfare into the workforce, according to reforms proposed by Gov.Tommy Thompson (R). The state is scheduled to replace the AFDCwelfare program with a work-based system in 1999.        Alaska, Pennsylvania and Louisianacould pass provider-supported medical malpractice legislation thisyear, according to the American Tort Reform Assn. Meanwhile,medical liability changes could be rolled back in New Jersey,Florida, Rhode Island and Utah. Call (202) 682-1022.        California Medicaid HMOs vary fromplan to plan in the amount of physician services they offer,according to a recent report by the Center for Health Care Rights.For example, Universal Care HMO averages 0.37 physician encountersa year per Medicaid patient, compared with 5.14 at KaiserFoundation Health Plan's HMO in southern California. Call (213)383-4519.        Hospital spending for acutemyocardial infarction in states with medical malpractice laws, suchas non-economic damage award caps, grew 17% between 1984 and 1990,compared with 24% in states without such laws, according toStanford University economists Daniel Kessler and Mark McClellan.For ischemic heart disease, spending growth was 17% in states withmedical liability changes and 28% in states without such laws. Call(415) 723-9193.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-33IA086-000615-B043-44http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in16.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020705 text/html 16131HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:11 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:30 GMTContent-length: 15944Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in16.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MARKET BRIEFING (423 words) DISCOUNTED RATES FOR TERRORISM (57 words) FUTURE FOR CAPTIVES? (138 words) EMSS RESEARCH BEGINS (247 words) LONGFORD EXPANDS HELP DESK FACILITIES (56 words) SAFETY SCHEME LAUNCHED (192 words) NEW MANAGING AGENCY (92 words) PRINTERS' PACKAGE (97 words) SHOP AND OFFICE PACKAGES RELAUNCHED (102 words) BUSINESS TRAVELCOVER RELAUNCHED (318 words) HOTEL PROTECT (157 words) ABSTRACT CONTRACTORS LIABILITY (31 words) CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MARKET BRIEFINGMost insurers include employers and public liability cover as part of aspecifically designed contractor's package.  A few, such as CommercialUnion and Eagle Star, use their standard liability wordingsappropriately tailored for the risk concerned.  General Accident, whichrecently introduced a combined liability policy specifically for theconstruction industry, uses instead its more general combined liabilitypolicy where the construction element of the business is less than 10%.Most contractors' liability covers offer a wide range of extensions,although policies designed for small businesses may be more restricted,for example omitting overseas cover.  Some insurers also have standardendorsements for different trades.Following a poor safety record and a significant number of death andinjury claims, there are now signs that liability claims experience inthe UK construction industry is improving.  The 1994/95 Health andSafety Commission annual report, published last November, stated thatfatal injuries in construction during 1994/95 continued the steadydownward trend and were expected to be the lowest in eight years.  Theprovisional fatality rate for the construction workforce was 4.7 perhundred thousand.In a key move to reduce accidents, the Construction Design andManagement (CDM) Regulations were  introduced on 31 March 1995.  Theseimplement the design and management aspects of the EC Temporary orMobile Construction Sites Directive, placing statutory duties on allthose involved in construction work to minimise accident and healthrisks.  To avoid disrupting projects already underway at 31 March,those involved in existing projects were allowed up to nine months inwhich to comply with the regulations - which means that all qualifyingconstruction work should now be implementing CDM.  The regulations donot apply to* construction work, other than demolition, that does not last longerthan 30 working days or 500 person work days and does not involve morethan four people* construction work for a domestic client* construction work carried out inside offices and shops or similarpremises without interrupting the normal activities of the premises andwithout separating the construction activities from the otheractivities* the maintenance or removal of insulation on pipes, boilers or otherparts of heating or water systems.Under the new rules, clients, designers, planning supervisors,principal contractors, contractors and self-employed workers acting ascontractors have clearly defined duties which they must carry out asfar as reasonably practicable.  A key element is the provision andimplementation of a health and safety plan and construction must notstart until this has been prepared.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DISCOUNTED RATES FOR TERRORISMPool Re is offering a 20% discount on premium rates for 1996.  Insuredswill be required to pay 60% of the discounted annual premium at thebeginning of the policy period.  The 40% remaining will not becollected as long as losses are not in excess of #75m.  No claims weremade on the pool last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FUTURE FOR CAPTIVES?Following Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's decision to increase the taxationof controlled foreign companies from 50% to 90%, AIRMIC's CaptiveSpecial Interest Group has been considering the implications for theviability of offshore captive insurers owned by UK companies.  Itconcludes that* risk managers are under no pressure to take drastic or immediateaction with regard to the operation of their captive insurers.  Somemajor organisations are still actively considering the possibility ofsetting up offshore captives* AIRMIC members' captive insurers have not been established for purelytax reasons, but to provide the broadest cover to their companies atlowest prudent cost* captives are still the critical component of their risk financingstrategies, and provide the ability to meet their needs in the face ofthe unpredictability of the insurance and reinsurance markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EMSS RESEARCH BEGINSThe Loss Prevention Council (LPC) is collaborating with ImperialCollege London to investigate the links between EnvironmentalManagement Systems (EMSs) and insurance.  EMSs are new tools by whichinsurers may be able to assess and quantify the environmentalperformance of their clients.  The LPC says that governments andinternational agencies agree that continued, sustainable economicdevelopment depends on the availability of adequate insurance cover forenvironmental risks.  However, insurers are said to be wary of suchrisks, particularly because of past experiences in the United States.A three-year study entitled The Response of the Insurance Industry toDevelopments in Environmental Management Systems recently began at theCentre for Environmental Technology at Imperial College London.  Theresearch is aimed at analysing the response of insurers to theintroduction of EMSs as expressed in their attitudes towards theirclients' environmental performance, as well as supplying insurers withinformation gathered during the study on the usefulness and benefits ofEMSs.The study will also address the following questions.  What are the mainconstraints on the environmental insurance market?  Are these caused byuncertainties in technical assessment, or other problems such aslong-term uncertainty in legal liability?  How do insurers currentlyassess the environmental performance of their clients - if at all?In the medium term, the study aims to determine whether and to whatextent compliance with EMSs standards supports insurers' own assessmentsystems, and also whether and how insurers might effectively use EMSsin their assessments.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LONGFORD EXPANDS HELP DESK FACILITIESThrough its "broker help desk", Longford Insurance Schemes is offeringsales visits to assist brokers with promoting Chauffeurplan.  Accordingto Longford, almost 60% of Chauffeurplan schemes are now sold byintermediaries, compared with 40% two years ago.  As a specialincentive, Longford Insurance Schemes are currently offering selectedintermediaries up to 60% commission on new sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SAFETY SCHEME LAUNCHEDMinister for Local Transport and Road Safety Steven Norris has launchedDriveCare - a safety scheme targeted at commercial vehicles (includingheavy goods, commercial goods vehicles and coaches).  This sector isresponsible for nearly 45,000 of all road accident injuries in the UK.Similar schemes in use in the USA over the past decade have resulted ina 25% drop in commercial vehicle accident fatalities.DriveCare encourages owners and operators of commercial vehicles alongwith general motorists to take a pro-active approach to road safety.Subscribing owners of commercial vehicles display a sticker whichincludes a free-phone number on the rear of each vehicle in theirfleet.  Motorists who witness a driver driving dangerously, carelessly,discourteously or speeding can telephone and lodge their complaint.This is registered on the DriveCare database and the owner of thevehicle is immediately faxed with the details of the incident.  Theowner is then in a position to take the necessary steps to counsel ordiscipline the driver or provide further driver training.The system originated in the USA where it is now estimated that over80% of all commercial vehicles display the sticker.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW MANAGING AGENCYUSF&G Corporation is establishing a Lloyd's syndicate and, through anew wholly-owned subsidiary known as F&G UK Underwriters Ltd, will bethe sole corporate member of Syndicate Number 1211.  USF&G has alsoformed F&G UK Agency Ltd ( a joint venture between USF&G subsidiary F&GHoldings Ltd and managing agents Ashley Palmer) to manage the operationof the new corporate syndicate.  USF&G plans to expand and capitalisein speciality markets such as reinsurance and the new syndicate and F&GUK Agency Ltd will focus on building a portfolio of internationalreinsurance business.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PRINTERS' PACKAGEINK Underwriting Agencies has introduced a specialist package, endorsedby The Guild of Master Printers, for smaller sized printers.  Coverincludes* all risks insurance on trade contents, including ingress of foreignbodies, transparencies, artwork, plates etc* business interruption, (for twice the trade contents figure)* glass* inching and crawling* employers and public liability* libel and slander* money* goods in transitA legal advice line is provided.  The scheme is underwritten by AXAInsurance and is open to all intermediaries (brokerage 10%).Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SHOP AND OFFICE PACKAGES RELAUNCHEDCountrywide Insurance Marketing has re-launched its shop and officepackages, Countrywide Tradewise and Officewise.  Additional cover suchas deterioration of stock, loss of licence, book debt and computercover becomes standard and is being included free for all 1996renewals.  A Survey Guarantee has also been introduced with theorganisation's sales team surveying the risk to confirm the level ofsecurity required; this will be guaranteed for the first year of cover.Countrywide recently joined forces with Transamerica Insurance FinanceCompany (Europe) to launch Countrywide Commercial Premium Finance.This enables customers to settle all their commercial insurance costsin one agreement.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BUSINESS TRAVELCOVER RELAUNCHEDBUPA has relaunched its Business TravelCover product with three levelsof cover.* EssentialCare provides comprehensive health cover including: medicalexpenses up to #1m, repatriation, a replacement service to assist withlost drugs, glasses or contact lenses, emergency return home, legalexpenses, inconvenience benefit while in hospital, personal accident,personal liability and replacement employee benefit, covering thetravel costs to replace an employee who has been hospitalised for threedays or more.* TotalCare provides all the EssentialCover health cover benefits plusprovision for loss of luggage, loss of money, loss of passport, loss offunds, cancellation or curtailment of the trip and travel and luggagedelay.* TotalCare plus winter sports cover combines the health and travelbenefits of TotalCare with cover for lost or stolen ski equipment, costof hiring replacement equipment, lost or stolen ski pass, refund forski expenses due to injury or illness and piste closure.Business travellers can upgrade their policy further to include leisureas well as business trips, cover for the family and business travelwithin the UK.BUPA Business TravelCover EssentialCare costs from #34 for 12 monthscover.  With the addition of TotalCare, premiums start at #47.50 ayear.  Fully comprehensive cover including leisure and business travelplus wintersports protection costs from #88.00 per annum.  UK businesstravel cover, for protection against lost or stolen business items,costs an additional #26.The policy is provided in conjunction with Europ Assistance, theworld's largest emergency assistance organisation, and is available toboth members and non-members of BUPA, for groups of three or moreemployees.  Should a member of staff leave, policies can be transferredat no additional cost and new members of staff will be coveredinstantly.  BUPA Business TravelCover provides protection for trips upto a maximum of 45 days in duration and a total of 180 days in any oneinsurance year.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HOTEL PROTECTConference specialist Insurex Expo-Sure launches a new policy forhoteliers in February.  Hotel Protect provides for all costs which havebeen pre-booked, such as deposits, room hire, accommodation or delegatecharges, to be paid back to the conference organiser should delegatesbe prevented from arriving by any reason out of their control.  Theinsurance is set in place at the time of booking by the hotelier addinga premium of #1.75 per person per night (plus the hotelier's handlingfee) to the delegate rate.Initially the policy is available for bookings of a minimum two nightsand is aimed primarily at the conference delegate or group bookings.The cover also includes roadside assistance whereby a delegate breakingdown en route to the hotel will be towed to the nearest garage,provided with emergency overnight accommodation if required and giventhe cost of onward travel to the original hotel.  Hotel Protect isunderwritten by Home & Overseas.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMERCIAL POLICY GUIDE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONTRACTORS LIABILITYAn analysis of contractors liability cover available in the UK is givenon pages 4-28 of the hard copy.  The names of the insurers whoseproducts are reviewed are also given.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-34IA086-000615-B043-60http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in11.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020720 text/html 31356HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMTContent-length: 31169Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in11.html Sample Issue Copyright DISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNet January 18, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DISABILITY LAW Clinton Signs Bill Delaying Over-The-Road Bus Accessibility Under ADA (519 words) WASHINGTON (1223 words) Insurer Refusing to Cover Applicant Because He Is Deaf, Suit Alleges (753 words) WASHINGTON (211 words) Mason Tenders Fund Settles Landmark Case (874 words) In Settling Suit, City Agrees to Accelerate Installation of Curb Ramps (522 words) UPDATE (462 words) CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996Clinton Signs Bill Delaying Over-The-Road Bus Accessibility Under ADAWASHINGTON -- As the Justice Department considers one amendment to theADA, another has already been signed into law by President Clinton. TheNational Highway System Designation Act of 1995, signed by the presidenton Nov. 28, 1995, delays the date by which over-the-road buses must beaccessible under the ADA.Original ADA regulations called for large over-the-road carriers such asGreyhound  to be accessible by July 1996, and smaller carriers by 1997.Those dates, however, were based on the issuance of Department ofTransportation regulations by July 1994. DOT did not release regulationsby 1994 -- in fact, it still has not.Congress, therefore, moved to amend the ADA so that large and smallcarriers have two and three years, respectively, to comply from whateverdate DOT issues its regulations.According to Maureen McCloskey, who monitors Congress for ParalyzedVeterans Association, the ADA amendment was placed into thetransportation bill while it was being debated in the HouseTransportation and Infrastructure Committee, chaired by Rep. BudShuster, R-Pa.  The Senate had no ADA provision in its version of thebill, but Senate officials receded in conference and the bill went tothe president with the ADA provision intact, McCloskey said."We're concerned that the disability community was not involved in theprocess," McCloskey said. "We had received assurances from both theminority and the majority that this would not be in the bill. But thereit was."Disability-rights advocates concede that controversy about accessibilityto over-the-road buses did not cease when the ADA was signed into law in1990. The Office of Technology Assessment was charged with doing a studyon the best way to provide accessibility to the buses; DOT was to havebased its regulations on the results of the study.The study, completed in 1993, concluded that each vehicle should beaccessible, whether by a ramp or lift, either vehicle-based or station-based. The controversy between advocates and bus company officialssimmered as DOT issued its notice of proposed rulemaking in 1994.According to McCloskey, DOT was considering allowing only a percentageof buses to be accessible. It also was considering a proposal by buscompanies to use a boarding device, placing a mobility-impaired personinto a regular bus seat and stowing the wheelchair. Advocates preferhaving the wheelchair secured within the bus -- but that tends to takeup more seats and more potential revenue from bus operators, McCloskeysaid.The 1994 deadline passed and DOT didn't issue regulations."I understand the bus companies' concern that they have no regulationsto comply with and their statutory deadline is in six months," McCloskeysaid. "As far as the ADA being a reasonable law, the extension makessense. Other entities had two years after regulations came out to be incompliance."On the other hand, they are the only public entity that hasn't had todo anything under the ADA. They're being allowed to perpetuate aninaccessible system. The technology is there. The private buses aredoing it. This is not a technological problem -- it's what the busindustry is pushing as a financial problem."Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996WASHINGTONThe Department of Justice has proposed extending the deadline -- by 10years, in some cases -- for the installation of curb ramps in cities andtowns across the U.S. The surprise announcement was made in a notice ofproposed rulemaking in the Nov. 27, 1995, Federal Register.If Justice's proposal is realized it would become the most significantalteration of Americans with Disabilities Act regulations since thelaw's passage in 1990. Further, the proposal comes on the heels ofanother rollback in ADA regulations that took disability-rightsactivists by surprise: In late November President Clinton signed atransportation bill containing a provision that extended the deadlinefor accessibility to over-the-road buses. (Story on page 7.)Public comment on the curb ramp proposal will be accepted until Jan. 26-- and there should be plenty of it. For disability-rights advocates,curb ramps are a basic issue: What good are other accessibility measuresif a person in a wheelchair can't get out of the street? Feelings runequally deep in municipal governments, where officials say budgets arebeing stretched to the limit to comply with this costly unfunded federalmandate.The proposed rule would amend Title II regulations to extend the timeperiod for compliance, to Jan. 26, 2000, for curb ramps serving stateand local government facilities, transportation, places of publicaccommodation, other places of employment and the residences ofindividuals with disabilities. It would extend the time period forproviding curb ramps at existing pedestrian walkways in other areas toJan. 26, 2005.The proposed rule would not affect a public entity's obligation toinstall curb ramps at all newly constructed or altered streets, roadsand highways. (28 C.F.R. Section 35.151(e)) And, public entities thatchoose to take advantage of this extension of time must amend theirtransition plans to establish specific schedules for meeting the newdeadlines.What are the current deadlines for curb ramp installation? This has beena matter of some debate. The provision of curb ramps is linked to theTitle II "program accessibility" standard -- in other words, a publicentity's programs and activities, when viewed in their entirety, must bereadily accessible to persons with disabilities. Title II requiredpublic entities to have achieved program accessibility by Jan. 26, 1992-- the effective date of Titles II and III. But where structural changes-- such as curb ramps -- were required for program accessibility, theADA provided that such changes be made as expeditiously as possible, butin no event later than Jan. 26, 1995, unless meeting that deadline wouldresult in a fundamental alteration of its program or would impose unduefinancial and administrative burdens.That Jan. 26 deadline came and went last year, and most disability-rights advocates admitted that while some cities had made significantprogress toward full program accessibility, many -- if not most -- hadnot. The Department of Justice, in explaining its reasons for proposingthe extension, stated that "it is the Department's hope that thisextension will provide the additional flexibility necessary for stateand local governments to comply with the ADA in light of strained fiscalresources, and that it will actually increase the number  of curb rampsthat will be installed on this nation's streets." That, too, was thestated motivation of a group of senators -- former co-sponsors of theADA -- who wrote the Department of Justice last year urging it toconsider the revised deadlines.Justice Department officials could not be reached for further commentdue to the partial shutdown of the federal government, which was ongoingat presstime.Maureen McCloskey, who monitors Congress for the Paralyzed Veterans ofAmerica, said members of her organization and the disability communityin general are not pleased by the proposal."We're real upset about this," she said. "This directly affects ourmembers' ability to get around. Local governments had five years sincethe ADA was passed. They're not making a ruckus about this; they justaren't doing anything. And what does this say to the communities thathave complied with the ADA's current provisions?"Justin Dart, former chairman of the President's Committee on Employmentof People with Disabilities, sums up the arguments on both sides. On onehand, would an extension of deadlines encourage further non-compliance?Will further extensions of time be granted after these expire?Conversely, he also said the revised deadlines are not unlike thoseordered by courts when communities are found to be in violation of theADA."What will we gain if we defeat the rule change?" he said. "We willretain the right to sue now. If we sue or threaten to sue everydelinquent community and win, we will probably get court-ordered orvoluntary schedules for compliance that are very similar to the onesrequired by the rule change. It will cost money and time. It could, insome instances, create animosities that become barriers to other agendaitems -- access, programs and funding."The genesis of the proposal was some of the ADA's staunchest and mostpowerful allies in the U.S. Senate: Republican Sens. Bob Dole, JohnMcCain and Orrin Hatch and Democratic Sens. Tom Harkin and EdwardKennedy. They sent a letter to the Department of Justice early lastyear, stating that "it was our intent to carefully craft ADA to includefair and balanced provisions and specific safeguards for state and localgovernments regarding costs. In this regard, we have heard that curbcuts are a unique, significant capital expense, and believe that ourintent would be more properly fulfilled over a longer time period."It had been suggested by some advocates that the proposed rule shouldrequire public entities to establish a formal process through whichindividuals with disabilities may request installation of a ramp attheir personal residence -- and that the ramp should be installed withinone year of the request. The Justice Department, however, states that it"is concerned that the imposition of a requirement to provide curb rampsat private residences within a year of a request may inhibit the abilityof a public entity to give priority to installing curb ramps on moreheavily traveled routes serving public and commercial facilities."Justice currently recommends -- but does not require -- the developmentof a request procedure. The proposed rule would require public entitiesto ensure that curb ramps serving the residences of individuals shouldbe done by Jan. 26, 2000, and before the construction of ramps at otherresidential and non-commercial sites.The Department of Justice also is seeking comments on:Costs. Justice is hoping to get beyond anecdotal evidence from state andlocal governments and receive specific curb ramp costs, including theamount of funds used both in terms of gross numbers and percentages ofthe city and state budgets.Transportation. The lack of curb cuts could hamper the move towardaccessible transportation as some bus stops may lack curb ramps for alonger period of time.Comments on this rule -- due on or before Jan. 26, 1996 -- should besent to: John L. Wodatch, Chief, Disability Rights Section, Civil RightsDivision, U.S. Department of Justice, Rulemaking Docket 007, P.O. Box65485, Washington, DC 20035. Comments also may be sent via e-mail toADA@justice.usdoj.govDocuments by Fax #401960002. (notice of proposed rulemaking) Pages: 8.Price: $10 subscribers, $20 nonsubscribers.Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996Insurer Refusing to Cover Applicant Because He Is Deaf, Suit AllegesMINNEAPOLIS -- While most insurance-related ADA suits have so farfocused on disability-based caps or exclusions in coverage provided byemployers, a case here appears to chart new waters: Does an insurerviolate the law if it refuses to write a health insurance policy for anindividual who is deaf?That's the allegation in a suit filed by James L. Houselog, a 30-year-old Minnesota man who has been deaf since birth. Houselog was deniedinsurance by Continental General Insurance Co. because of his hearingloss -- even though he has no apparent health problems, said one of hisattorneys, Laura Rovner of the National Center for Law and Deafness inWashington.The case has obvious implications for insurers. If Continental'sdecision is found to be discriminatory, insurers across the nation couldbe forced to re-evaluate their policies on applicants with disabilities.Employers should keep an eye on the case too, as they are liable if theyoffer a policy to employees that is found to be discriminatory.Access to health insurance has been a long-standing problem for peoplewith disabilities -- in fact, it was at the top of disability activists'agenda during the debate for national health care reform in 1994.However, even staunch disability-rights proponents concede that the ADAis a civil rights law and not a blueprint for healthcare and insurancereform. Despite this, ADA suits continue to net favorable settlementswhen challenging caps or exclusions in insurance (See Mason Tendersstory on page 1.)The Minnesota case centers on plaintiff Houselog, a financial consultantwho does not receive health benefits from an employer. He submitted anapplication for health and accident insurance to Continental. Accordingto the suit, the application asked whether he "[e]ver had anyindication, diagnosis or treatment of eyes or ears, including: impairedsight or hearing?" Houselog answered yes, indicating that he was borndeaf because his mother had rubella while she was pregnant.According to the suit, Continental denied the application, stating: "Inaccordance with our current medical underwriting guidelines, we doconsider applicants with deafness on a substandard basis. Unfortunately,the state of Minnesota has passed insurance regulation that limits ourability to offer substandard coverage in Minnesota. Therefore, we areunable to issue a policy to you." The insurer indicated that it wouldhave considered Houselog on a "substandard" basis -- in other words, itwould have covered him for only those expenses not related to hisdeafness. However, Minnesota recently passed a law forbidding thewriting of substandard policies, Rover said."This is the purest form of discrimination," Rovner said. "It's likeracial discrimination; it's like saying we're not going to cover youbecause you're black. There is no reason to think that this man, who hasa totally clean health record, would incur any more expenses than aperson who is not deaf."An official representing Continental declined comment on the case.Rovner expects the insurer to equate its alleged denial of Houselog'sapplication to the more common practice of insurers not covering personswith pre-existing conditions. Rovner also notes that the ADA at 42U.S.C. Section 12201(c) allows insurers to classify and administerinsurance risks that are consistent with state law."The ADA also requires that such a decision be based on actuarialevidence," Rovner said. "I think their justification is that there issome kind of actuarial basis that deaf people are a greater risk. Butthey haven't presented that to us."Plus, they haven't obtained enough information from him to know whetherhe's an increased risk. They know that his mother had rubella, that hewas born deaf. The insurance company didn't even get enough informationto know whether he was  totally deaf and therefore wouldn't even need ahearing aid."Houselog  asked the Minnesota Department of Commerce to investigate thealleged denial of insurance. According to the suit, a Continentalofficial responded to the state inquiry by writing, "Because Mr.Houselog presented an application with the history of hearing loss, wewere unable to provide a standard policy. We consider applicants withdeafness on a substandard basis."The state concluded its investigation by informing Houselog that "[i]tappears that the reply addresses your concerns and answers yourquestions. We have closed the file."Rovner said that, ironically, Minnesota has a law that prohibits thedenial of insurance because of someone's blindness. The law, however,does not address other disabilities.(Houselog v. Continental General Insurance Co. U.S. District Court forthe District of Minnesota. Filed November 1995Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996WASHINGTONEmployment of people with disabilities in the federal government remainssteady despite government-wide downsizing, according to a report justreleased by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management."It is gratifying to see that while government continues to downsize andhiring restrictions at many agencies remain in effect, the number ofpeople with disabilities in the federal executive branch has actuallyrisen during the Clinton Administration from 6.9 percent in 1990 to 7.4percent in 1994," said OPM director Jim King.The office's report will be used to give agencies up-to-date informationto develop strategic affirmative recruiting plans, and for makinginformed and cost-effective human resource decisions, according to OPM.The report names the Department of Veterans Affairs as the largestemployer of persons with disabilities, employing 22,038 people withdisabilities. This represents 8.4 percent of the work force in thatdepartment. About 13 percent of employees with disabilities in thefederal work force are veterans who are eligible for preference becausethey served in combat or suffered a service-connected disability, thereport says.Other agencies with the best records for hiring individuals withdisabilities, according to the report, are the Navy, Army, Air Force,Agriculture and Treasury.Copies of the OPM report are available by calling Warren Asher at (202)606-1800Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996Mason Tenders Fund Settles Landmark CaseNEW YORK -- Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund will pay some $1million to settle the government's first suit alleging unlawful ADA/HIVinsurance exclusions under the Americans with Disabilities Act. As partof the settlement, the fund will pay back medical bills and compensatorydamages to workers with HIV or AIDS whose medical expenses were notcovered.Terrance Donaghey, whose complaint to the Equal Employment OpportunityCommission in 1992 got the case started, will receive $16,000 foremotional distress as well as payment for past medical bills. In all,the fund will compensate more than 10 workers who had filed complaintswith EEOC and also invite other plan members to file claims if they feelthey have been discriminated against.The landmark settlement -- believed to be the largest yet in aninsurance exclusion case -- brings to a close the government's firstsuit alleging "disability-based distinctions" under the ADA. From theEEOC's perspective, it emphasizes to employers and insurers thatdisability-based distinctions are illegal unless they can be justified.Government regulations issued just days before Mason Tenders was sued in1993 state that the so-called distinctions are illegal under the ADAunless proven by actuarial evidence.The fund, which provides health benefits to thousands of construction-related workers in New York, amended its plan in 1991 to, among otherthings, exclude coverage for expenses relating to HIV and AIDS. Unionofficials had said the decision was prompted by rapidly rising healthcare costs and a construction downturn related to the recession of theearly 1990s.Nevertheless, the EEOC made the elimination of disability-baseddistinctions a priority in its ADA enforcement and chose Mason Tendersas its first target. EEOC went on to sue numerous other funds that hadexcluded AIDS or HIV, but  just about all of those cases settled."The fact is that when the insurers were told they would have to justifytheir denial of coverage, settlements came pretty quickly," said CaryLaCheen of New York Lawyers for the Public Interest, who representedDonaghey in his private suit against Mason Tenders. "They don't fightthese cases indefinitely."But Mason Tenders -- unlike most of the other funds sued by EEOC ----appeared prepared to fight back. Many thought the case would eventuallygo to the U.S. Supreme Court and resolve the murky interplay between theADA and insurance. While the case never made it to the high court, itdid yield an important decision at the district court level. There, thefund's motion for summary judgment was denied when a judge held that itwas a covered entity under the ADA -- even though it didn't fit thetypical definition of employer under the act. The judge held that thefund must justify its exclusions by a sound actuarial basis. (See box onpage 11.)"The most significant part of the Mason Tenders case, in addition to thesettlement, is the earlier ruling that the plan was covered under theADA," LaCheen said. "That was instrumental in leading to the settlementof this case and probably affected other settlements as well."The judge's oral opinion -- which was never issued in written form --relied on a broad interpretation of "employer" in a 2nd Circuit case,Spirt v. Teachers Insurance Annuity Association, which was brought underTitle VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The EEOC, in its interpretiveguidance of ADA regulations, provides that the term "employer" has thesame meaning under ADA as it does under Title VII.In a brief filed in opposition to the fund's motion for summaryjudgment, the EEOC also cited the Spirt case: "In Spirt, a tenureduniversity professor sued the independent insurance company and pensionfund that managed the university's retirement fund to challenge underTitle VII their use of sex-based mortality tables to compute lowerannuity payments for female retirees. Although the professor was not anemployee [of the insurance company or the fund] in any commonlyunderstood sense, the court of appeals held that the defendants, whichexist solely for the purpose of enabling universities to delegate theirresponsibility to provide retirement benefits for their employees, areso closely intertwined with those universities ... that they must bedeemed an employer for purposes of Title VII."The Mason Tenders judge accepted EEOC's argument that the fund, too,exists solely for the purpose of enabling contributing employers todelegate their responsibility to provide health benefits for theiremployees."These settlements send a clear signal to other insurers that theycannot discriminate on the basis of disability," LaCheen said. "Peoplewith disabilities should come forward and file complaints with EEOCabout disability discrimination in insurance they receive through work.You don't need a lawyer to file a complaint."Attorneys representing the Mason Tenders fund did not return phone callsseeking comment on the case. EEOC officials could not be reached forcomment due to the partial government shutdown, which was ongoing atpress time.(EEOC v. Mason Tenders District Council Welfare Fund. U.S. DistrictCourt for the Southern District of New York. Filed March 1993.Defendant's motion for summary judgment denied November 1993. Settlementagreement announced December 1995.)      nDocuments by Fax #401960005(consent order). Pages: 13. Price: $15subscribers, $30 nonsubscribers.Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996In Settling Suit, City Agrees to Accelerate Installation of Curb RampsPHILADELPHIA -- The proposed deadline extension for the installation ofcurb ramps appears to have come too late for the city. Then again,perhaps that's not surprising. No other major city in the nation hasbeen the target of more litigation concerning the accessibility of itsstreets and sidewalks under ADA's Title II.Last year the city appealed all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court alower court ruling that said it must construct curb ramps on all streetsit resurfaced since Jan. 26, 1992 -- the effective date of Title II.The high court declined to review the 3rd Circuit case, Kinney v.Yerusalim, 4 NDLR Paragraph 278 (3rd Cir. 1993).And just last month, in settling a suit brought by 20 persons withmobility impairments, the city agreed to adopt a new transition plan andaccelerate its schedule for curb ramp installation citywide. Under thenew plan, the city will install curb ramps on virtually allintersections within the Center City district by Dec. 31, 1996. The planalso calls for the city to install curb ramps throughout allPhiladelphia by Dec. 31, 2001 -- nine years earlier than stated in thecity's pre-lawsuit transition plan.The proposed settlement agreement will not become effective unless it isapproved by a judge in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern Districtof Pennsylvania. A hearing is scheduled later this month.Persons with mobility impairments sued the city last year, alleging thatits transition plan for installing curb ramps did not give priority tostreets near state and local government offices and facilities,transportation, places of public accommodation, and employers -- as isrequired by ADA regulations at 28 C.F.R. Section 35.150(d)(2). The plandid not identify any specific priorities nor did it identify  the dateby which curb ramps would be installed, according to the suit.Title II regulations required all public entities to set a transitionplan -- by January 1992 -- for areas where structural changes toexisting facilities were required to comply with the ADA. In addition toestablishing a plan to install curb ramps at existing facilities, theADA at 28 C.F.R. Section 35.151(e) requires that all newly constructedor altered streets must contain curb ramps.City officials could not be reached for comment on the settlementagreement. However, when the suit was filed last year, officials saidthe city was making progress on the curb ramp project, which it saidwould take 10 years and $100 million to complete. Plaintiffs' attorneyStephen Gold said the city had spent only $1 million installing curbramps over the last three years.As part of the settlement agreement, the city will provide plaintiffswith annual status reports containing detailed information about itscompliance with the new transition plan. Plaintiffs may remedy anyviolations through motions to enforce the agreement if resorting to adispute resolution process proves unsuccessful.Gold said the Justice Department's proposal to extend the curb rampdeadline should have no effect on this case.(Koch v. City of Philadelphia. U.S. District Court for the EasternDistrict of Pennsylvania. Filed July 1995. Settlement agreement December1995Back to Headline List CopyrightDISABILITY COMPLIANCE BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 18, 1996UPDATECLEVELAND -- A football fan who is hearing-impaired has failed toconvince the 6th Circuit that the National Football League is violatingthe ADA when it "blacks out"  local TV broadcast of home games that arenot sold out 72 hours before game time. Thomas Stoutenborough wasappealing a district court's decision to grant the NFL's motion todismiss. In essence, Stoutenborough alleged that the blackout unlawfullydiscriminates against persons with hearing impairments because they haveno other way to access the game. Thus, they are denied the"substantially equal" access that they claim the ADA requires. Theappeals court, however, ruled that the blackout rule is notdiscriminatory because it applies equally to the hearing-impaired  andnon-hearing-impaired population. The court also called "irrelevant" thefact that hearing individuals may be able to listen to a blacked-outgame on radio. The NFL blackout rule does not affect radio broadcasts,according to the court.WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department has announced two settlementsinvolving restaurants. In northern Michigan, the owner of the well-knownBear Lake Tavern agreed to make its restrooms accessible to persons withdisabilities. The settlement stems from a civil suit filed by thedepartment against owner James O. Moyes, who allegedly refused to makethe restaurant more accessible. In addition to altering restrooms, therestaurant installed a ramp at the entrance, designated two accessibleparking spaces and lowered the public telephone. Moyes also agreed topay undisclosed damages. In Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., the RaindancerRestaurant built a ramp and made its restroom accessible. Twocomplainants also received $900 worth of gift certificates for meals atthe restaurant.CHICAGO -- The Chicago Cubs professional baseball team has agreed tomake major renovations at Wrigley Field to bring the 83-year-old stadiuminto compliance with ADA's Title III.  An elevator to the stadium'sterrace level will be installed, more than doubling the number ofreserved accessible seats. Cubs officials also agreed to correct allegeddeficiencies in Wrigley's washrooms and concession stands. Accessibleparking also will be expanded. The Cubs were sued by the Legal Clinicfor the Disabled last year after people with disabilities filedcomplaints. The settlement agreement was finalized just two monthsbefore a trial was set to begin. Under terms of the agreement, Cubsmanagement has until April to make the stadium accessible under the ADA.The Cubs also agreed to publish a brochure describing the facilities andarrangements made for persons with disabilities. Finally, the club willpay Legal Clinic for the Disabled $20,000, which includes areimbursement to plaintiffs for the costs of the suit.The editors of Disability Compliance Bulletin welcome your comments,questions and news tips via e-mail! Please send e-mail to managingeditor Marc Sugarman at msugarman@lrp.com or to legal editor ThomasD'Agostino at tdagostino@lrp.comBack to Headline List WT03-B02-35IA086-000615-B043-96http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in12.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020800 text/html 107083HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:49 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMTContent-length: 106895Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in12.html Sample Issue Copyright EAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CZECH MATES? (822 words) NEWS CP PROFITS RISE (61 words) CP INCREASES STAKE IN KREDITNI BANKA PLZEN (43 words) EKOAGROBANKA PUT UNDER ADMINISTRATION (36 words) CR: MTPL RATES (66 words) SR: MTPL TO BE FREED IN 1998? (292 words) CR: NINE HEALTH FUNDS TO GO? (147 words) CR: POOR RETURNS FOR PENSION FUNDS (244 words) BANK MERGERS (104 words) PLZENSKA BANKA SHARE OFFER (65 words) CESKO-RAKOUSKA (31 words) CHMELARSKA (90 words) GRECO (84 words) KOOPERATIVA (95 words) HASICSKA (BRATISLAVA) (131 words) SLAVIA (54 words) VSZP (89 words) COMPULSORY MTPL POSTPONED (171 words) ESTONIA: 1995 11 MONTH DATA (207 words) ALBA (17 words) BRB (18 words) FORTUNA (104 words) TRYGG-HANSA/HANSA KINDLUSTUS (40 words) POOL FORMED (124 words) OREL/BALKAN (297 words) DZI (210 words) RUSSIA: AMENDMENTS VETOED AGAIN (262 words) RUSSIA: FOREX POLICIES PERMITTED (431 words) BELARUS: PROPOSED LEGISLATION (439 words) BELARUS: 10 INSURERS SUSPENDED (83 words) KAZAKHSTAN: NEW LAW "IRREVERSIBLE" (548 words) BELARUS: CORRECTION (76 words) RUSSIA: 1995 PREMIUM ESTIMATE (29 words) RUSSIA: MINCONS FAVOURED INSURERS (35 words) ALEXANDER HOWDEN (39 words) BELINGOSSTRAKH (214 words) UIIC (243 words) ZASHCHITA ST PETERSBURG (37 words) CROATIA IC (729 words) MERGER OF SUPERVISORS PLANNED (174 words) NEW VMBF LAW (605 words) MTPL RATES (156 words) GROWTH AND COMPETITION IN LIFE (624 words) COLONIA (109 words) EUROPA-GAN (123 words) GARANCIA (89 words) GRAZER WECHSELSEITIGE (264 words) HUNGARIA (77 words) IFOR VEHICLE CLAIMS (37 words) WINTERTHUR (125 words) MOTOR TPL PREMIUMS, 1996 (HUF) (84 words) UNOFFICIAL LIMIT ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT? (228 words) FOREIGN INVESTMENT TO BE LIBERALIZED (66 words) VAT AT 7% FOR 1996 (70 words) MOTOR RATES RISE (138 words) INSURANCE STICKERS (35 words) UNINSURED CAR FINES RISE (67 words) MOTOR INSURANCE FRAUD (76 words) OMBUDSMAN ON PROBLEMS (94 words) WARNING ON EXCESSIVE COMMISSIONS (61 words) AIG (43 words) ATU (23 words) GRYF (362 words) ELEKTRIM INCREASES STAKE IN WARTA (21 words) HESTJA (POZNAN) (207 words) POLISA (434 words) OCCURRENCE AND REPORTS OCCURRENCES AND REPORTS TO 21 JANUARY (1684 words) NEWS ALBANIA: FOREIGN LOAN (30 words) BALTIC STATES: FOREIGN INVESTMENT (23 words) CIS: JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT (363 words) CZECH REPUBLIC: JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT (167 words) HUNGARY: FOREIGN INVESTMENT (27 words) POLAND: JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENT (79 words) ROMANIA: JOINT VENTURES (70 words) CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CZECH MATES?HARD ON THE HEELS of complex changes in the ownership of major Czechbanks in November, one of the results of which was control of Kreditnibanka Plzen by Ceska pojistovna as, Prague (EEIR061/13), came somemajor changes in the shareholdings of the Czech Republic's largestinsurer itself. Just before Christmas, it was revealed that PPFBurzovni Spolecnost as (PPF Stock Exchange Co Ltd, PPF BS), asubsidiary of Privni Privatizacni Fond as (PPF), had acquired an 11.72%stake from Ceska sporitelna (EEIR062/14). Shortly thereafter, it alsoagreed to purchase a further 7.69% from Interbanka, and PPF announcedthat it intended to make further purchases in the market to bring itsstake up to 20%, the maximum permitted in a Czech financial institutionby a single investment fund or fund group.The price was not disclosed, but banking sources estimated a price inthe region of Kc5,000 (US$192) per share, five times nominal value andat a premium of just over 25% to the Kc3,990 quoted on the Prague stockexchange on 15 December, the last trading day of the year. (CP shareswere at their 1995 high of Kc6,090 in January, with a low in April ofKc3,660). Ceska sporitelna had sold its stake, it was speculated,because of its need for funds to make an increase of Kc7bn in bad debtprovisions to a total of Kc23bn for 1995. It also sold shares in someof its investment fund subsidiaries to Bankers Trust for Kc6.7bn.PPF BS director Jaromir Proks stressed that the CP stake had beenbought for long-term investment purposes, and declined to comment whenasked if talks were under way with other CP shareholders. Someobservers retain suspicions that, as with the KBP/Agrobanka sharepurchases, there is a "hidden hand" involved. Initial press speculationthat this was Allianz AG Holding, Munich, was quickly denied - andindeed represented nothing more than the rounding up of the usualsuspects. The idea that the orchestrator is Ceskoslovenska obchodnibanka (CSOB) is perhaps more plausible (EEIR060/14, EEIR056/13). It hasa 14% stake currently, and may well be interested in increasing it.CSOB's net profit for 1995 (on preliminary unaudited figures) wasKc4.1bn, up 115% on 1994.Transfer to PPF BS of the majority of the CP shares from Ceskasporitelna, and those from Interbanka, was to be approved by thecontrol committee of the insurer (its supervisory board) on 11 January:the 7.69% Interbanka stake, and the same proportion of the stake heldby Ceska sporitelna, are registered shares which can only change handswith company approval. Control Committee chairman Pavel Kavanek (ageneral manager of CSOB) had indicated in December that there were noobstacles to the transfers, but in the event the committee declined toapprove it. Officially, a discussion took place between the 12 membersof the committee (of which seven represent shareholders) on whether toretain the present diversified shareholding structure - which mostmembers probably support - or whether to allow a shareholder withgreater influence. After this, "the committee unanimously concludedthat it is first of all reasonable to reach a consensus of owners andformalise it through an agreement."In reality, it was later suggested, the implacable opposition of adirector representing a 10% shareholder had been at the root of thecommittee's refusal. The two 10% shareholders are Komercni banka andInvesticni a postovni banka (IB), and the finger was pointed at thelatter as the one mainly opposing the entry of a large shareholder.Other sources supposedly equally close to the negotiations suggestedthat all the large bank shareholders were also opposed to it. (As ithappens, IPB was also the bank which was worsted in the Agrobankabattle.)Of CP's total shares, 73.08% are in the form of registered shares; ofthe 36.92% freely tradeable bearer shares, 15% were held by the publicat the end of 1994. The largest single shareholder remains the NationalProperty Fund (26.27%), followed by CSOB (14%), Komercni banka and IPB(10% each), Restitution Fund (3%) and employees (5%). National PropertyFund chairman Roman Ceska said on 16 January that it was not opposed tothe share transfers, but the decision was up to the other shareholders.PPF Investicni Spolecnost responded by calling an EGM with theintention of proposing board changes, executive director LadislavBartonicek said in mid-January. Although its intended stake includes a15.4% block of bearer shares, 4% of bearer shares acquired from Ceskasporitelna and a proxy granted by Interbanka for its 7.69% inregistered shares gave it the 10% representation required to call anAGM, the CP board said on 17 January. The EGM will also considerchanges to the company's articles of incorporation and executivebodies. The supervisory board will hold an extraordinary meeting of itsown prior to the EGM, for which no date had been set as EEIR went topress.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CP PROFITS RISEAccording to unaudited preliminary results released this month, CP'snet profit in 1995 was Kc405.5m, up from Kc73m in 1994, and 45% up onthe original estimate for the year. The target for 1996 is Kc470m. Non-life reserves increased from Kc10.6bn at the end of 1994 to Kc14.1bn atthe end of 1995, and life reserves from Kc48.3bn to Kc51.9bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CP INCREASES STAKE IN KREDITNI BANKA PLZENAt the end of 1995, CP increased its stake in Kreditni banka Plzen(EEIR062/14, 061/13) from 56% to 61.26% through a further issue of newshares. With current paid up capital of Kc1.86bn (US$71.5m), Kreditnibanka is the sixth largest in the country.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EKOAGROBANKA PUT UNDER ADMINISTRATIONOn 16 January is Ekoagrobanka as, Usti nad Labem, in which CP has astake of just over 10%, was put under administration by the NationalBank, the fifth against which such measures have been taken.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CR: MTPL RATESThanks to the Czech reader who points out that the average increase in1996 MTPL rates for cars in the Czech Republic is not 13% (EEIR062/12),but 29% to 40%, while rates for motorcycles are 29% to 41% lower. The13% figure (12.7%, in fact) represents the anticipated increase in MTPLpremium for Ceska pojistovna as, Prague, as monopoly carrier, which wasKc3.6bn (US$132.5m) in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SR: MTPL TO BE FREED IN 1998?In an article in the local press, Imrich Fekete of the Green Cardoffice of Slovenska poistovna as, Bratislava, said that he expected anew system of compulsory motor TPL open to the whole insurance marketrather than operated as a monopoly by SP, to be introduced from 1January 1998. The need for such a slow transition was partly due to thesocial consequences of the change resulting from the expected sharpincrease in MTPL costs for private cars, but also because of a dauntinglist of legal and infrastructure preconditions which had to becompleted first. Mr Fekete's list is worthy of study, especially incountries of the FSU which are considering introduction of compulsoryMTPL from scratch in a short space of time.1) New legislation on compulsory MTPL insurance which conforms with EUguidelines.2) Creation of a central register of all motor vehicles in cooperationwith the police authorities, including details of the insurancecarrier, and drawing up a sanctions scheme for uninsured vehicles.3) Legal solution as on insuring vehicles for the preliminary periodbetween purchase of the vehicle and signing an insurance policy.4) Categorisation of motor vehicles for rating purposes.5) Issuing of a Finance Ministry order supplementary to the MTPL lawsetting out insurance limits, the bonus-malus system, and indemnity incase of loss caused by an unknown or uninsured vehicle, etc.6) Issuing of a standard form of general insurance conditions for MTPLinsurance.7) Signing of a framework agreement between MTPL and motor damageinsurers on apportioning losses.8) Establishment of a Green Card Office of the Slovak Republic, aGuarantee Fund, an Association of Frontier Insurers, and securing thefinance for these.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CR: NINE HEALTH FUNDS TO GO?On 21 December, Parliament approved the 1996 financial plans of nine ofthe country's 27 health insurance funds, in addition to the fiveapproved in November (EEIR062/13). The additional nine were ZeleznicniZP Gral, Garant Hospital, Vojenska ZP, Moravska ZP, Bankovni ZP,Stavebni ZP, Revirni ZP, Crystal ZP, and REZAPO.Four more - ZP Ministerstva Vnitra, Mendlova ZP, ZP Atlas and ZP Prima- secured preliminary approval from the Health Ministry this month, butafter expected Finance Ministry approval will still need that of thefinal Parliamentary hearing on the matter in February. Of those whichhad still not secured approval, and are therefore expected todisappear, Prima Plzen announced plans to merge with Crystal, subjectto Health Ministry approval, as are at least five of the others. Mergerwill assist some of the approved but smaller funds to meet the minimumrequirement of 50,000 insureds.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CR: POOR RETURNS FOR PENSION FUNDSAccording to Czech Statistics Office figures, in Q1-Q3 1995, the 40active pension funds made a consolidated loss of Kc244m (US$9.4m), withtotal costs and expenses of Kc3.2bn, premium income of Kc3.5bn andother income for funds' own products and services Kc109m. Consolidatedequity capital (including operating results) totalled Kc3bn and pensionreserves Kc1.7bn. Membership totalled over 1m.Average yields for 1995 year are expected to be between 5% and 10%,barely above an inflation rate expected to turn out at 9.1%. Accordingto preliminary figures, the highest yields for insureds are expected tobe achieved by* Penzijni Fond Multi (11%)* Penzijni Fond Energie (10.6%)* Podnikatelsky Penzijni Fond (Entrepreneurs PF) (minimum 10%)* Penzijni Fond Ceske Pojistovny (Ceska pojistovna as, Prague) (10%)* Vojensky Otevreny Penzijni Fond (Military Open PF)  (minimum 8.5% to 8.7%) and* Penzijni Fond Winterthur (8%).Other funds are expected to provide much lower yields, including ZemskyPenzijni Fond (Regional PF) (6%) and Penzijni Fond Thalie (5%), andsome such as Stavebni Penzijni Fond Ceske Republicky (Construction PFof the CR) no yield at all, since they returned a financial loss forthe year. The largest fund in this position is expected to beSporitelni Penzijni Fond (Savings PF).On 21 December, an "association agreement" was signed between PenzijniFond Energie, Penzijni Fond Koruna and Penzijni Fond Skoda. The threeare also interested in pursuing talks about co-operation or merger withother funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BANK MERGERSOn 25 January, Czech National Bank deputy governor Pavel Kysilka saidthat problems in the Czech banking sector affected some large banks aswell as smaller ones. In order to meet the requirements of future EUmembership, Czech banks "must undergo a process of more fusions andmegafusions, searching for foreign partners, raising basic capital andbeing more specialized in their focus," he said. The future policy ofthe Central Bank would take account of these necessities, he told aseminar in Prague on preparations for EU membership.Four banks have failed since 1989, and a rescue plan is currentlyunderway for Ekoagrobanka.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PLZENSKA BANKA SHARE OFFERAccording to an opinion poll by the Institute for the Research ofPublic Opinion, attempts by Plzenska banka to buy large quantities ofshares acquired by individuals during voucher privatization(EEIR061/13) are unlikely to be very successful. It sent 5.5m lettersto shareholders. The poll found that 56% of respondents had little orno interest in the offer, 25% some interest, and 7% very interested.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CESKO-RAKOUSKACesko-rakouska pojistovna as, Prague, majority-owned by BundeslanderVersicherungs AG, Vienna, announced on 17 January that it hadintroduced motor casco policies. These cover Czech drivers throughoutEurope, with a 30% deductible.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHMELARSKAChmelarska vzajemna pojistovna as (CVP) (Hopgrowers' Mutual InsuranceCo), Zatec (EEIR060/16), began operations on 1 January, initiallywriting commercial property and liability. Individual property andliability and motor will follow in July, life and accident andagricultural risks in 1997 and motor TPL when legislation permits. Itsmain office is in Pardubice, with regional offices in Prague, Zatec,Ceske Budejovice, Hradec Kralove, Brno and Olomouc. Reinsurance is ledby Swiss Reinsurance Co, Zurich, with the remainder placed by Le Blancde Nicola+ Reassurance, Levallois-Perret, and Harris and Dixon Ltd,London.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRECOA new entrant to the Czech intermediary market (as well as the 43rdsubsidiary of machinery and engineering company Skoda Plzen) is SkodaPojistovaci Management sro, Plzen, in which the local subsidiary ofGrECo International AG, Vienna, has a 26% stake. The new entity appearsto be the first German-style captive broker to be established incentral Europe, and will act as broker and risk management consultantto the Skoda Plzen group, employees and associated companies, whichincreasingly include activities unconnected with heavy engineering.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996KOOPERATIVADr Gunter Geyer, deputy general director of Wiener StadtischeAllgemeine Versicherung, Vienna, and a board member of Kooperativadruzstevna poistovna as, Bratislava, told the Austrian insurer's staffmagazine that Kooperativa Bratislava's premium income for 1995 wouldreach approximately SK780m (US$28m), an increase of over 30% on 1994.With reference to the 51/49 Kooperativa/Wiener Stadtische broking jointventure InExCo, Bratislava (EEIR062/14), the same magazine noted thatit was intended to develop Kooperativa's industrial business, sincethere remained a severe shortage of qualified brokers with experienceof risk management, risk analysis and loss protection in Slovakia.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HASICSKA (BRATISLAVA)Hasicska poistovna as (Fire Brigade Insurance Co), Bratislava, has nowbegun operating, with share capital of SK118m (US$3.9m), which wasexpected to be raised by a further SK20m this month, and intended tofund entry into life as well as non-life, ceo Peter Hargas said.Shareholders include the municipalities of Bratislava and Kosice, andthe investment fund Karpaty. It has main offices in Bratislava, Kosice,Banska Bystrica and Presov, and plans others in Nitra and Zilina.Distribution will include sales through voluntary fire brigade members,which are organised into 2,800 units throughout the country. Mr Hargasis a former Bratislava brigade commander. He said the name had beenchosen partly to thwart efforts by the Czech Hasicska vzajemnapojistovna as (Fire Brigade Mutual Insurance Co), Prague, to enter theSlovak market.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SLAVIAPojistovna Slavia as, Prague, took a stake in Brno bank Coop Banka aspart of a new issue to increase its equity from Kc500m (US$19.2m) toKc1.55bn. Coop Banka, a major shareholder in MoravskoslezskaKooperativa druzstevne pojistovna as, Brno, entered the top ten Czechbanks by paid capital as a result of the issue.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VSZPThere was general chaos in late November and early January at theBratislava branch of state health insurer Vseobecna Zdravotna Poistovna(VsZP) as clients waited in long queues to obtain new registrationcards. A number of private sector health insurers complained thatclients who decided as a result to change their health insurer werehindered by bureaucratic obstacles erected by VsZP, a fairly commonsort of complaint (EEIR059/15).The 1996 budget of VsZP anticipates income of SK26.25bn (US$870m) and4.1m insureds, with monthly expenditure per insured of SK850.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMPULSORY MTPL POSTPONEDThe Latvian government has announced that the introduction ofcompulsory motor TPL will be postponed until 1 July. The newlegislation is subject to a press campaign against its introduction, asis also understood to be opposed by elements of the Finance Ministry ofthe new government. A Latvian Motor Bureau has been established, headedby representatives of Balta and BTA, both Riga.In Lithuania, where new legislation is still being prepared, proposalsto introduce compulsory MTPL have also been put back. In Estonia, MTPLlosses ran at 120% to 130% for 1994-95, and rates have been increasedsubstantially this year.The reinsurance of the Estonian Green Card Pool is probably the largestreinsurance treaty from the region, led at Lloyd's with support fromSwiss Reinsurance Co, Zurich, Kolnische RuckversicherungsGes AG,Cologne, and SOREMA, Paris.The leading motor casco insurers in Latvia are Saules Laiks, Balta andPareks.Motor theft in Estonia declined by 40% in the first six months of 1995compared with the previous year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ESTONIA: 1995 11 MONTH DATAAccording to data from the Estonian insurance supervisor, non-lifepremium for the first 11 months of 1995 totalled EK449.123m (US$38m),and claims EK214.295 (47.7%). Motor TPL represented EK218.560m, 48.7%of total premium, and MTPL claims EK129.367m, 59.2% of premium and60.4% of total claims.For the first ten months of 1995, for which life premium totalledEK34.5m and non-life EK401.9m, RAS Eesti Kindlustus, Tallinn, hadpremium of EK109.7m (a market share of about a quarter) and claims ofEK60.1m (54.8% of premium). ASA Kindlustus, Tallinn, was secondlargest, with premium of EK82.7m (market share of 18% to 19%) andclaims of EK52.6m (63.6% of premium). ASA was partly responsible forthe scrutiny of all reinsurance contracts by the insurance superior,following its inability to collect on a reinsurance placed with aFlorida-based company identified to EEIR as Olympia. This matter wassettled in ASA's favour by the arbitration court in Estonia, which is asignatory to international arbitration conventions.Commercial property market leader BK Baltic Insurance Co (BICO),Tallinn, had premium of EK29.6m (market share of about 7%), with claimsof EK6.9m (23.3% of premium). Insurance supervisor Ellen Ridasteestimated that non-life premium for 1995 would reach EK500m, increasingto EK650m to EK700m in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALBAThe Latvian Finance Ministry will shortly institute insolvencyproceedings against Alba, Riga, Neatkriga reported on 29 January.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRBBRB Ltd (Baltic Reinsurance Brokers), Riga, obtained a licence for BRBDraudimas Brokers, Kaunas (Lithuania) on 1 December.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FORTUNADripdev reported just before Christmas that Fortuna LebensversicherungGes, Adliswil, had acknowledged having made "regrettable mistakes" bypermitting the sale of insurance policies on an unlicensed basis inEstonia through the Riga arm of pyramid sales intermediary Safe-Invest(EEIR062/2, and passim). Dripdev said that the company had agreed tocease any sales in Estonia, and make refunds on all contracts taken outbefore 31 October 1995 according to Swiss law. Given the relativelyshort time which the policies are likely to have been in force, therefunds on a typical Safe-Invest-sold 10 or 15 year policy are likelyto be very small, or non-existent.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRYGG-HANSA/HANSA KINDLUSTUSAs expected (EEIR062/2), Sampo Insurance Group, Turku, has sold itsminority stake in Hansa Kindlustus, Tallinn, to Trygg-Hansa Group,Stockholm. The latter now owns 90% of Hansa Kindlustus, and hasconfirmed plans to establish a commercial property subsidiary in Riga.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POOL FORMEDThe 13 insurers which last May were the founding shareholders onBulgarski Prezastrachvatelen Ko (BPK, Bulgarian Re), Sofia (EEIR055/9,060/6) announced in late January that they had also formed a pool aimedprimarily at insuring the property risks of companies mainly owned bythe municipality of Sofia, BPK deputy executive director Rusi Rusevsaid. The pool will be led by Bulstrad and Motor Insurance Co MIC, bothSofia, with 24.5% each, and the other members are the insurers Atlas,Evropa, Evropeiska Zastrachovatelna Atsotsiatsiya (EZA), Granit,Turgovsko Zastrachovanie, Vi-Vesta, Bulgarski Imoti, &M, Hemus, Trakiaand Bul Ins. Each company will be permitted to lead a given risk, withpremium distributed on a co-participation basis. Mr Rusev said thatparticipation was also open to other insurers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OREL/BALKANAt a general meeting on 2 January, the shareholders of ZPK Orel AD,Sofia, and SZPK Balkan AD, Sofia, a specialist insurer associated withthe Orel group, approved a merger between the two, and specialisthealth insurer ZOZAD Zakrila, Sofia, approved merger with Orel lifeaffiliate ZPK Fenix AD, Sofia, which will vote on the proposal inFebruary.The mergers are partly with the requirements of the Insurance Billcurrently being debated in Parliament in mind. This proposes anincrease in the minimum capital for insurers to Leva200m (US$2.75m) (afigure of Leva100m is also being discussed), as well as increasingcredibility abroad: Orel, which is currently capitalised at Leva100m,is said to be keen to secure the support of Swiss Reinsurance Co,Zurich. Balkan began operations in 1994 with the minimum legallyrequired capital of Leva10m, with Orel G Holding AD, Sofia, as theleading shareholder with 40%, along with TSBank (10%), Angel (11%), theSinit motor trading company, Postal Bank (2%) and some individualinvestors. It was mainly aiming at the financial insurance market(EEIR049/10), but by last Spring it had become clear that this marketwas weak, and slow-growing. Nor could the shareholders reach agreementon a development strategy, and some withdrew.Zakrila was set up in 1993 with capital of Leva10m (EEIR026/6) by OrelG, Sirbank, Feniks (which currently has registered capital of Leva50m)and the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions, and planned to offergroup medical insurance. This market did not develop as hoped either,partly because of an absence of a legislative structure.Other similar mergers are expected to accelerate, as the "back-kitchen"insurers unable to raise minimum capital 20 times the current level arefaced with liquidation, sale or transformation into an agency of alarger company.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DZIDarshaven Zastrachovatelen Institut (DZI), Sofia, has announced its1996 interest rates for life policies, which will be 34% for five yearpolicies (currently about 40% of the portfolio), 38% for six to 10 yearpolicies (about 30% of the portfolio) and 44% for policies over 10years (also about 30% of the portfolio). Deputy chairman Valery Alexievsaid that such inflation-proofing could be offered because 75% to 80%of reserves were invested in government securities. Mr Alexiev addedthat the fastest-growing product is family and children's policies,typically for terms of 14 to 18 years. In 1995 400,000 new customersbought policies, yielding premium of Leva4.1bn (US$56m), Mr Alexievsaid. Life insurance had contributed a further Leva200m. 1995 premiumfor both life and non-life is estimated to have reached Leva5bn.DZI, as a major shareholder in Razvitie Investment Fund, announced thismonth that it will set up a fund to participate in this year's voucherprivatisation programme. Other shareholders, including the StateSavings Bank, United Bulgarian Bank and the Intransmash engineeringcompany, are also expected to participate. Privatization funds musthave registered capital of at least Leva70m, at least Leva10m of thetotal in cash. The remainder may be made up with vouchers, which have anominal value Leva25,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RUSSIA: AMENDMENTS VETOED AGAINOn 3 January President Boris Yeltsin vetoed the bill amending the lawOn insurance for the second time, a spokesman for the presidentialpress service announced. In a letter to the Duma, President Yeltsinsaid that it had ignored his criticisms of the bill made in October(EEIR061/6). He again rejected the proposed restrictions on thecorporate form of insurers on the grounds that it is inconsistent with"the equality of participants in civil legal relations" laid down inthe Civil Code (and originally intended, no doubt, to prevent theprivate sector being discriminated against to the benefit of the statesector. It is a fundamental principle of Russian jurisprudence, on aNapoleonic as much as a Soviet basis, that subordinate legislationcannot amend primary legislation. Thus broadly speaking theConstitution takes precedence, followed by international treaties,Codes, laws, decrees and normative acts.) Nor has the Presidentrelented in his opposition to a compulsory separation of life and non-life insurance, which he said "disregards the condition of the Russianinsurance market" - the "special circumstances" argument familiar toanyone who has discussed economics with a group of Russians - and willnot enable the insurers to improve their financial position, but on thecontrary, "will split numerous insurance companies and, in the lastanalysis, reduce the insurance market." President Yeltsin also objectedto the restriction of reinsurance to classes for which insurers have aprimary licence, which he said "contravened the general principles ofreinsurance". He made "numerous" other additions and amendments, thespokesman said, which were no doubt equally insightful.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RUSSIA: FOREX POLICIES PERMITTEDFrom 1 February, Russian insurers will be more or less free to engagein insurance in foreign currency both inside and outside the country,when new procedures issued by the Central Bank come into force. The newmeasures, for which insurers have been waiting for close on threeyears, were announced by the Bank's head of foreign currency regulationand control, Viktor Melnikov, in mid-December.Insurers will be able to insure and reinsure with foreign parties freeof Central Bank restriction, and settlement in foreign currency betweeninsurers and resident insureds is permitted for a wide range of listedcategories of insurance. Potentially the most far-reaching change ispermission for insurers to settle claims in hard currency with residentindividual insureds for life, health, accident and voluntary medicalinsurance.For most of the other approved settlement categories, there is anobvious foreign currency risk element. For individual residentinsureds, these categories are the luggage of individuals leaving theRF, TPL for private vehicles going abroad, and defined real estateoutside the country.For settlements between insurers and insured legal entities, the listof permitted settlement categories is* goods being imported into or exported from Russian customs territory(the distinction may be important in view of the customs unions withBelarus and Kazakhstan);* ground vehicles, aircraft and river and sea vessels moved through thecustoms territory of the RF and used in international transportation;* liability to non-residents by owners of vehicles used ininternational transportation;* accidents to resident individuals leaving the country on business;* CAR/EAR abroad;* liability for export loans;* transportation and storage of foreign currency, in cash orsecurities;* foreign-manufactured vehicles and equipment owned by residentorganisations and purchased for foreign currency.At one time, insurers were permitted not only to insure foreignequipment in hard currency, but also the loss of production from theequipment. This appears to have been one of those areas whichsubsequently became technically a breach of Central Bank instructions,but remains unclear under the new regulations.Mr Melnikov said the regulations had been amended partly to reflectmarket developments and the introduction of new classes of business.Some transactions had not previously been officially sanctioned, andinsurers engaged in them were technically in breach of regulations, hesaid. Secondly, foreign companies had, he claimed, secured a largeshare of the market, and the new rules, by putting foreign and domesticinsurers on the same footing, would help to reduce the outflow offoreign currency.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BELARUS: PROPOSED LEGISLATIONThe first meeting of the Insurance Council of the Cabinet of Ministersof Belarus (EEIR062/5) discussed four draft government resolutions, OnInsurance Brokers, On the Investment Activities of Insurance Companies,On Compulsory Insurance of Passengers and On Compulsory Insurance ofthe Staff of the Taxation Service.The latter two measures are both intended to apply on a temporarybasis. The Council recommended the adoption of the law on passengerinsurance, which was issued as a government resolution in mid-January.Cover against accidental death is made mandatory for all forms ofpublic transport, whether state- or privately-owned introducingmandatory, and covers all passengers in possession of a ticket fromarrival at the point of departure. The sum insured is 100 minimumwages, or BR6m (US$520), with the premium set at 2% of the ticket priceand included in the ticket cost. The scheme will be administered byBelgosstrakh SKARB, Minsk, but will be superceded at some point in thefuture by new comprehensive legislation On Transporter's Liability.The proposal on compulsory [life] insurance for taxation servicepersonnel stands in the same relationship to planned legislation OnCompulsory Insurance of Civil Servants, which will replace thecollection of measures left over from Soviet times or implementedsince, whether still put into practice or not.A Cabinet resolution has also, as expected (EEIR062/5), instructed theMinistries of Finance, Economy and State Property to draw up plans fora "national system of reinsurance" in the form of a BelarussianNational Reinsurance Society (BNRS) as an open joint stock company withminimum statutory fund of US$6m, and a state shareholding of at least30%. Its activities will be supervised by Belgosstrakhnadsor, andparticipation is planned to be open to foreign reinsurance companies.The Council also discussed the funding of a training centre forinsurance. At the meeting of the German-Belarussian Insurance WorkingGroup in Berlin in November (EEIR062/5), the German government agreedin principle to provide DM3.5m (US$2.4m) in funding, provided theBelarus government considered it an immediate priority, Belarus Marketreported last month.Currently, some insurance training is provided by the Minsk Academy ofManagement, founded in 1991. Its two year course includes marketeconomics, management, the theory and classification of risks,commercial insurance, reinsurance, the international insurance market,regulation, and insurance company management, Vice Rector AlexanderGolovachkov told the local Insurance News. It works closely withBelgosstrakhnadsor, which assists in course organisation and assessmentof diplomas, he added. The Academy plans in future to providespecialist insurance education for professional in other fields, forexample so that doctors will be able to acquire expertise in medicalinsurance.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BELARUS: 10 INSURERS SUSPENDEDIn late 1995, there were 82 insurers operating in Belarus, according toBelgosstrakhnadzor. Fifteen went bankrupt in 1994, and about the samenumber were not expected to survive 1995. Belgosstrakhnadsor sentletters to the owners of ten insurers ordering them to cease activity,return their registrations and set up liquidation committees, on thegrounds of financial instability, assets below the legal minimum of5,000 minimum salaries (BR300m, US$26,000), etc. The ten were Belavers,Belvarta, Belvest-Grodno, Kredo, Lidors, Olimpium, Polar, Rabel, Raiseand Strakhimpeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996KAZAKHSTAN: NEW LAW "IRREVERSIBLE"In an interview with Kazakhstanskaya Pravda this month, newly-appointedchairman of Kazakhstan Gosstrakhnadzor, Oskar Ler, described the newinsurance law (EEIR060/1) as "a serious step forward" whichdemonopolised the insurance industry and created the conditions forfree competition both for state and private sector and insurers. It hadbeen positively received by foreign companies and investors, and nowthe domestic market was open to foreign insurers, they were consideringhow to invest, he said.The cynical interviewer asked whether the law would change anything, as"It is well known that with normative acts any pro-market law can beturned into its opposite." "That cannot be," Mr Ler replied. "Ourmarket needs to be integrated with the CIS economies, and enter intothe world market," he added, and the needed foreign investment wouldnot be forthcoming without a positive business climate, including afully-formed system of insurance and reinsurance. The law wouldstimulate the formation of financially stable insurance reservescompanies backed by major financial and industrial groups and thoseinsurers which had already acquired sufficient capital, expertise andassets. Gosstrakhnadzor would supervise, development policy and assistwith training. A seminar on insurance accounting was held in December,and an international seminar on reinsurance was due to take place inJanuary.Among Gosstraknadzor's proposals were the transfer of the guaranteeingof financial risks from government to the insurance market. A trulycompetitive environment lay in combining state and private sector,compulsory and voluntary insurances, he said.Insurance joint ventures and a system of reinsurance with foreignreinsurers would enable the possibilities of the Kazakh market to covermajor risks to be utilised to the full, Mr Ler said. It was imperativeto use international professional experience to develop the market.Local insurers would find it useful to work alongside the world'sleading insurers, consultants, brokers, and other professionals. Theentry of foreign insurers and reinsurers would, however, be conditionalon guarantees of solvency and financial stability, and before seekingreinsurance abroad, the Kazakh market would have to be exploited to thefull through coinsurance and "other groupings of insurers".A priority for the future was the development of long-term life andpensions insurances, as well as compulsory motor TPL in line withinternational practice, for both privately and commercially ownedvehicles. Development of compulsory medical insurance was theresponsibility of the state social insurance system, but voluntarymedical insurance would be an important complement to it, and "muchcould be done" by co-operation between medical and insuranceprofessionals, he said. In the context of the new law the stateinsurance company would also have to be reorganised to maximise the useof professionalism and assets.Mr Ler said that he saw the Union of Insurers of Kazakhstan as an ally,not an opponent, since they shared mutual interests. A period of threeto five years would be needed for the formation of stable, solventinsurers, and much depended on the progress of privatization, thebanking sector, and other factors, Mr Ler said. "We will have acivilised insurance market, however, because there is a legal basis forit, and a recognition of its importance. There is a great desire in thegovernment of Kazakhstan that we should have a normal insurancemarket," he concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BELARUS: CORRECTIONDue to transcription and transmission difficulties, the table inEEIR062/6 on the availability of lines of insurance from Belarusinsurance was reproduced wrongly. An authentic version of the table didnot arrive until after EEIR had already gone to press. A correctedversion of the part of the table which was corrupted appears at thefoot of the page, and readers are requested to paste it over therelevant part of EEIR062/6 between Belingostrakh and Ometa.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RUSSIA: 1995 PREMIUM ESTIMATEAccording to preliminary estimates announced by deputy Rosstrakhnadzorhead Valery Sukhov, premium for the Russian market in 1995 was aboutR25,000bn (US$5.3bn), with claims paid of R18,000bn to R20,000bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RUSSIA: MINCONS FAVOURED INSURERSFollowing a competition in December, the Russian Construction Ministryreportedly recommended for their reliability in insuring constructionwork Vostochno Yevropeiskoye Strakhovoye Agentstvo LTD (VESTA), Moscow,followed by Russkiy Strakhovoi Tsentr and SAO Energogarant, bothMoscow.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALEXANDER HOWDENAlexander Howden Group Ltd, London, has opened a representative officein Moscow, with Slava Telguin as general representative. In making theannouncement, chairman Ron Iles took the opportunity to draw attentionto AHG's capture of the 1996 Aeroflot account.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BELINGOSSTRAKHIn the November issue of Belarussian Entrepreneur, Yuri Gavrilov,director general of Belingosstrakh, Minsk, outlined some of theoperations of the company. It writes 19 voluntary classes, of which themost widely distributed are motor TPL, health, motor casco, andproperty insurance. Major domestic clients include Belvest, BelavtoMAZ[motor manufacturer], Belmagistralautotrans [freight], touristcompanies and foreign embassies and trade representations. Annualclaims payments total in the region of US$400,000, but reserves areclose to $4m. Belingosstrakh also accepts domestic reinsurance.Travel health is written both individually and on a group basis. A BlueCard for motor liability in eastern Europe costs US$20 per month,extendible for $10. It issues policies in its own name rather thanthose of foreign insurers, as in addition to its nine offices withinthe country it is the only Belarus insurer with a representative officeabroad [in Vienna, in association with MACH.) For motor, it has co-operation or average commission agreements with Moldova, the BalticStates, Ukraine, Russia, Poland, Spain, Germany, Austria, Romania,Hungary and Bulgaria, Mr Gavrilov said. The third meeting of theparticipants in the Baltic Insurance Pool, the co-operativeorganisation for insurers from Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Belarusin Minsk last autumn agreed to include SAO Ingosstrakh, Moscow, as amember, Mr Gavrilov said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UIICAt a press conference in Tashkent on 25 January, Uzbekinvest, Tashkent,chairman Saidakar Abdurakhimov announced that its 80/20 joint venturewith American International Group Inc (AIG), New York, UzbekinvestInternational Insurance Co, London, had formally commenced operations,and had underwritten four political risk policies. One of these coveredthe consortium led by Technip of France which is constructing an oilrefinery in Bukhara.Also active in Uzbekistan is Devor-Dost Insurance Co, Tashkent, foundedin April 1993 by AIZ Individual Builders' Association, Uzneftegazstroi(state oil & gas construction company), Uzstroimaterials (statebuilding material manufacturing company) and Uzpromgraidanstroi (statebuilding company), it was re-registered in May 1994 with registeredcapital of 2m som (app US$55,000). Its prime mover and managingdirector, Simeon Fusman, was by training a civil engineer.Devor-Dost specialises in insurance of construction projects, but alsounderwrites cargo, liability, commercial property, and trade and bankcredit. About 60% of its portfolio is property and liability, withannual premium in the region of US$500,000.As well as a joint venture with Lloyd's broker Exall Warren Darby Ltd,London, EWD-Centrasia Ltd, registered in June 1995, it has co-operationagreements with Gosstrakh Uzbekistan, Tashkent, and Sumitomo Fire &Marine Insurance Co Ltd, Tokyo, and is the local representative ofIngosstrakh, Moscow, and its average commissioner in Central Asia.Nor would any account of the Uzbekistan market be complete withoutmention of the operating but underpublicized subsidiary of AlexanderHowden Group Ltd, London.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ZASHCHITA ST PETERSBURGSAO Zashchita Peterburg, St Petersburg, became insolvent with totaldebts of the order of R634 m (US$135,000) after suffering heavy losseson covering a motor leasing scheme by the local company OGGO, DelovoiPeterburg reported last month.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CROATIA ICA new general manager was appointed at Croatia Osiguranje dd, Zagreb,this month. Suad Rizvanbegovic is an expatriate Croat, who left Croatiain 1969. By the 1980s the owner of a New York tennis club, in mid-1984- as he told the daily Vecerni List - contacts he made as a resultenabled him to enter the insurance business. In 1987 he joinedAlexander & Alexander of New York Inc, New York, where he was appointedvice-president the following year, and remained until very recently asnumber two. A&A sources confirmed to EEIR that Mr Rizvanbegovic was aprodigious producer of business for its New York branch office, withexcellent contacts among the Wall Street investment community.Two factors influenced his decision to take up his new post, he toldthe newspaper: the desire to return home, and his friendship withCroatian President Franjo Tudjman. "Being an insurance expert, it wasonly natural for me to come to the head of the biggest insurancecompany in Croatia which covers 86% of the insurance market. Now that Iam in, I shall try to introduce the American system of doing businessin the Croatian economy," he said.Asked whether Croatia IC should be privatised, however, his answer wascategoric. "No, it should not," he said. "I think it must remain astate owned company. Privatisation is OK, but Croatia [Osiguranje] hasbrilliant potential, so let the Croatian state get the benefit," headded. Mass privatization throughout most of the rest of the economy"only means that Croatia [Osiguranje] will have to be competitive. Theonly strong suit it possesses and the basis on which it rests arenumerous branch offices and the strong net capital. A private owner [ofan enterprise] will have several opportunities - either to insure witha small private company having small net capital, or to turn to alarge, strong company which will be able to cover each of his losses,and reduce the risk of possible failure to be reimbursed. Here we shallcertainly have an advantage," Mr Rizvanbegovic continued.Mr Rizvanbegovic said that he had already held discussions with membersof the Croatia IC supervisory board and made contact with members ofthe government to inform them of his plans for the company. "I want torevitalise Croatia [Osiguranje] and bring in young and capable people,"he said. He also plans development of life insurance, which was what,he said, interested him most. He was aware of specific problems in thelife sector - the "unsettled" position of Austrian insurances, forexample.The interviewer suggested that collecting premium was not the onlyproblem. Local insurers suggested that government tax policy alsorestricted development of the life market. "Taxes must be paid," MrRizvanbegovic observed, and were paid on life and pensions insurance inthe US as well. "The essential thing is in which phase an insurance istaxed, how it is treated," he said, adding that he was sure "this isgoing to be settled in Croatia in the most satisfying way."He was confident of the support of the Finance Ministry, he said, and"Not only that, I am sure we shall have excellent co-operation withboth the Ministry of Finance and the government, as well as with therest of institutions." Mr Rizvanbegovic also made it clear that heintended to recruit expertise from Croatians [and perhaps others] fromabroad. He already had an excellent offer on his desk from a young USwoman who was offering her knowledge to Croatia IC. She was not theonly person ready to come and help introduce new business criteria inCroatia, and he intended to make use of such readiness, he said. A freehand in hiring staff was one of the conditions he had made beforetaking up his new post, he said, and he was counting upon "absolutesupport" from government and ministries in all the developments heplanned.The re-emerging insurance industry in Bosnia & Herzegovina - BosniaReosiguranje dd, Sarajevo, announced that it would restart businesswith the New Year - may also be interested in Mr Rizvanbegovic'sappointment. They will hope that the fact that he is by descent aMuslim as well as a Croat will make the development of Croatian-B&HFederation links in the insurance sector considerably easier tofacilitate.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MERGER OF SUPERVISORS PLANNEDIn mid-January, a government spokesman announced that during cabinetdiscussion of draft credit institutions and securities legislation, thegovernment had accepted in principle that the banking, securities andinsurance supervisory offices should merge, possibly as early as 1January next year, to form a new body subordinate to the governmentrather than to the Finance Ministry.  As a result, sections dealingwith supervision in draft banking legislation due to be discussed byparliament shortly will be removed, and the operation of the newunified supervision be dealt with in separate measures yet to bedrafted, president of the Banking Supervisory Commission Tamas Rusznaksaid.The government spokesman said that a draft of the unified supervisorylegislation would be considered by cabinet before the end of February,and that capital and reserve requirements for financial institutionswould be amended. Other draft measures include licensing of banks fortrading in government securities, new licensing procedures for creditinstitutions, and abolition of the requirement for foreign investors toobtain government authorisation for stakes in credit institutions.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW VMBF LAWIn order to stimulate the development of voluntary mutual benefit funds(VMBFs), a new law is under preparation, according to Dr TiborParnitzky, deputy chairman of the supervisory body overseeing theirlicensing. The changes come two years after the original legislationcame into force in November 1993, as - various optimistic announcementsnotwithstanding - the growth of the movement has proved to bedisappointing (EEIR060/19), and coincide with the appointment of a newpresident for the supervisory office, Dr Gyorgy Radnai.By the end of 1995, the total number of funds was 197 (151 withoperating licences), of which 177 were pension funds, 14 mutualassistance funds and only six health funds. The vast majority areorganised on a regional basis, 42 around individual enterprises, 14 byeconomic sector and four by profession. At the end of October, totalmembership was 114,610, with the end of year average likely to havebeen at most 650 members per fund. Furthermore, despite the generoustax concessions supporting VMBF contribution levels (by members andsponsoring employers or other organisations), payments were well belowexpectations. Accumulated funds of HUF5.5bn to HUF6bn (US$40m to $44m)at the end of 1995 would have represented an average per fund of HUF28mto HUF30.5m, or just over $200,000 each.Dr Parnitzky told EEIR that the main aims of the proposed legislationare to speed up the authorisation of new funds, reduce bureaucraticburdens on their operation, tighten supervision of existing funds andremove the contradictions between various sections of the current law.One amendment will lift the restriction on formation of funds to acommon interest basis of workplace, profession or sector, enablinggeneral funds to be set up, and existing localised funds to merge.The operation of health funds will be eased by clarifying theirrelationship to the universal state health insurance system, which isalso under review. The supervisory body is also expected to take a morepro-active educational and information role in promoting the VMBFmovement. Currently, much is done by financial institutions to spreadthe concept, although in some cases the expansion is based on theexploitation of an existing loophole which enables the largely tax-freerefund of contributions, within a short period for those who arealready past retirement age. At present pension fund members who retirecan receive their payments back while benefiting from tax allowances.The new legislation will restrict lump sum or regular pension paymentsto those who have been in the fund for two years, while permittingthose who retire to remain in membership.It is hoped that new legislation will come before parliament during theSpring and into force by the middle of the year. A second phase ofamendments is expected by the end of 1996 regarding VMBF fundmanagement activities.The eventual rejection of a proposal contained in late drafts of therecently passed new insurance law to bring the supervision of VMBFsunder the same office as that of insurance companies (EEIR059/20), isregarded as a significant support for the independent development ofthe movement. While insurance companies can perform services (such asdata processing, fund management, premium collection etc.) for VMBFs,these must be performed by a separate subsidiary, such as that of AB-Aegon tltalanos Biztosito Rt, Budapest (EEIR062/16), Aegon NyugdijalapKezelo es Szolgaltato Kft (pension fund management and service co),which will charge a fee of 5% to 15% fee, depending on the size of thefund. Over 50 banks and consulting firms, including Budapest Bank,Creditanstalt, ING Bank, Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank, Sedgwick NobleLowndes and William Mercer, offering similar services.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MTPL RATESOn 27 December, the government determined rates for motor TPL for 1996were published in the Official Gazette. The basic rates for passengercars are modified by four bonus and four malus categories, eachrepresenting 5% of the base premium.MTPL insurers must have been pleasantly surprised: the average increaseaverage for cars was 21.56%, above the average 21.11% requested by theinsurers' association MABISZ (EEIR061/18) due to the government'sgranting of a increase for the largest engine power (and imported) cars2.6 percentage points above that requested by MABISZ while slightlycutting back on MABISZ's proposals for the smallest and mid-range(mainly domestically-produced) ones. Rates for the smallest buses wereincreased by more than MABISZ's request, and larger ones by less.MABISZ did not secure the doubling of premium for lorries with cargoweight of over 6 tonnes which it wanted, but the average increase of54.27% was above the 48% it had sought.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GROWTH AND COMPETITION IN LIFEPremium income for the Hungarian market as a whole for 1995 would needto be of the order of 30% above the HUF93.5bn (US$668m) total for 1994for any growth in real terms to be achieved, Figyelo calculated late inDecember. Despite the continued relative dominance of HungariaBiztosito Rt, Budapest, over motor and of AB-Aegon tltalanos BiztositoRt, Budapest, over household, a competitive market is continuing todevelop, the paper considered, predicting that Hungaria's market sharefor 1995 would drop from 38% to 36% and that of AB-Aegon from 26% to24%. Competition this year would be particularly strong in liabilityand commercial property, it said.It had been competition for the growing life market which has beenresponsible for most of the shifts in company market share in 1995,Figyelo said. Such had been the success of Nationale-NederlandenMagyarorszagi Biztosito Rt, Budapest, that there was a possibility ofits soon replacing Providencia Osztrak-Magyar Biztosito Rt, Budapest,as market number three, having retained its overall share of 10% (lifeonly) while that of Providencia had slipped back a percentage point to11%. Nat-Ned and AB-Aegon, at the same time, are both anxious to claimthe title of largest life insurer in Hungary.Of the medium-sized companies, Generali Budapest Biztosito Rt,Budapest, had around 6%, the Figyelo calculated, followed by OTP-Garancia Biztosito Rt and Colonia Biztosito Rt, both Budapest, with 4%to 5% each. Despite the increases in premium achieved by thesecompanies, however, in life they were experiencing difficulty incompeting with the market leaders, Nat-Ned and AB-Aegon, it suggested,while in some non-life lines - motor casco for example - the market wasshrinking in real terms.Nat-Ned's dominance, the paper said, was due to its focus on high-valuebusiness, estimating 1995 premium at HUF12.3bn. In 1994, Nat-Ned had a37% share of the Hungarian life market. Last year, company presidentGyorgy Bordas told EEIR, premium increased by a further 71% toHUF12.5bn. New business written totalled HUF5bn, and the company has253,000 policyholders. The premium target for 1996 is HUF17bn. Nat-Nedalso continues to reinsure a substantial proportion of its businesswithin the ING Group, mainly due to local capital adequacyconsiderations, although the proportion is declining from the 79% cededin 1994.While AB-Aegon continued to dominate long-standing group life business,and was projecting HUF13bn, Figyelo suggested that business from theCSaB group policy was dropping off rapidly, and would only be replacedby new individual business with difficulty.A number of other companies had been reluctant to disclose apreliminary estimate for 1995 life premium, possibly, the paper said,because they had concentrated on low-value life policies with premiumsbetween HUF10,000 and HUF15,000 annually. Those attracted by theaffordability (and tax benefits) associated with these policies werethose hardest hit by economic pressures, and cancellations were high,it said. Providencia, for example, had once vied with AB-Aegon in termsof new business sold, but now had difficulty generating enough to makeup for cancellations, the paper suggested, predicting life premium ofHUF5bn for 1995, at 22% up on the HUF4.1bn of 1994 below the rate ofinflation.At Generali, the increase would be up by only 14.5% to HUF300m, mainlygroup life business, it predicted. Among the smaller companies, theincrease at Europa-GAN Biztosito Rt, Budapest, from HUF349m in 1994 toabout HUF480m was, at 37.5% positive growth in real terms, but notspectacular.Hungaria, on the other hand, appears to have improved its position.Having dropped to a low of HUF500m in 1992, the forecast for 1995 wasHUF1.9bn, two and a half times the 1994 total. However, Hungaria toohad targeted lower incomes, "a very volatile market", Figyelo said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COLONIAAs expected (EEIR061/17), Colonia made a net loss last year largely asa result of losses of its motor TPL portfolio of 130% of premium,including expenses, Otto Csurgo, recently promoted from deputy generalmanager to general manager, confirmed at the beginning of January.Premium income increased by 48.4%, from HUF3.556bn (US$25.4m) toHUF5.2bn, of which motor was responsible for HUF2.8bn (54%), up fromHUF1.774bn (50%) in 1994, motor TPL representing HUF1.2bn compared toHUF863m, 23% and 24% of total premium income respectively.Colonia Biztosito is now 51% owned by central European holding companyNordstern Colonia Central Europe Holding AG, Vienna, and 49% by ColoniaFinance Holdings BV.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EUROPA-GANEuropa-GAN Biztosito Rt, Budapest, is to increase its capital bybetween HUF500m and HUF1bn (US$3.5m to $7m), general manager MiklosSzendi said in mid-January. Although both Groupe des AssurancesNationales (GAN), Paris (currently owner of 89.4%), and SocAssicuratrice Industriale SpA (SAI), Turin (10%), will participate,negotiations are also in progress with a Hungarian bank and a thirdforeign investor, he added. The increased capital will be devoted toextending its branch network and developing motor business(EEIR058/12).According to preliminary data, Europa-GAN's premium income last yeartotalled HUF1.1bn in 1995, up 29% on the HUF893m written in 1994, andabout on a par with inflation. Life contributed HUF480m (HUF250mindividual and HUF230m group), commercial and other property HUF520mand liability HUF100m.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GARANCIAOTP Bank has distributed information packs to potential investors whohave expressed preliminary interest in taking a strategic 49% stake inits insurance subsidiary OTP Garancia Biztosito Rt, Budapest(EEIR062/16, 061/17). The Bank is seeking a partner to help developbancassurance. It has also embarked on a sale and leaseback operationaffecting a number of its own major offices. "These decisions are inline with two of the bank's major strategic objectives: therationalisation of its investment portfolio and the reduction of itsexpenses," it said in a statement.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRAZER WECHSELSEITIGEGrazer Wechselseitige Versicherung AG (GWV), Graz, has finally receivedapproval to establish a Hungarian subsidiary, Prima Austria BiztositoRt (EEIR060/20), the Official Gazette revealed at the beginning ofJanuary. Its previous application in September 1994 was blocked(EEIR052/13), following a dispute over capitalisation and the status ofpremium on GWV policies sold in Hungary illegally by pyramid salesagencies. According to a report by the Hungarian news agency MTI-Econews, it appears that GVW's application was granted by the Hungariangovernment shortly before the new insurance law (Law XCVI of 1995) cameinto effect on 1 January.GWV re-applied for a licence in September (EEIR060/20). Under the newinsurance law, final responsibility for licensing insurers passes fromgovernment to the Insurance Supervisory Office, which may refuseapplications, inter alia, because a founder has an unsatisfactorybusiness reputation. Previously, the ISO only made recommendations tothe legal and financial departments of the Finance Ministry, which thenstudied the application independently and submitted recommendations toa ministerial committee, which sent its report to the cabinet for finalapproval of the application. Econews reported that GWV's applicationwas classified as "strictly confidential", but quoted Finance MinistryLegal Department head Zoltan Molnar as indicating that this was "quitecommon" for government documents.Vilaggazdasag reported on 15 January that it understood that theinsurers' association MABISZ had asked Finance Minister Lajos Bokros toexplain why the incorporation of Prima Austria had been approved.Econews gave an estimate of total foreign currency outflow tounlicensed life insurers of HUF70bn (US$500m) from 50,000 policies,which seems rather high.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HUNGARIAAn EGM of Hungaria Biztosito Rt, Budapest, on 1 February was expectedto appoint Mihaly Patai as general manager. Mr Patai, who succeedsHungaria's founding general manager Tamas Uzonyi, who reachedretirement age last year, was chairman and managing director ofBudapest Investment Rt.The state property holding company will shortly sell its remaining 9.2%stake in Hungaria, with a nominal value of HUF384.5m (US$2.8m), toAllianz AG Holding, Munich, it confirmed early in January (EEIR060/20).Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IFOR VEHICLE CLAIMSBy 28 December, the Thursday after UN IFOR forces had begun deploymentin Bosnia & Herzegovina, the Somogy County office of Hungaria hadreportedly received 20 claims for damage as a result of collisions withIFOR vehicles.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WINTERTHURWinterthur Schweizerische Versicherungs Ges, Winterthur, received itslicence for a Hungarian subsidiary on 27 December, four days before theentry into force of the new insurance law permitting establishment of acomposite insurer. Registered capital was the old minimum of HUF1bn(US$7.14m) is currently held 100% by Winterthur, but the European Bankfor Reconstruction & Development (EBRD) is expected to acquire 30%during the year (EEIR060/20, 059/19), and operations are not expectedto begin before the autumn, initially in life and pension only.Winterthur established fund management company WinterthurPenztarszolgaltato Rt in September, with capital of HUF370m, and intowhich the parent company is expected to inject a further HUF100m andthe EBRD HUF200m, and Winterthur National Pension Fund was set up on 8November.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MOTOR TPL PREMIUMS, 1996 (HUF)                        1995    1996    change    % changeUnder 850cc              7,920   9,840   1,920    24.24%851-1150cc              10,080  12,720   2,640    26.19%1151-1500cc             12,240  16,320   4,080    33.33%1501-2000cc             25,440  28,080   2,640    10.38%Over 2000cc             36,960  42,000   5,040    13.64%Buses10-19 seats             15,840  21,504   5,664    35.76%20-79 seats             27,960  45,996  18,036    64.51%Over 80 seats           48,000  65,496  17,496    36.45%LorriesUnder 2t capacity       21,696  28,620   6,924    31.91%2-6t capacity           35,400  53,412  18,012    50.88%Over 6t capacity        44,664  80,400  35,736    80.01%Source:  Official Gazette/EconewsUS$1 = HUF140.065 at 19.1.96Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNOFFICIAL LIMIT ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT?Unnamed officials have confirmed to Rzeczpospolita that Poland isoperating an informal limit of 30% on foreign participation in localinsurers, the newspaper reported, as has long been suspected byobservers (EEIR056/4). The deputy finance minister responsible forapproving insurance company licences is apparently advised not to signif foreign participation exceeds this limit, the newspaper added,suggesting that this would appear to be in contravention of theobligations of the preliminary agreement to form the World TradeOrganisation signed by Poland last year, under which signatorycountries are not supposed to impose additional restrictions on theactivities of foreign investors in their financial services markets.The Insurance Law, as newly amended, requires Finance Ministry approvalfor insurers which are fully foreign-owned, and at six thresholdsbetween 15% (of voting or non-voting shares) to 75% of voting rights,but also lays down that applications may only be refused on groundsidentical with those applied to Polish shareholders. However, theseinclude if "An important state economic interest is threatened"(EEIR061/2).Azur Ostoja SA, Warsaw, has an approved foreign shareholding of 84.6%,the newspaper reported, and Gerling Konzern Allgemeine VersicherungsAG, Cologne, 51.2% of TU Turystycznych ATU SA, Warsaw, but only 49% ofvoting rights. Fourteen non-life insurers - one third of the total -have an element of foreign capital, and seven out of 12 life insurers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FOREIGN INVESTMENT TO BE LIBERALIZEDInterestingly enough, on 15 January the government economic committee(KERM) approved and recommended to the Cabinet a draft law liberalizingforeign investment as part of the transitions necessary for Poland toapply for membership of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation &Development (OECD) this year. Among the sectors to be opened to jointventures are financial services, wholesale sales, real estate, portmanagement and armaments production.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VAT AT 7% FOR 1996The decree holding VAT on insurance intermediary services at 7% for1996 (EEIR 062/17) duly appeared in the final issue of Dziennik Ustaw(Legal Gazette) for 1995, number 154. However, as the Finance Ministerhas again applied a derogation to the statute imposing VAT, leaving theunderlying statute unchanged, a further derogation will be required ifthe rate is not to rise to the standard 22% on 1 January 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MOTOR RATES RISEPowszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen SA (PZU), Warsaw, has increased motor TPLpremiums by an average of 35% this year, its basic annual premium for aFiat 126 (with a 652cc engine) in Warsaw rising to ZL235 (US$94) andfor a car of 2,000cc engine capacity to ZL615. Last year, PZU soldabout 9m MTPL policies.Other insurers are charging between ZL160 and ZL600 for the 126, andbetween ZL308 and ZL919 for the 2 litre in Warsaw. Premiums for otherareas are lower: in Lublin (near the Ukrainian border), for example,the premiums range from ZL 93 to ZL400 and ZL231 to ZL839 respectively.No claims bonuses, and other discounts such as those for customerloyalty or paying the annual premium in a lump sum, can yield areduction of up to 70% of the basic premium.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INSURANCE STICKERSThe Finance Ministry has abolished the need to display stickers on thewindscreen as proof of insurance. Henceforth the policy itself, whichmust be carried by the driver, constitutes the only proof of insurancerequired.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNINSURED CAR FINES RISEThe Insurance Guarantee Fund, which compensates the victims ofaccidents caused by uninsured drivers, has raised the fine for drivingan uninsured car from ZL800 to ZL1,100 ($440), an increase of 37.5% andin line with that of PZU's premium increase. PZU president RomanFulneczek told a press conference that various estimates had suggestedthat somewhere between 10% and 20% of Polish motorists drove aroundwithout insurance.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MOTOR INSURANCE FRAUDAbout 40% of Polish motor insurance claims are fraudulent, according toa study by Wyzsza Szkola Ubezpieczen i Bankowosci (Insurance andBanking Institute) quoted in the recent issue of the bulletin publishedby the insurance professionals' association SUP, a figure comparable tothat prepared for Germany by the Federal Criminal Office, it said. ThePolish figures showed that as many as 76% of policyholders intended todefraud the insurers, and that 78% approved of the practice.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OMBUDSMAN ON PROBLEMSThe main problems facing the Polish insurance market were the financialweakness of the insurers and the excessive expectations of clientstogether with their lack of knowledge and understanding of both theinsurance market and insurance law, newly-appointed Polish insuranceombudsman Stanislaw Rogowski told a press conference. Mr Rogowski saidhe intended to be a mediator between companies and their clients aswell as between the companies and the NationalInsurance Supervisory Office (PUNU). Although he has no formal powersof decision, he can draw attention to injustices being committed in theindustry.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WARNING ON EXCESSIVE COMMISSIONSLeon Kozicki, president of the brokers' association StowarzyszeniePolskich Brokerow Ubezpieczeniowych i Reasekuracyjnych, warned therecent Insurers' Congress organised by the Polish InsuranceProfessionals Association (SUP) of the dangers of excessive commissionswhen competing for large clients. "If a company pays 50% commission,the situation can last a year or two; after that the company will notbe there," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AIGBank Polska Kasa Opieki SA (Pekao SA) will distribute insurancepolicies underwritten by Amplico SA and Amplico Life SA, both Warsaw,the American International Group Inc (AIG), New York, subsidiaries inwhich it is a minority shareholder, the bank announced on 16 January.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ATUThe new president of TU Turystycznych ATU SA, Warsaw (EEIR 062/18), isMariusz Wichtowski, previously a vice president of TU TUK SA, Warsaw.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRYFThe late bid by Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen SA (PZU), Warsaw, torescue Pomorskie TU Gryf SA, Bydgoszcz (EEIR062/1), appears to be beingstill assembled, invitations to join an all-Polish consortium not beingsent out until after Christmas. A further potential obstacle remainsthe attitude of the Anti-Monopoly Office, which may take a view on anyplan that involves increasing PZU's estimated 62.6% share of the Polishnon-life market, were it considered that such an increase posed athreat to competition.Nor is it yet clear whether other insurers which had expressed aninterest in taking over Gryf's insurance portfolio in full or in partwould still be interested if that involved joining a PZU-ledconsortium. Also the subject of discussion locally is the effect ofassuming Gryf's portfolio on PZU's already-strained solvency margin,which was still inadequate at the last count. Strictly speaking, Polishlaw requires a company assuming the policies of another to have anadequate solvency margin.The decision by the insurance industry - formally under the auspices ofmeetings of the Policyholders' Protection Fund and the InsuranceGuarantee Fund - to withdraw backing from the rescue plan formulated byWinterthur Schweizerisches Versicherungs Ges, Winterthur, and TU PBKSA, Warsaw, would appear to have been motivated by fear of allowing amajor foreign competitor into the market. The PZU plan may be slightlycheaper, requiring a loan of ZL55m (US$21.7m) from the two funds (whichare due to be merged) rather ZL60m ($23.7m), but as a Winterthurspokesman pointed out, the PZU plan did not propose to meet Gryf'sother obligations, such as those to the state, or to preserve itsnetwork of sales offices.At a press conference, TUiR Warta SA, Warsaw, president Henryk Chmielakhedged when asked questions about the possibility of joining the PZUconsortium, saying only that Gryf's portfolio would be examined to seewhether there were any interesting parts. Warta would concentrate onproducing good financial results rather than chasing market share,considering that fighting for premium without considering costs was ashort-term policy, he said, citing the experience of Pomorskie TU GryfSA (under administration), Bydgoszcz, and ZU Hestja SA, Poznan.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ELEKTRIM INCREASES STAKE IN WARTAOn 22 December, Elektrim SA increased its stake in Warta from 300,000shares (8.67% of voting rights) to 400,000 shares (11.56%).Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HESTJA (POZNAN)ZU Hestja SA, Poznan (no connection with Sopockie TU Hestia InsuranceSA, Sopot), has reportedly failed to meet an extended deadline for acapital increase to meet own funds requirements. While managementcontinued to try to raise the required funds, Dariusz Blaszczuk,director of the Finance Ministry insurance department was quoted asindicating that a number of companies were interested in taking astrategic stake in Hestja. One of these is said to be Bankowe TUiRHeros SA, Warsaw, which a company spokesman would neither confirm nordeny.In late 1994, a net loss of over ZL10m (US$4m) wiped out Hestja's owncapital of ZL3.3m, Rzeczpospolita. The company proposed a capitalincrease of ZL24m to ZL55m ($9.6m to $22m) through the issue of newSeries D and E shares, and sale of the Series D shares took place inOctober 1995, bringing in a notional ZL27m of which only about aquarter was paid up. Hestja requested an extension until 15 December,which appears was insufficient.Hestja's leading shareholder is reported as Centralny FunduszInwestycyjny Sp.zoo (in turn owned by Solaris Holding SA and SolarisSA, EEIR041/17), which is also a shareholder in ZUiR Polonia, Lodz, andin Pomorskie TU Gryf SA, Bydgoszcz (under administration).Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POLISATU-R Polisa SA, Warsaw, has completed its new Series H share issue(EEIR062/19), with 1,192,458 shares of up to 3.2m on offer at ZL8(US$3.16) per ZL2.5 nominal share taken up. The main buyers appear tohave been Bel Leasing Sp zoo and Forin Sp zoo, both subsidiaries ofBank Inicjatyw Gospodarczych SA (BIG), which took up between 500,000and 650,000 of the shares on offer. Final details of the newshareholders were due to be published once shareholdings had beenregistered.At one time, BIG held up to 30% of Polisa. Prior to the latest shareissue, the holdings of Bel-Leasing and Forin had been diluted to 6.4%and 3.76% respectively. Following the stake-rebuilding, they areexpected to hold about 13%. Polisa deputy president Zygfryd Kielarskiwas quoted as saying that a total of 656 individuals and companies hadtaken up shares from the issue.Polisa's share capital has therefore increased by ZL2.98m to ZL26.98m,with the remaining proceeds of ZL6.56m earmarked for reserve capital toobviate any difficulties with solvency margins.Polisa may need to set aside reserves for the loss of up to ZL5.11m onits stake in Tarpan Sp zoo, a motor company based in Poznan whichmanufactures an all-terrain vehicle, and is on the verge of bankruptcy.Polisa's shareholding was acquired when Tarpan's predecessor company,Poznanska Fabryka Samochodow Rolniczych Polmo, failed to repay a creditguaranteed by the insurer. The holding was originally valued atZL11.4m, but Polisa ceded part of it to Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen(PZU) SA, Warsaw. Even so, it accounted for a substantial slice ofPolisa's investment portfolio of ZL22.14m as of June 1995, when itsought permission from the Finance Ministry to maintain such a highproportion in one stock. Both Tarpan management and Polisa blamed thefailure of the motor manufacturer on indecision by the DefenceMinistry, which took a long time to decide to buy the Tarpan's Honckerall-terrain vehicle despite the fact that it had been designed incollaboration with the army. Polisa and PZU may secure some return if,as is hoped, another manufacturer is found to take over manufacture ofthe Honcker.TU na Zycie Polisa-Zycie SA, Warsaw, has announced that three companiesrecently bought 31% of its shares (EEIR060/22), but has not yetrevealed their identities. Since it also announced that Michal Solowowand Wojciech Ciesielski had joined the supervisory board,Rzeczpospolita suggested that Echo Press SA and Polish Life ImprovementSA, in which Mr Solowow has controlling interests, may be among the newPolisa-Zycie shareholders. Mr Ciesielski is a large shareholder in EchoPress.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OCCURRENCES AND REPORTS TO 21 JANUARY1.1-31.12.94, aviation, crashes, statisticsCIS: Russia: 36 aircraft destroyed following air crashes in 1994, withover R480bn (US$102m) paid out in compensation.1.1-31.12.95, aviation, crashes, statisticsCIS: air crashes left total 245 dead in 1995, compared with 327 dead in20 crashes in 1994. Of these, Russia accounted for more than half, with174 dead in 13 crashes.1.1-31.12.95, fire, statisticsCIS: Ukraine: app 40,500 fires recorded in 1995, causing est damage of592bn karbovantsi (US$3.2bn).1.1-30.6.95, nps breakdowns, statisticsCIS: Ukraine: nuclear plants registered 86 breakdowns in 1995, downfrom 144 in 1994. Zaporozhye nuclear station recorded highest no ofaccidents at 36, down from 61 in 1994. Chernobyl nuclear plant recordedfour stoppages in 1995, down from 15 in 1994. Khmelnitskiy nps recorded8 breakdowns, from 21 in 1994.12.12.95, marine, sinkingSouth Korea: m cargo vessel `Bureya', Russian registered, owned byVladivostock commercial company, en route from Pusan for Vladivostok,cargo 100 tonnes of rice, sprang a leak and sank soon after leavingPusan.16.12.95, pipeline, rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: pipeline, Tyumen region, owner Samotlorneft Co, carryingoil from wells to storage facilities, nr Nizhnevartovsk, rupture in700mm pipeline led to 20-tonne oil spill. Est damage: R50m (US$10,646).19.12.95, fire, partial shut-downCIS: Ukraine: Khmelnitsky nuclear power plant, fire forced partial shut-down of sole reactor.23.12.95, fire, property damageCIS: Ukraine: Zasyadko mine, Donbass coalfield, fire broke out in a 2kmauxiliary working, spreading to top of mine. Preliminary est damage:1,500bn karbovantsi (over US$8m).26.12.95, pipeline rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: Urals-Siberian pipeline, linking Tyimazy, Omsk andNovosibirsk, rupture nr Ufa caused oil spill. Est 460 tonnes of crudespilled into R Belaya.26.12.95, pipeline rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: Yaroslavl-Ukhta trunk pipeline, 50-metre section ofpipeline ruptured, app 110km from Ukhta. App 400 tonnes of oil leakedcovering app 5,000sqm area, polluting R Ropcha. Oil supplies cut off.(16.1) app 70 tonnes of crude oil leaked from Ukhta-Yaroslavl pipeline,app 6km from Kotlas, northern Arkhangelsk region.26.12.95, marine, sinking, fatalitiesNorway: m stern trawler `Novgorodets', Russian registered, owned byZapryba fishing association, sank app 200km off Bear Island, NorwegianSea, app 0400 GMT. 1 dead, 9 missing, feared dead.26.12.95-13.1.96, snow, property damageSlovenia: heavy snow caused "worst damage in 30 years" to ElektroLjubljana electricity supply company. Power failures occurred in mainsand low-tension transmissions, affecting between 80,000 and 90,000customers. Est direct costs: SLT600m (US$4.5m).27.12.95, bad weather, property damageAlbania: heavy rain led to widespread flooding, northwestern Albania.More than 5,000 hectares land submerged, 00's of houses destroyed,Shkodra, Malesi e Madhe, Lezhe and Kruja districts.27.12.95, bad weather, flooding, property damageBosnia & Herzegovina: heavy rain and melted snow led to flash flooding,water up to two metres deep, NATO military camp, app 100 metres from RNeretva, several km N Mostar. Dozens of vehicles lost or damaged, tentswashed away. Three pedestrian bridges, central Mostar, swept away.28.12.95, fire, property damageCzech Republic: Dukovany nps, nr Trebic, app 200km SE Prague, firestarted in transformer which distributes electricity to light plant,causing minor damage.29.12.95, aviation, crashCIS: Russia: An-24B, on charter to Volga Cable Works, crashed 1.5kmfrom runway, overturned, causing left wing and undercarriage to be tornoff as it was landing, Saransk.29.12.95, bad weather, property damage, fatalitiesRomania: thaw and heavy rains led to floods, damaging crops, centralTransylvania region. More than 2,400 households affected, road and raillinks, telephone lines and power supplies cut. 7 dead. Government togive Lei500m in aid to flood-affected areas. (6.1) Some 69,970 hectaresof agricultural fields submerged, app 507.1kms communication lines, 439bridges and 128 social-economic units affected. (11.1) Flood damage estat Lei132bn (US$51m).29.12.95, explosionCIS: Russia: gas explosion led to collapse of 105-apartment block,Berezniki, destroying floorings in nine flats on fourth and fifthfloors. 3 dead. Cause: gas explosion in cooker, flat 57.1.1.96, fire, property damageYugoslavia: car factory, operator Zastava, Kragujevac, app 60 miles SBelgrade, fire broke out in main warehouse destroying rubber productsand technical equipment. Extensive damage to roof of 10,000sqmwarehouse. Production to resume later this month. Initial est damage:100m dinars (app DM30m (US$20.3m)). (15.1) Repairs to be completed byend of Q1.1.1.96, earthquakeCIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 6, epicentre app 100kms NPetropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, struck app 2226 local.2.1.96, nps shutdownLithuania: Ignalina nps, No 2 generating unit shut down, app 1230 GMT,due to suspected leak in room housing water pipes. Suspected cause:crack in small pipe in impulse control system.2.1.96, earthquakeCIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 7.2, hit offshore area EKamchatka, app 1000 local. Earthquake led to eruption of Karymskyvolcano, Kamchatka peninsula, spewing hot ash 7km into air.3.1.96, flooding, property damageCIS: Russia: build-up of ice blocking river estuary, led to flooding,Belomorsk, Karelia, flooding roads, land plots and several 00 houses.4.1.96, bad weather, property damage, fatalitiesCIS: Kazakhstan: two weeks of blizzards caused est damage of Tenge200m(US$3m). Winds of 100kph damaged electricity and telephone lines,several buildings. 113 dead, 5 missing.4.1.96, bad weather, property damageRomania: melting snow and rain flooded 25 districts, washed away app4,000 houses, north-western areas. Est damage put at more than Lei10bn(US$3.4m).4.1.96, earthquakeCIS: Azerbaijan: earthquake, measuring Richter 6-7, epicentre 110km NWBaku, struck app 1142 local.5.1.96, nuclear, radioactive leakCIS: Ukraine: nps, 350km S Kiev, radioactive leak in steam pipe, thirdreactor, contaminated app 30sqm area. Reactor shut down.6.1.96, structural collapse, fatalitiesBulgaria: 30m-long footbridge, Elkhovo, iron railing snapped, app 1000GMT, causing bridge to capsize and app 200 people watching atraditional festival from the bridge to plunge into R Toundja. At least7 dead. Government to give Leva5m (US$70,000) to bereaved families.5-8.1.96, theftSlovakia: Nitra branch, VUB bank, at unknown time between 5-8.1,cSK130m (US$4.33m) and SK40m (US$1.33m) in foreign currency stolen.Alarm system off, safe undamaged, suspected use of duplicate keys withinside assistance.8.1.96, aviation, crash, fatalitiesZaire: Antonov 32 cargo aircraft, Russian-built, owned by Moscow AirLines, en lease to African Air, en route from Ndolo airport, failed togain height on take-off and ploughed app 100 metres through market,engulfing it in flames, Kinshasa, app 1300 local. At least 350 dead,470 injured. (9.1) Moscow Air Lines was operating in breach of anoffical ban, according to reports, after having its operationssuspended by air transport department, Ministry of Transport on 3.1 forsafety violations.8.1.96, earthquake, property damageCIS: Russia: earthquake, measuring Richter 6.1, struck Okha, app 50kmfrom Neftegorsk, app 2106 local, leaving 14 apartment blocks unstable.10.1.96, pipeline rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: Samara-Kuzmichi pipeline, rupture app 4kms from R Volga,led to spill of app 500 tonnes of oil. Some 15m of pipeline replaced,more than 150 tonnes of oil collected and 2.07 hectares of land clearedof oil.11.1.96, pipeline, rupture, damageCIS: Russia: 1,220mm Surgut-Polotsk oil pipeline, bulldozer damagedpipeline, nr Teplaya Gora, Perm Region, 1.5km from R Koyva. Total 242tonnes of oil spilled over 650sqm area. Est damage: R6.7bn (US$1.4m).11.1.96, pipeline, explosion, property damageCIS: Russia: Sintezkauchuk chemical plant, Tolyatti, high-pressuresteam pipeline exploded damaging power lines and installations. 3injured. Cause: pressure rise in pipeline. Est damage: R230bn(US$48.9m).12.1.96, marine, sinking, fatalitiesCIS: Russia: mrv `Sisafino-2', Russian registered, owned by privateSakhalin company, en route from Korsakov for Nevelsk, sank during aheavy storm, Tartar Strait, off Sakhalin Island. At least 2 dead.12.1.96, helicopter, crashCIS: Ukraine: Mi-2 helicopter, owner Universal-Avio enterprise, fellfrom height of a few metres while landing and crashed, during pipelineinspection flight.12.1.96, fireCIS: Russia: Oktyabr-Neft oil well, app 6km SE Grozny, operator AOYunko, fire began in output pipes before spreading to well. Firereported to be burning more than 1,000 tonnes of oil per day andexpected to take at least 15 days to extinguish.15.1.96, oil spill, pollutionLatvia: Ventspils port, northwestern Latvia, leak of petroleum productsunder wharf structure, reached Baltic Sea. Ventspils Nafta to be finedas oil company responsible for pollution.15.1.96, pipeline, rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: oil refinery, Angarsk petrochemical plant, Irkutsk region,300mm underground pipeline ruptured causing app 350cum of kerosene tospill over 700sqm area.16.1.96, marine, holingCanada: mv `Razboieni', Romanian registered, 15,555dwt, holed in portbow and taking on water, on arrival Sheet Harbour, Nova Scotia, afterbeing damaged by ice, St Lawrence River.16.1.96, pipeline, rupture, oil spillCIS: Russia: Syzran-Zolnoye pipeline, leak from underwater section ofpipeline led to oil slick covering 2.5km area, R Syzranka. Suspectedcause: corrosion.18.1.96, marine, collision, oil slickSingapore: m tanker `Kapitan Shvetsov', Russian registered, 4,268 gt,built 1973, en route from Bangkok for Surabaya, cargo molasses, and mcontainer vessel `Nanta Bhum', Singapore registered, 11,079 gt, built1990, in collision between light buoys 26 and 27, mouth of Chao Phrayariver, Samut Prakarn province. `Kapitan Shvetsov' sank, leading tolarge oil slick.19.1.96, chemical spillCIS: Russia: Salavat oil refinery, Bashkortostan, app 2cu m of phenolspilt.19.1.96, pipeline, leak, oil spillCIS: Russia: Tikhoretsk-Tuapse pipeline, damage to pipeline, understoodcaused during illegal attempt to siphon off oil, resulted in leak ofapp 200 tonnes of oil, Adygeya republic, Krasnodar territory. Oilleaked over 18 hectare area, polluting R Giaga and nearby lake.Affected section of pipeline owned by Chernomorsktransneft (Black SeaPetroleum Transport) company.21.1.96, pipeline accident, fire, property damageCIS: Russia: Punga-Ukhta gas pipeline, N Tyumen region, accident led tofire damaging 60m section of 1,200mm pipeline. Gas pumping facilitystopped.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALBANIA:  FOREIGN LOANPower generation: Overseas Economic Co-operation Fund of Japan grantedOfficial Development Assistance loan of US$16m for rehabilitation ofDrin River Hydroelectric Power Stations Rehabilitation Project, co-financed with the ERBD.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BALTIC STATES:  FOREIGN INVESTMENTBanking:  Estonia:  Swedfund, Sweden, paid EK30.5m (US$2.6m) for 16.7%stake in Estonian United Bank, acquiring 2.5m shares with par value ofEK10 each.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CIS:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENTGeneral:  Ukraine:  direct foreign investment totalled US$595m in 1995. Foreign businesses put app $113.59m into Ukrainain enterprises, ofwhich $107 came from state-owned share sales through internationalinvestment tenders.Beverages:  Russia:  Hero, Germany, and food importer Soyuzkontrakt injv to construct US$22m plant for production of up to 60m bottles ofHerschi drinks annually.  Construction to take up to 11 months.Construction:  Azerbaijan: Transcaucasus Development Corp (70%), US,Baku city (25%) and property trading company NRV (5%) in jv forconstruction of US$500m business and shopping complex, including 12-storey business centre, several office blocks, a hotel, exhibition andsports facilities, shops, apartments and cafes.  Baku World TradeCentre jv intends to complete project in six years.Turkmenistan:  GAP Iplik Sanahyi ve Ticaret AS (30%), Turkey, EBRD (20%(US$17.8m)) and Turkmen government (50%) formed GAP-Turkmen, tospecialize in building and equipping textile factories.  Authorizedcapital:  US$89m.  First project to re-equip a denim factory nrAshkhabad.Minerals:  Azerbaijan:  National Iranian Drilling company (50%) andAzerbaijan (50%) agreed to form drilling jv to prospect for mineralresources.  Authorized capital:  US$100,000.Oil and Gas Production:  Uzbekistan:  Gama Co, Turkey, startedconstruction of oil refinery to process gas condensate produced atKokdumalak oil and gas field.  Refinery operations to start by yearend, with annual capacity of 2.5m tonnes.Russia:  Neste, Finland, and Elf Aquitaine, France, jointly to developYuzhno-Shapinskiy and Shapinskiy oilfields in Nenets Autonomous Area.neste has invested app US$5m so far, and plan further investment of app$200-300m for a pumping system and attendant infrastructure.Ruhrgas AG, Germany, signed agreement with Vladimir city to advise onand install energy saving technolgies in municipal hot water and heatsupply systems.Siberia:  BASF, Germany, and Gazprom signed US$1bn agreement toconstruct gas pipelines from Yamal Peninsula to western Europe.Shipping:  Russia:  Kvaerner, Norway, paid R414.66m (US$88,291) for 13%stake in Vyborg shipyard, bringing total stake to 18.81%.  Kvaernerplans to invest further US$5m over three years.Tea Packing:  Azerbaijan:  Intersun (70%), United Arab Emirates (UAE),and Baku Tea Packing factory formed Azersun for packing of 8,000 tonnesof tea a year.  Charter capital of jv:  US$1.34m.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CZECH REPUBLIC:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENTElectrical Equipment:  matsushita Electrical Industrial Co Ltd, Japan,to invest between US$65-75m in Panasonic television plant, producting300,000 sets by 1997.  Annual output to increase to 1m sets by 2001.Minimum $54m to go into production equipment. Construction of plant tostart this year.Power Supply:  RWE AG, Germany, subsidiary Promineral AG (50%) and CEZAS (50%) formed Gaprom for the processing of energo gypsum andproduction of elements for building industry.Sugar Production:  Eastern Sugar, US?, increased stake in CukrovarNemcice Nad Hanou AS sugar refinery from 14% to 49%.  Eastern Sugarintends to invest Kc50m (US$1.9m) in company, increasing its stake to64%.Textile Production:  Hualan Corp (50%), Taiwan, Malaysian associatedcompany and other small shareholders (50%) to open new textile factory,producing 4,000-5,000 tonnes of long and short fibre yarns per year.Hualon to invest US$20m in factory.Banking:  Investicni a Postovni banka (IPB) and Vozrozhdeniye TradeBank (Russia) agreed to establish First Czech-Russian Bank Ltd, subjectto regulatory approval.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HUNGARY:  FOREIGN INVESTMENTFabric Manufacture:  Amoco Corp, US, unit Amoco Fabrics Europe (AFE) toconstruct new commodity carpet-backing plant to be completed by 1998.Partial operations to start by year-end.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POLAND:  JOINT VENTURES AND FOREIGN INVESTMENTBanking:  Internationale Nederlanden Groep NV (ING) (50%), theNetherlands, and Bank Slaski (50%) to form ING BSK Asset Management tomanage portfolios for private and institutional investors.  ING BSK toset up subsidiary to manage investment funds, the first to be marketedin second half of 1996.Tobacco:  Seita, France, to invest US$40m in ZPT Radom tobacco plantover next three years to upgrade its technology and distributionnetwork.  Seita hopes to purchase additional 32% stake in ZPT.Back to Headline List CopyrightEAST EUROPEAN INSURANCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ROMANIA:  JOINT VENTURESFertiliser Manufacture:  Mannesman AG (85%), Germany, and Azochim SA(15%) in US$58m project to upgrade ammonium plant.  Plant to produce upto 1,000 tonnes of ammonium daily when work completed.Oil and Gas Production:  Butan Gas SpA (56%), Italy, and Competrol SAformed Butan Gas Romania SA in US$5m jv to bottle and distributeliquefied petroleum gas (LPG).  Bottling capacity to be increased to2,400 gas bottles an hour.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-36IA086-000615-B043-117http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020904 text/html 43289HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMTContent-length: 43102Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in04.html Sample Issue Copyright FEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNet January 5, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INSURERS SUE TO BLOCK PROPOSITION 103 IMPLEMENTATION IN CALIFORNIA (866 words) INSURERS JOIN TO OPEN AN ALL-INDUSTRY "HELPLINE" FOR CONSUMERS (130 words) EVEN BEST LONG-TERM CARE POLICIES INADEQUATE, A.A.R.P. REPORTS (348 words) WORLD'S REPORTED AIDS CASES TOPPED 200,000 IN 1989 (61 words) HEALTH COSTS CONTINUE TO OUTPACE INFLATION (82 words) TREASURY DECIDES TO SEND OUT MEDICARE REFUNDS IN FEBRUARY (111 words) F.T.C. LETTER ON CRASH PARTS GIVES COMPETITIVENESS ARGUMENTS A BOOST (335 words) GOVERNMENT PROPOSES EXTENDING AIRBAG REQUIREMENT TO TRUCKS & VANS (158 words) AGENTS & CONSUMER ADVOCATES OFFER 100 WAYS TO CUT AUTO COSTS (225 words) HARTFORD EXPANDS DISCOUNTS FOR AUTO SAFETY (206 words) * NEWS FROM THE STATES * CALIFORNIA QUAKE EXPECTED TO HAVE LITTLE LASTING ECONOMIC IMPACT (106 words) CALIFORNIA'S NEW WORKERS' COMP LAW GOES INTO EFFECT (79 words) DELAWARE GOVERNOR RENEWS PUSH FOR BANKS IN INSURANCE (184 words) GEORGIA COMMISSIONER PROPOSES LIMITS ON AUTO PERSONAL INJURY SUITS (318 words) ILLINOIS MANDATORY AUTO INSURANCE LAW GOES INTO EFFECT (74 words) ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT SAYS DRUNK EMPLOYE CAN'T GET WORKERS' COMP (165 words) MARYLAND APPROVES BLUES' PLAN TO ENCOURAGE SAFE DRIVING (173 words) MASSACHUSETTS LIMIT ON AUTO RATE INCREASE CHALLENGED IN COURT (66 words) MICHIGAN AGENTS SAY INCREASING SAFETY COULD REDUCE AUTO RATES (188 words) MISSOURI SENATOR PROPOSES UPGRADING INSURANCE REGULATION (165 words) NEW JERSEY BLUES WIN APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASES (195 words) NEW YORK GOVERNOR CALLS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE FOR ALL CHILDREN (64 words) NORTH CAROLINA COMMISSIONER ORDERS ANOTHER AUTO RATE ROLLBACK (162 words) NORTH CAROLINA ANTI-THEFT PROGRAM PAYS ITS FIRST REWARD (170 words) OREGON SUPREME COURT REQUIRES BROAD COVERAGE BY AUTO POLICIES (170 words) TENNESSEE REPORTS 42% OF BIRTHS PAID FOR BY MEDICAID (68 words) VIRGINIA CITES LACK OF EVIDENCE THAT MANDATED BENEFITS RAISE COSTS (225 words) WISCONSIN BILL WOULD BROADEN POLICYHOLDER REDRESS AGAINST INSURERS (95 words) BUILDING CODES HELP PREVENT HURRICANE DAMAGE, STUDY FINDS (132 words) CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990INSURERS SUE TO BLOCK PROPOSITION 103 IMPLEMENTATION IN CALIFORNIAInsurance companies filed suit this week to block implementation ofCalifornia Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie's emergencyregulations to implement Proposition 103.The action by State Farm and Allstate marked yet another twist in thetortuous journey to implementation of the initiative passed by votersin November 1988.It took more than a year for Gillespie to issue the regulations, andin the interim she was criticized by advocates of the initiative fordelay and siding with the industry. Now the initiative's backersaccept Gillespie's rules but insurers don't."I view this whole thing as large insurance companies showingthemselves to the door of the California market, because they're justinfuriating the public," said Harvey Rosenfield, head of Voter Revoltand principal sponsor of Proposition 103.He said Jan. 5 that he hadn't seen Allstate's suit, but State Farm'slitigation is "basically a joke" that wouldn't pass scrutiny by afirst-year law student."This simply is another way to stall and delay," he said.State Farm Insurance filed two suits Jan. 3, challenging not onlyGillespie's new regulations to implement Proposition 103, effectivein March, but also her decision to deny an increase in auto ratesunder the state's assigned risk plan.In a suit filed in San Francisco Superior Court, the company said the"emergency regulations" issued last month were illegal because theydon't fairly implement the auto rate provisions of Proposition 103,passed by voters in November 1988.State Farm said Proposition 103 forbids rates that are inadequate,excessive or unfairly discriminatory. But it said Gillespie's ruleswould bring rates that are inadequate in some cases, excessive inothers and thus are unfairly discriminatory.Allstate Insurance Co. filed suit Jan. 4, alleging that Gillespie'sregulations violate the state constitution and weren't supported bysubstantial evidence.It said the regulations would cost the company a 25 percent drop inrevenues and a $175 million loss during the next policy year.The suit asks Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Miriam Vogel tobar enforcement of the regulations and order a return to the previoussystem of setting rates."We're asking for a return to a cost-based system," said MichaelCarlson, an attorney for Allstate.As in other states, insurers have based rates on motorists' place ofresidence, age, gender and marital status. Gillespie's regulationswould forbid use of all those, although insurers could use otherfactors that would approximate the same effect.State Farm's second suit over the California Automobile Assigned RiskPlan, or CAARP, was filed with Judge Vogel of Los Angeles, whoalready has ruled that Allstate can raise its rates by 40 percent forbad drivers covered under CAARP.State Farm said it has experienced an underwriting loss of $3.5million a week from assigned-risk coverage.California law requires motorists to carry minimum liability coverageand requires insurers to offer assigned-risk coverage based on theirshare of the market.But if it can't get a rate increase, State Farm is asking the rightto stop issuing the coverage.In another development, consumer advocates and representatives ofminority groups held a news conference Jan. 3 to urge California Gov.George Deukmejian and Assembly Speaker Willie Brown to approve a billoffering motorists a no-frills, no-fault auto insurance policy."Consumers today are far worse off for auto insurance than they werea year and a half ago," said Judith Bell of Consumers Union."We've watched the insurance companies figure out how they can scamthose hearings" held by the Insurance Department on implementingProposition 103.The plan by Democratic Assemblyman Pat Johnston would allow victimsof auto accidents to sue only in case of serious injury. Otherwisethey would recover medical costs and lost wages up to $15,000 fromtheir own insurance companies.Doctors would be held to the fee schedule set forth in the state'sworkers' compensation plan.Motorists covered by the minimum policy would have to go to small-claims court to recover costs of property damage.Minimum coverage under the bill would cost $180 a year. If propertydamage were covered, Bell said, rates would rise to about $300 or$400 a year.It is supported by many, but not all, insurance companies --notableexceptions being State Farm and Farmers.It also is backed by some consumer advocates but opposed by thoseassociated with Ralph Nader, as well as by the California TrialLawyers Association. They say no-fault diminishes victims' rights.Johnston, chairman of the Assembly Finance and Insurance Committee,left his bill in committee in last year's session when he saw hedidn't have enough votes to enact it in preference to a substitutebill offered by the Democratic speaker.The Legislature passed Brown's bill over the vigorous opposition ofinsurers, but the Republican governor vetoed it. Deukmejian said atthe time that he was willing to work with legislators to come up witha compromise bill.Consumers Union's Bell said Johnston's plan failed last year "due toan extraordinary effort by the speaker and a lack of leadership bythe governor."Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990INSURERS JOIN TO OPEN AN ALL-INDUSTRY "HELPLINE" FOR CONSUMERSThe life, health and property/casualty insurance industries havejoined in an unprecedented effort to establish a toll-free telephoneline to provide consumers with information.Main sponsoring organizations for the "National Insurance ConsumerHelpline" are the American Council of Life Insurance, the HealthInsurance Association of America and the Insurance InformationInstitute, which represents property/casualty companies.Staff based in Annapolis, Md., will be expected to handle a widerange of quesitons, refer complaints to appropriate sources and sendbrochures and educational materials upon request.Such an effort has been discussed for years, but it gained impetusfrom widespread consumer dissatisfaction with the industry.The Helpline will operate from 8:30 a.m. to 8 p.m. Eastern timeMonday through Friday, starting Jan. 2. The telephone number is 800-942-4242.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990EVEN BEST LONG-TERM CARE POLICIES INADEQUATE, A.A.R.P. REPORTSEven some of the best long-term care insurance policies fail toprovide adequate protection against costs of nursing home care,according to a study released Jan. 3 by the American Association ofRetired People (AARP).The study analyzed policies offered by 11 leading companies andconcluded many "failed to achieve the basic purpose for which theywere bought.""Many of them failed to provide much protection against theuncertainty of paying high out-of-pocket costs for nursing homecare," the study said.It said there were wide variations and coverage options among thepolicies, leaving "a great deal of uncertainty" over how many nursinghome costs would be covered.Applying both strict and lenient interpretations, policies mightreduce out-of-pocket spending on nursing homes by anywhere between12.1 to 62.6 percent, the report said.The study was conducted by Thomas Rice and Kathleen Thomas of theUniversity of North Carolina and William Weissert of the Universityof Michigan, under a grant from the AARP.It analyzed policies marketed from May through July of 1988 andacknowledged improvements in policies since then.Most of the policies studied denied benefits to those who went intonursing homes without first being hospitalized or provided benefitsonly for skilled -- as opposed to custodial -- nursing home care.Those findings confirm the wisdom of a December 1988 recommendationby the National Association of Insurance Commissioners that statesprohibit sale of policies with such requirements, the report said.It recommended that the NAIC expand its model regulations to requirethat policies cover at least four years in a nursing home and offersome kind of inflation protection.The study named the companies whose policies were analyzed, butdidn't provide specific information on each policy.Companies included Aetna, American Express-Fireman's Fund, AmericanProgressive, Bankers Life & Casualty, Blue Cross & Blue Shield ofIndiana, Equitable Life & Casualty, Great Republic, John Hancock,Prudential, Transport Life and Travelers.According to the Health Insurance Association of America, more than100 companies now offer insurance covering long-term care.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990WORLD'S REPORTED AIDS CASES TOPPED 200,000 IN 1989The number of reported AIDS cases reached 203,599 by the end of 1989,the World Health Organization reported Jan. 3.The total included 36,942 new victims during the year.U.S. cases totaled 113,211 by December.Reports to the Geneva-based WHO seriously underestimate the actualnumber because many cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome,particularly in Africa, go undetected.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990HEALTH COSTS CONTINUE TO OUTPACE INFLATIONStandard & Poor's Corp. says medical costs rose 8 percent fromOctober 1988 through September 1989, compared to an overall inflationrate of 4.3 percent.It said inflation has slowed in dental and eye care, but costs ofhospitals and drugs rose 11.8 percent.S&P said it expected the inflation rate for health costs to outpaceoverall inflation by "a wide margin" in 1990 -- matched only by anincrease in the 10 to 12 percent range for property/casualtypremiums.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990TREASURY DECIDES TO SEND OUT MEDICARE REFUNDS IN FEBRUARYUnder pressure from members of Congress, the Treasury Department hasannounced that it will send out refund checks in February and Aprilto nearly 27 million elderly Americans who are paying for benefitsthey won't be receiving.Congress acted late last year to repeal the Medicare CatastrophicCoverage Act of 1988, which increased both Medicare benefits and thepremiums to pay for them.Many Medicare premiums are paid through monthly deductions fromSocial Security checks, and those deductions went up by $5.30 as ofJan. 1. Treasury said it didn't have time to reprogram the computersto reduce the deductions before May, but said it could refund themoney.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990F.T.C. LETTER ON CRASH PARTS GIVES COMPETITIVENESS ARGUMENTS A BOOSTA letter from Federal Trade Commission staff to an Ohio legislatorgives a boost to arguments that there are anticompetitive effectsfrom laws restricting use of replacement crash parts made by otherthan the original manufacturers.The argument pits auto manufacturers, who decry use of "imitation"parts, against insurers and consumer groups, who say competitionlowers prices of replacement parts.The letter from FTC staff to Ohio State Rep. Joseph E. Haines, camein response to a request for comment on an Ohio bill, H.B. 302. Itappears to mark the first time a U.S. government agency has taken aposition on the issue -- even though it represents staff views andnot those of the commission.The Dec. 27 letter suggests that the Legislature "take into accountthe possibility that the bill might unreasonably restrict consumerchoice in the market for auto crash parts. The Legislature may alsowish to take into consideration the benefits and costs of mandatorydisclosure."The Ohio bill regulates marketing and use of aftermarket crash parts,including a requirement that installers can't charge more for partsmade by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) than they wouldhave for non-OEM parts."This provision attempts to equalize the prices of OEM and non-OEMparts, thus eliminating perhaps the only attraction of non-OEMparts," the FTC staff said.The measure also requires disclosure that non-OEM parts, "most ofwhich are not made in the United States, may vary in terms ofquality, fit, performance and warranty from the original parts."The FTC staff said it wouldn't address the question of poorerquality, but added that some consumers might be willing to acceptlower quality in order to get a lower price.The disclosure might add to costs without providing useful additionalinformation to consumers, the FTC staff said. And, it said, "there isa risk that the language of a mandatory disclosure may misleadconsumers, creating a negative public perception where none isjustified."Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990GOVERNMENT PROPOSES EXTENDING AIRBAG REQUIREMENT TO TRUCKS & VANSThe National Highway Traffic Safety Administration proposed Jan. 4that the current requirement for airbags or automatic seatbelts beextended to light-duty trucks, vans and small buses.The restraints would be phased in beginning with the 1994 model yearwith full compliance by the 1996 model year. But vehicles with driver-side airbags and manual passenger belts would be considered incompliance through the 1997 model year.Vehicles with only two seating positions also would have to beequipped to secure a child safety seat on the passenger side.NHTSA estimated that some 2,000 lives a year could be saved throughthe proposal.The action followed a NHTSA proposal last month to extend the door-strength requirements for passenger cars to all minivans, small busesand multipurpose vehicles.NHTSA also reported that it opened a record 213 investigations intopossible auto safety defects during 1989 and influenced a record 77percent of recalls.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990AGENTS & CONSUMER ADVOCATES OFFER 100 WAYS TO CUT AUTO COSTSThe National Association of Professional Insurance Agents and theConsumer Insurance Interest Group joined Dec. 27 to offer more than100 recommendations on controlling personal injury and propertydamage costs.Suggestions include ways to improve driver responsiblility, speed andalcohol control, highway design and improved state record-keeping onaccidents.The groups also recommended improving vehicle safety by such means asdisplaying crashworthiness ratings on new vehicles, improvingsteering assemblies, enhancing side-impact protection and reinstatingthe 5 mph bumper standard.The Consumer Insurance Interest Group is headed by PIA Nationalconsumer adviser Esther Peterson and includes Joan Claybrook ofPublic Citizen, Steve Brobeck of Consumer Federation of America andJ. Robert Hunter of the National Insurance Consumer Organization.The organization was formed at the behest of PIA National in aneffort to reach agreement on issues of common interest, such assafety, while setting aside issues that divide the two groups."All the recommendations in this report should be looked upontogether rather than as isolated proposals," Peterson said.The agents and consumer advocates agreed that another issue --insurer efficiency -- also is important, but they couldn't agree onhow to achieve it.The 40-page report, "Factors Contributing to Auto Insurance ClaimsCosts," is available from PIA National at 400 North Washington St.,Alexandria, VA 22314, telephone 703-836-9340.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990HARTFORD EXPANDS DISCOUNTS FOR AUTO SAFETYITT Hartford Insurance Group, which claims credit for pioneeringdiscounts for airbags or automatic seatbelts in 1977, announced Jan.4 that it is increasing those discounts.The Hartford's discounts on personal injury coverage for occupants ofthe insurance vehicles are 30 percent for automatic seatbelts, 40percent for driver-side airbags, 50 percent for full front airbagsand 60 percent for a combination of both automatic belts and airbags.They apply to personal injury protection (PIP) coverage in no-faultstaes and to medical payments coverage in other states.In addition, cars with antilock brakes will get a 5 percent saving oncollision coverage."The discounts are substantially greater than those offered by mostauto insurers," according to Dale R. Comey, The Hartford's presidentof property-casualty insurance operations.The company said actual dollar savings will vary by state, rangingfrom $102 in the no-fault state of Colorado down to $9 in Illinois,where tort suits are allowed and first-party medical coverage is morelimited.As of Feb. 1, the discounts will be available in 38 states onpolicies sold by independent agents or through the AmericanAssociation of Retired Persons (AARP), The Travelers said. They areunder consideration in five other jurisdictions.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990CALIFORNIA QUAKE EXPECTED TO HAVE LITTLE LASTING ECONOMIC IMPACTLast year's Loma Prieta earthquake won't have a severe lingeringeconomic impact and rebuilding will probably stimulate the SanFrancisco Bay area, the Commission on State Finance reportedJan. 3 in its budget projection for the 1990s.Some businesses and households will suffer huge uninsured casualtylosses and some small retailers will go bankrupt because of a declinein tourism, the commission said, but "the net loss in wealth andincome is not that large."The panel estimated that the Oct. 17 earthquake will cost the state$1.035 billion, most of it offset by a quarter-cent increase in thesales tax enacted Dec. 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990CALIFORNIA'S NEW WORKERS' COMP LAW GOES INTO EFFECTCalifornia's new workers' compensation law went into effect Jan. 1,raising maximum weekly benefits from $224 to $266 immediately andmore in later years.The law also imposes requirements on employers to inform injuredworkers of claims procedures and act on them promptly and containsreforms intended to reduce the amount of litigation.Insurers' uniform provision for expenses goes down from35 percent to 34 percent this year, 33 percent next year and32.8 percent in 1992.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990DELAWARE GOVERNOR RENEWS PUSH FOR BANKS IN INSURANCEDelaware Gov. Mike Castle has renewed his drive to win passage oflegislation that would allow some state banks into the insurancebusiness.The Republican governor told the Wilmington Rotary Club Dec. 28 thatpassage is important if Delaware is to continue to be a financialcenter.The measure would help encourage banks to stay in the state andexpand, Castle said, but he warned that California, Florida andIllinois all are considering similar legislation."The first state in which national and regional banks are located, ormay locate, which grants these insurance underwriting powers tocommercial banks...will have foreclosed any need or reason forsimilar action by other states," said Castle.He said one major backer of the legislation, Citibank, has said itwould create up to 500 new jobs in Delaware if the bill passes.Insurance agents oppose the bill, which would apply to bankschartered in the state before 1933 and allow them both to underwriteand sell insurance.It was passed by the House but has been stalled in the Senate sincelast summer.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990GEORGIA COMMISSIONER PROPOSES LIMITS ON AUTO PERSONAL INJURY SUITSGeorgia Insurance Commissioner Warren Evans proposed Jan. 4 that theGeneral Assembly revise the state's no-fault law by allowing suitsonly in case of defined injuries.Current law now calls for accident victims' insurance companies topay medical bills, lost wages and burial expenses regardless of whowas at fault, but injured persons may still sueif their medical expenses exceed $500.Evans told a House-Senate study committee that the proposal wouldallow insurers to cut costs and could lead to a 20 percent reductionin premiums.The effort to raise the tort threshold is being led by Georgians forResponsible Insurance Policy, an industry coalition headed by DedleyMoore of Atlanta's Omni Insurance Group."The exorbitant increase in tort litigation is one of the mainreasons Georgia's insurance rates have been climbing faster than thenational average," Moore said.But the Georgia Consumer Center says that auto rate increases in thestate have outpaced the growth of claims.The group's executive director, Debbie Schecter, said claims onlyamounted to 69.4 percent of premiums in 1988, compared to 79.3percent in 1984."It's further evidence of the inefficiency in the insurance industryin Georgia and perhaps even price-gouging," she said.In other areas, Insurance Commissioner Evans proposed:* Requiring health insurers to pool policies for groups with fewerthan 50 members, in order to reduce the possibility of a large rateincrease resulting from one large claim on a small group.* Making health maintenance organizations available to those coveredby Medicare or Medicaid who now lack that option.* Expanding the Insurance Department's ability to investigateinsurance fraud. He said it's been estimated that at least 10 to 20percent of the cost of premiums results from fraud.* Extending the FAIR Plan providing property insurance to high-riskapplicants who have difficulty getting commercial coverage.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990ILLINOIS MANDATORY AUTO INSURANCE LAW GOES INTO EFFECTAn Illinois law requiring motorists to carry auto insurance went intoeffect Jan. 1, allowing state troopers to require motorists to provethat they have personal injury liability coverage of at least $20,000per person and $40,000 per accident.The law also requires $15,000 in property damage liability.Motorists without insurance face fines of $500 or more and vehicleregistration suspensions of at least two months. Reinstatement willcost an additional $50.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT SAYS DRUNK EMPLOYE CAN'T GET WORKERS' COMPThe Illinois Supreme Court ruled Dec. 21 that an intoxicated employeewho was critically injured in a car crash while traveling between onebusiness meeting and another isn't entitled to workers' compensation.Without dissent, the court upheld the ruling of the IllinoisIndustrial Commission that the employee wasn't capable of working atthe time of the accident and therefore wasn't eligible for workers'compensation.The case was brought by the family of Bennie Johnson, a businessagent for the International Union of Operating Engineers. He had ablood alcohol level of nearly .24 percent, more than two times thelegal definition of drunkenness, at the time of the 1983 accidentthat left him incapacitated."The commission was free to infer from those circumstances that theemployee was so intoxicated that he could no longer follow hisemployment and thus could not be said to be engaged in his employmentat the time of the occurrence," Justice Ben Miller wrote for thecourt.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990MARYLAND APPROVES BLUES' PLAN TO ENCOURAGE SAFE DRIVINGMaryland Insurance Commission John Donaho has approved a plan by BlueCross & Blue Shield of Maryland to encourage safe driving throughexpanded benefits.The plan applies to some 37,000 policyholders enrolled incomprehensive major medical programs for individual consumers.If a policyholder is injured in a traffic accident while using aseatbelt, child restraint or motorcycle helmet, 100 percent of thefirst $1,500 in covered medical costs will be paid.Previously, the company paid 80 percent of such costs.Donaho also approved a provision withholding benefits when apolicyholder is injured in an accident and convicted for the secondtime of driving while intoxicated or under the influence ofunprescribed drugs.Another provision extends coverage to policyholders for routinemammography screenings."Our emphasis on safe driving, prevention and wellness place us andthe state of Maryland in the forefront of a national trend thatencourages people to take responsibility for actions that affecttheir health," said Linda Benedict, vice president of the insurer'sindividual market division.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990MASSACHUSETTS LIMIT ON AUTO RATE INCREASE CHALLENGED IN COURTAetna Life & Casualty Co. filed suit Jan. 3 challenging  theMassachusetts insurance commissioner's decision last month limitingauto rate increases to 7.9 percent.The suit filed in Supreme Judicial Court, the state's highest, notedthat insurers had sought a 12.8 percent increase.Aetna covers about 9.5 percent of the state's drivers, but a decisionin its favor would affect other insurers as well.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990MICHIGAN AGENTS SAY INCREASING SAFETY COULD REDUCE AUTO RATESThe Michigan Association of Professional Insurance Agents is sayinggovernment should increase safety regulation as a means of holdingdown auto premiums.Michigan PIA's proposals include reducing the maximum speed limitfrom 65 mph and more funding for highway maintenance and safer roads.The agents also propose increased funding for insurance regulationand a new look at the territorial rating system."Our recommendations are designed to provide a credible base ofinformation that everyone can work on to reduce accidents andinjuries and hold the line on rising auto insurance rates," saidMichigan PIA President James Alexander.The PIA recommendations are part of an effort to divert legislativeproposals to mandate reduced auto premiums by as much as 30 percent.Although Michigan's no-fault system is held up as a model for otherstates, auto rates there have been rising -- especially in Detroit.Michigan Citizens Lobby has been leading a campaign for rate cuts.The group's executive director responded to the PIA proposals bysaying they're a step in the right direction but shouldn't divertattention from the push for a rate rollback.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990MISSOURI SENATOR PROPOSES UPGRADING INSURANCE REGULATIONMissouri Senate President Pro Tem James Mathewson urged Jan. 3 thatthe state constitution be amended to upgrade insurance regulation tothe status of a separate department."For too many years, our Division of Insurance has been the stepchildof the Department of Economic Development," the Democratic leadersaid."In order to assure Missouri consumers they are not payingunreasonable rates and to make sure the insurance industry isadequately related, we need to have a separate department in chargeof insurance regulation."Under Mathewson's amendment, the proposed department would bedirected by a five-member commission."I have talked to officials with major insurance companies, fellowlawmakers and consumer representatives," Mathewson said."We agree that in light of the growing public concern with insurancerates and the increasing number of insurance company insolvencies, weneed improved regulation of the industry."The amendment would have to be approved by both houses of the GeneralAssembly and then approved by voters.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990NEW JERSEY BLUES WIN APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASESNew Jersey Insurance Commissioner Kenneth Merin approved rateincreases in excess of 20 percent Jan. 4 for 600,000 residents of thestate who carry health insurance with Blue Cross & Blue Shield of NewJersey.Merin approved increases of 26.4 percent for 350,000 holders ofindividual health insurance policies and of 21.3 percent for 250,000who carry Medicare supplemental coverage.The increases are expected to bring $97 million more this year toBlue Cross & Blue Shield, which has reported a $230 million deficit.If applied across the board, the increases would amount to about $950above the current $3,600 annual non-group premium for family coverageand $98 above the current Medigap average of $460. But Merin orderedBlue Cross & Blue Shield to modify the demographic factors used insetting rates.The company had sought a 33.7 percent increase for individualcoverage and 28.9 percent for Medigap policies.Merin said medical costs haven't risen as much as Blue Cross & BlueShield claimed.About 3.4 million more residents of the state are covered by BlueCross & Blue Shield group plans, which aren't affected by the latestdecision.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990NEW YORK GOVERNOR CALLS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE FOR ALL CHILDRENNew York Gov. Mario Cuomo called Jan. 3 for universal healthinsurance for all children in the state, from birth through age 17.In his "State of the State" address, Cuomo gave few details of aprogram he called New York CHILD, for Children's Health Insurance forLifelong Development, but said it would include coverage for primarycare, preventive care and catastrophic illness.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990NORTH CAROLINA COMMISSIONER ORDERS ANOTHER AUTO RATE ROLLBACKNorth Carolina Insurance Commissioner Jim Long has ordered auto ratesrolled back by 6.2 percent, the third cut in less than two years."I have determined that the evidence and testimony justify a decreasein the current rate level," Long said Dec. 28."Decreases are ordered for both liability and physical damagecoverage."Long also ordered a 12.1 percent decrease for motorcycles.The industry had requested a 4.2 percent increase."The order represents a 248 percent decrease from the industry'srequest," Long said."The last six auto rate orders represent a total of $492 million lessthan the increased rate levels proposed by the insurance industry."Besides ordering three rate cuts, Long has approved three rateincreases that were smaller than those requested by the industry.The industry has taken previous decisions to the North Carolina Courtof Appeals, and more than $115 million in premiums is being held inescrow pending the outcome.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990NORTH CAROLINA ANTI-THEFT PROGRAM PAYS ITS FIRST REWARDNorth Carolina's Stop Thefts, Assist Recoveries (STAR) program haspaid its first reward: $2,000 to an informant who helped bring aboutthe conviction of six persons in Brunswick County believedresponsible for $120,000 in burglaries."This is the first money to be paid through the industry's STARreward program and we believe this is only the beginning of a veryeffective program to assist North Carolina law enforcement agenciesin fighting burglary rings," said William L. Pollard, executive vicepresident of North Carolina Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Co. andchairman of the STAR reward committee."Our target for STAR is the thief or theft ring that commits 10 ormore burglaries or steals 10 or more vehicles. We call them high-volume thieves," Pollard said Jan. 4.The North Carolina Rate Bureau, made up of property/casualty insurers, will put up as much as $20,000 a year for rewards.Co-sponsors of the program are the North Carolina Association ofPolice Chiefs and the North Carolina Sheriffs Association.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990OREGON SUPREME COURT REQUIRES BROAD COVERAGE BY AUTO POLICIESThe Oregon Supreme Court ruled Dec. 28 that auto insurers doingbusiness in the state must cover vehicles owned by the policy-holdereven when the vehicles are being driven by someone else.Ruling in two different cases, both involving Viking Insurance Co. ofWisconsin, the court said Oregon law requires policies to covervehicles all the time, not just when they are being driven by certainpeople.One case involved a policy held by an Oregon man, Grant Perotti, thatcovered him when he was driving any vehicle but didn't cover histruck when it was driven by someone else. An employee of Perotti's,driving the truck with his permission, was involved in an accidentand Viking refused to cover damages.The other case involved a policyholder who allowed his car to bedriven by a 19-year-old woman who was involved in an accident. Vikingsaid its policy didn't apply in this case because a clause in thepolicy excluded a vehicle driven by someone under 25.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990TENNESSEE REPORTS 42% OF BIRTHS PAID FOR BY MEDICAIDMedicaid paid for 42 percent of all births in Tennessee last year andthe proportion is expected to rise above 50 percent this year, StateHealth and Environment Commissioner J.W. Luna told legislators Dec.28.The other 58 percent of births were paid for by the parents and theirinsurance or were written off by the hospitals as bad debts, Lunatold the Legislature's Fiscal Review Committee.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990VIRGINIA CITES LACK OF EVIDENCE THAT MANDATED BENEFITS RAISE COSTSVirginia's State Corporation Commission issued a report Dec. 27saying that it was unable to find clear evidence that removingmandated benefits would make health insurance more affordable.It told the General Assembly's joint subcommittee on health care thatall mandated benefits and providers account for, on average, no morethan 10 percent of the policy premium for individual coverage and 20percent of the group premium.The study said it's impossible to answer the crucial question of howmany people are uninsured as a result of mandated benefits, becauseinsurance companies don't normally keep such data.The report was based on a survey of 100 companies.Insurance Commissioner Steven Foster suggested that the GeneralAssembly enact legislation requiring insurers to keep such data forfuture use, as seven other states have done.Having such data might make it possible to consider options such asallowing consumers to get cheaper insurance by agreeing to forgo somekinds of treatment, such as mental health therapy.The state now requires insurers to provide coverage, for example, fornewborn children and in-patient psychiatric services and it requiresthem to offer coverage for mammograms, obstetrical care and alcoholand drug dependency.It also requires insurers to reimburse a variety of health-careproviders, including clinical social workers, psychologists,chiropractors, podiatrists, optometrists and opticians.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990WISCONSIN BILL WOULD BROADEN POLICYHOLDER REDRESS AGAINST INSURERSWisconsin State Rep. Peter Barca introduced legislation Dec. 28 thatwould call for hearing examiners to decide monetary awards incontested cases and allow policyholders to recover attorney's feeswhen they sue insurers.The measure also would create a public intervenor in insurance casesin the Wisconsin Justice Department as well as requiring insurers topublish their rates and file an annual report showing premiumscollected, claims paid and court awards.The Democratic legislator said he was introducing the bill in lightof a state audit critical of a lack of consumer protections.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL & STATE INSURANCE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1990BUILDING CODES HELP PREVENT HURRICANE DAMAGE, STUDY FINDSStrong building codes, properly enforced, can greatly reduce damagefrom hurricanes, according to a new report by the All-IndustryResearch Advisory Council.The study was undertaken in cooperation with the National Committeeon Property Insurance and covered Hurricanes Alicia (1983), Diana(1984), Gloria (1985) and Gilbert (1988), as well as last year'sHurricane Hugo.It found evidence that counties with strong codes and enforcement insome areas, such as Charleston County, held down damage. It alsofound trees were a mixed blessing -- causing damage from fallinglimbs but reducing the impact of hurricane-force winds.Single copies of the study, "Surviving the Storm: Building Codes,Compliance, and the Mitigation of Hurricane Damage," are availablefree from AIRAC at 1200 Harger Road, Suite 310, Oak Brook, IL 60521,telephone 708-572-1177.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-37IA086-000615-B043-127http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in02.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020920 text/html 15761HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMTContent-length: 15574Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in02.html Sample Issue Copyright IMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES RELATIONSHIP SELLING: A NEW YEAR'S TALE (415 words) AUTO INSURANCE CRUISES THE I-WAY (268 words) THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS: CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM (172 words) BANKS IN INSURANCE: SIX THREATS (210 words) ICBC TO EXPAND BODY SHOP NETWORK (176 words) WHOSE BONO IS IT, ANYWAY? (170 words) VE-MAIL: VICTORY IN COMMUNICATIONS (167 words) * MARKETEER TIP OF THE WEEK * ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE (75 words) * PRODUCTS, SERVICES, AND MEMBER NEWS * PAYROLL DEDUCTION: IT'S ELEMENTARY (215 words) EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH: DAVE WILTZ (131 words) CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RELATIONSHIP SELLING: A NEW YEAR'S TALEIMMS would like to start off 1996 with IMMS Chairman GeorgeNordhaus recounting his experiences with his insurance agent:"My agent and I have a relationship. He writes my Homeowners, myAuto policy, the floater on my wife's wedding ring, and our UmbrellaLiability coverage. All in all, it's a pretty good account -- probably aboveaverage, in fact. The bills arrive on a staggered basis once every quarter,so nothing too big hits at once.Copious Contacts"At least once a month I hear from my agent or the companies herepresents. I get a quarterly newsletter that's full of meaningful, easy-to-understand information -- not as good as the ones IMMS offers, but nice.We also receive a desk calendar, birthday cards for my wife and me,updates on insurance legislation, offers to provide other services -- andsometimes just a personalized letter telling me that he's still aware I'm aclient. Once a year he calls to review our insurance needs for the comingyear. Although he doesn't write our Life or Health coverage, he alwaysasks if we'd like to discuss our needs in these areas.Creating Karma"Every two weeks or so I get a call from a prospective client who tellsme, 'Your agent tells me that IMMS (or the Silver Membership CD-ROM service, or employee testing, or newsletters, or whatever) is justwhat my agency needs.' There's absolutely no doubt that these referralsgenerate far more business for IMMS than I pay my agent and hiscompanies in premiums.Quality Conquers"How do you think I react when I receive a solicitation in the mail askingfor a 'free quote on your insurance'? Or if I see the same type of offerfloating across my screen when I'm browsing the Internet? Or when I geta phone call at home from some prospector looking for my X-date? Orthe next time I run across an electronic insurance kiosk or a mannedbooth in a mall? What do you think I'd do if any of these price sellerscould save me 10% or 15% on my annual premiums?"You got it. I ignore them because my agent has taken the time andtrouble to build a strong relationship with me. We at IMMS have madeour New Year's resolution to make the same commitment to you. And it'snot a bad resolution for you to make to your customers, either."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AUTO INSURANCE CRUISES THE I-WAYUtah consumers can use their home computers to surf the Internet forAuto quotes from Workmen's Auto Insurance Co. through the InsWebmarketplace gateway service. The Workmen's-InsWeb connection marksthe first Auto insurance-buying program on the I-Way. Workmen's, basedin Los Angeles, wrote $30 million in high-risk Private Passenger Autopremium through independent agents in 10 Western states in 1995."We're pleased to have Workmen's on board," says InsWeb Chairman andCEO Hussein Enan. "They understand the importance of the Internet as alogical distribution medium for insurance, and they want to be on thecutting edge of technology, connecting their agents with consumers in anefficient and cost-effective way." InsWeb and Workmen's launched theprogram in Utah because of the state's high rate of computer usage (51%of households own PCs, compared to the nationwide average of 27%)and the fact that digitized signatures are considered binding under Utahlaw.Wired for SuccessWorkmen's President George Nevitt sees the Internet as a low-costdistribution medium that can strengthen direct communications betweenconsumers and the company's agent base. "Right now, many of ourinsureds make first contact with an agent after seeing a Yellow Pages ad.Now they will be able to go on-line and search for agents or receivequotes more efficiently." InsWeb has a variety of irons in the Internet fire,including a nationwide Personal Watercraft program that's up andrunning. Pilot programs in the works include Auto insurance in otherstates, Term Life, Accidental Death and Dismemberment, and Short-Term Medical coverages. Several Commercial Lines programs will be on-line early this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS: CAUTIOUS OPTIMISMNet income for the P/C industry took a quantum leap in the third quarter,hitting $5.6 billion -- more than double the $2.4 billion of the same periodlast year. According to data on 96% of industry volume compiled by theInsurance Services Office, Inc. and the National Association ofIndependent Insurers, earnings for the nine months more than tripled,skyrocketing from $4.8 billion to $14.7 billion. The combined ratio forthe quarter fell from 107.7% in the year-earlier quarter to 103.7%, a levelthat Insurance Information Institute Senior Vice President and economistSean Mooney called the lowest he's seen in the last 10 years. Analystscredit the upswing to the superheated stock market's boost to investmentincome and the lack of megacatastrophes during the quarter.On the other hand, Mooney expects a downswing in earnings for thefourth quarter, when the industry will take a $2.1 billion hit in losses fromHurricane Opal. He's also concerned about evidence of under-reservingfor future claims. We're not out of the woods yet.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BANKS IN INSURANCE: SIX THREATSThe Consumers' Association of Canada has voiced doubts about banksgetting into the insurance business. The association is concerned thatexpanding the power of financial institutions into insurance marketingmight lead to: (1) overconcentration in the financial services sector, (2)the cross-subsidizing of banks' insurance businesses by their otheroperations, (3) the danger of rejecting higher-risk customers, (4)inadequate insurance expertise, (5) the possibility of abuse in cross-sellingor "tied sales," and (6) potential loss of privacy rights in exchanginginformation between a bank's lending and insurance operations.A side note: The nation's "Big Six" banks earned a record $5.18 billion inannual profits this year. Royal Bank and the Canadian Imperial Bank ofCommerce led the pack, earning more than $1 billion apiece.MP Warns Against BanksLiberal MP John Nunziata thinks the feds should block any expansion bybanks into the insurance business. "I don't think there's too much supportin Ottawa for that to happen. I believe Canadians want the banks to bemore responsible and, I think, unless the banks shape up, the governmentwill intervene," said Nunziata in a recent broadcast on the BatonBroadcast System. The lawmaker also called for a governmentinvestigation of the "outrageous" service fees charged by banks.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ICBC TO EXPAND BODY SHOP NETWORKThe Insurance Corp. of British Columbia (ICBC) will launch a province-wide body shop accreditation program come spring. The "customerassured repair" (c.a.r.) shops will meet industry standards, have trainedstaff and up-to-date equipment, offer courtesy cars, provide customerwaiting areas -- and guarantee their work in writing. ICBC projectmanager Stacey Bernier says that the program, created to meetcustomers' demands for recommended repair shops, is "really trying tobuild a trust relationship" with the body-shop industry, with focus on thecustomer. Last year, ICBC shelled out $400 million for repair parts andservices, with policyholders often finding themselves caught in the middleof an adversarial relationship between the insurer and a repair shop.Kamloops has been hosting a pilot c.a.r. operation since last October,with nine of the city's 22 body shops accredited. Policyholders are notrequired to use accredited shops; unaccredited shops will still be free todo ICBC work. Said Don Beck, the Automotive Retailers Association'spoint man in developing the program, "This will lift the industry to a newlevel."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WHOSE BONO IS IT, ANYWAY?It seems that pro bono publico ("for the public good") cases in whichattorneys provide their services to the poor free of charge often wind uppro bono advocatorum ("for the lawyers' good"). More and more lawfirms are using "fee-shifting statutes" that let the winning legal eagles billtheir opponents (usually a government entity) at their customary -- oftenlucrative -- rates. The result: Taxpayers pick up the tab, which may endup in seven figures. The partners of Wilson Sonsini Goodrich and Rosatiwound up splitting $3.5 million after the firm won a case that led tomajor reforms at California's Pelican Bay State Prison. The patricianManhattan firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft sued New York Stateon behalf of an inmate who was confined to his cell for four days aftersnatching an extra piece of cake on the prison chow line. A courtawarded the inmate $200. The Cadwalader firm did a bit better, endingup with $100,000. There's nothing like doing well by doing good.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VE-MAIL: VICTORY IN COMMUNICATIONSThe same principles apply to paper memos and electronic messages alike.Because E-mail requires speed and clarity, remember these points beforeyou post your cybermessage:-- Be conversational. E-mail is much less formal than paper. Think "Post-It" rather than executive memo.-- Be swift. Make it a rule to answer your E-mail messages as soon aspossible. Shortcut abbreviations and images (called "emoticons") canspeed up the reply process -- and save your readers time.-- Be colorful. Try to develop a distinctive on-line style that will makereaders more likely to remember your messages. But remember that it'shard to convey humor in writing.-- Be stingy with CAPS. Since most E-mail systems don't allowunderlining, italics, or boldface, you'll need to use CAPITAL LETTERSfor emphasis. But use control: Capital letters are like SHOUTING.-- Be succinct. People don't like to read long texts on screen, so try tokeep your E-mail messages short: no longer than 24 lines.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVEThere's no such thing as asking too many questions when you're dealingwith a prospect. Questions offer a variety of benefits: (1) They make theprospect feel important, (2) they provide vital information, (3) they allowyou to highlight your products' strengths, (4) they encourage you andyour prospect to think, (5) they allow the prospect to talk, (6) theyprovide direction for your presentation, and (7) they create a positive"yes" momentum. Any questions?Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PAYROLL DEDUCTION: IT'S ELEMENTARYPayroll deduction for Personal Lines is on the move. Coverages includeAuto, Homeowners, Nursing Home, and other employee-paid policies.The antiquated direct billing system -- inflexible for the agent, customer,and employer -- is giving way to a method that satisfies clients, simplifiesCSRs' workflow, and offers the agency a cash flow system that nearlyeliminates cancellation and reinstatement notices. Keeping customers firstmeans offering them a convenient payment option: in plain words, payrolldeduction. A typical family insurance program that covers the home, twocars, and a boat, plus an Umbrella policy, would require a substantialpremium (with down payments and installments). Payroll deduction, withits smaller, predictable payments, simplifies budgeting.Payroll deduction lets you deliver a quality benefit at no extra cost toemployers, while strengthening relationships with your Commercial Linesclients. The Marketing & Management Group's Benefit Innovationsoperation offers a turnkey deduction program tailored for independentagencies and brokerages. It includes a complete set of marketingmaterials, communications tools, and a program manual. You may alsoenjoy a discount on Insurance Deduction Services (IDS), a powerfulmulticarrier payroll deduction and electronic funds transfer softwarepackage created by Agency Management Services (AMS). For moreinformation on this unique profit-making program, contact Jim Higgins atthe Marketing & Management Group, (508) 760-4617.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMMS WEEKLY MARKETEER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EMPLOYEE OF THE MONTH: DAVE WILTZDave's the "Answer Man" when it comes to making the most effectiveuse of your IMMS Membership -- regular or Silver. Feel free to write,fax, or call him with any and all questions from 6 a.m. to 3 p.m. (PacificTime) Monday through Friday. You can also reach Dave after hours oron weekends at his pager number, (818) SKY-8888, p.i.n. 1167471. Anative Louisianian, Dave came to IMMS from the University of SouthernCalifornia, where he was a point guard for the USC basketball team andearned a degree in communications. An avid traveler, he enjoys longdrives to the mountains with his jazz collection in the CD changer.PUBLISHED BY INSURANCE MARKETING & MANAGEMENTSERVICES, 12424 WILSHIRE BLVD., STE. 600, LOS ANGELES,CA 90025, (800) 753-4467, (310) 442-6000.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-38IA086-000615-B043-146http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122020936 text/html 34857HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:34 GMTContent-length: 34670Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in01.html Sample Issue Copyright THE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TAX REFORM COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS (814 words) FAIR VALUE OF LIABILITIES STILL A CHALLENGE (657 words) SURPLUS NOTES BACKED IN NEW REPORT (528 words) QUESTIONS TO BE RAISED (164 words) NEW YORK UNVEILS CROWD-PLEASING REFORM (464 words) TEXAS TO CURB WORKERS COMP (263 words) OCC LAYS PLANS FOR INSURANCE OVERSIGHT (329 words) HANCOCK FINED FOR CHURNING (289 words) WALL STREET WATCH GEORGIA BLUES' CONVERSION GETS GREEN LIGHT (276 words) KEMPER UPGRADE FOLLOWS MERGER (91 words) FOCUS ON FASB FASB EXTRACTS LEASES FROM HEDGING PROJECT (331 words) COMPREHENSIVE INCOME TAKES TINY STEP FORWARD (318 words) ACSEC TO EXPLORE BALANCE SHEET (135 words) CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996TAX REFORM COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETSTax simplification could have a drastic effect on corporate balancesheets, wiping out as much as $3 trillion in equity, according to taxexperts at the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants who havejust completed a major study of alternatives to the current system.        Many observers in Washington and on Wall Street believe thatCongress will undertake a major overhaul of the tax system by the turn ofthe century. But the new AICPA study indicates that the "unintendedconsequences" of some of the tax reform plans that have been put forth areso great that the proposals will collapse of their own weight.        "The level of discussion in the last two or three years (about taxreform) has gotten to be significant, but once you look at some of thisinformation you become less certain that people will want to jump intothat," said Deborah Walker, a KPMG Peat Marwick partner and chair of theAICPA's Tax Executive Committee.        "The AICPA has long been an advocate of tax simplification, butthere are many, many unanswered questions," said Barry C. Melancon, AICPApresident.        Various proposals have been made in Washington, and they differ inmany significant ways. But in general they would do away with the currentincome-based system of taxation and replace it with one based onconsumption.        Byrle M. Abbin, a retired partner and now a consultant at ArthurAndersen, warned of "dire" effects on financial statements from taxsimplification. First, there would be some gains from the elimination ofthe corporate income tax. He noted that $600 billion in deferred taxliabilities would no longer be owed while just $100 billion in deferred taxassets would be wiped out by a flat tax.        But the big crunch would become with the imposition of aconsumption tax.        "Without transition relief, deductions for depreciation of existingassets would not be allowed under the new tax, and the entire proceeds froma theoretical sale of assets at the end of the reporting year for theinitial application of the new tax law would be included in the tax base,"the AICPA said in its new study, "Flat Taxes and Consumption Taxes: A Guideto the Debate."        Assuming a 10% tax rate and given that corporations have $20trillion in tax basis, "it is possible that $2 trillion of deferred taxliabilities would be created upon the enactment of this new tax," the AICPAsaid.        Under FAS 109, this entire amount, which could be higher with ahigher tax rate, would have to be booked in the year of tax change.        "This would more than wipe out total corporate profits in any oneyear and severely reduce the amount of shareholders' equity," the AICPAwarned. "Thus financial statements would have to reflect the enormousincrease in future taxes that results from lost depreciation deductions ortaxable gain on sales due to the elimination of tax basis."        "The desire for efficiency and simplification has to be balancedwith problems of fairness," Abbin said. He acknowledged that some of theseproblems could be reduced or resolved with appropriate transition rules.But he predicted a battle royal over those rules.        "Even if you do have transition rules, first you are going to havestrong discussions involving FASB, the SEC, the accounting profession andCongress," he said. "It would be a tough, tough confrontation."        Tax simplification could present additional problems for insurers.Not the least of these would be the loss of tax advantaged status for manylife products and for policy payouts. In addition, however, insurancecompanies and other financial service providers may find themselves subjectto a special tax regime.        "Because it is difficult to identify and value services provided byfinancial institutions, no country with a consumption tax has been able totax financial services in a manner consistent with consumption taxprinciples," the AICPA said. "Exemption of financial institutions fromconsumption tax generally results in overtaxation of financial servicesprovided to businesses and undertaxation of services provided toconsumers."        In general the tax burden would increase for labor-intensivebusinesses, such as insurers, and decrease for capital-intensive ones, theAICPA said. While tax rates may be cut dramatically, tax outlays couldactually increase.        "Even though the (proposed) rates sound low, you have to rememberthat people don't pay rates, they pay taxes," Abbin said. "There'll be awhole host of companies with lower rates that will have higher taxes to paybecause major components of their business cannot be deducted."        Another area where there could be surprising consequences to taxreform is in international operations. "The exclusion of exports from grossreceipts provides large tax benefits to those firms that export," the AICPAsaid.        In addition, Abbin said that the "U.S. could become a tax haven"under some of the reform proposals. "This could bring retaliation fromforeign countries where we have operations." --Miles MaguireBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FAIR VALUE OF LIABILITIES STILL A CHALLENGEIt can be done, but it won't be easy.        That's the clear message about setting fair values of insuranceliabilities that came out of last month's conference on the subject at NewYork University.        The two key challenges are that there is no active market forinsurance liabilities and that such liabilities typically contain embeddedoptions, which are best estimated through complex valuation methodologies.        On the other hand, there is a general consensus that the currentlopsided approach to marking only one side of the balance sheet to marketis creating distortions in financial statements.        "One can conclude that the current GAAP accounting environment issubject to ambiguity and inconsistency with regard to the underlyingeconomics of transactions, can result in significant volatility of earningsand/or surplus, is losing the goals of company comparability andcomparability over time, is not capturing all the risk exposures of thecompany and so is not reflecting what has really transpired and the impactsof a company's management actions on the firm," said David N. Becker,vicepresident, chief actuarial officer and appointed actuary at LincolnNational Life Insurance Co.        He presented a paper at the conference describing a methodologycalled the "option adjusted value of distributable earnings" (OAVDE), whichcan be used to find the fair value of liabilities after determining thepresent value of future earnings under various scenarios.        "Applying finance and option pricing theory directly to liabilitiesis a powerful and useful, but it is not a completely valid analogy forinsurance enterprises," Becker said.        "While market value analysis  does provide insight as to the riskposture, it does not provide all the insight into the risk/reward postureof the value of the firm that OAVDE analysis does," he added. "This is dueto the omission from the market value analysis of significant economicvariables and their timing that affects the value of the insuranceenterprise."        A similar point was made by Christopher D. O'Brien, appointedactuary of Royal Life Insurance in Liverpool, England. "We usually considerthe 'main' liabilities under a life assurance policy as being the monetaryamounts contractually payable to policyholders in specified circumstances,"he said. "However, life assurance is a long-term contract under which thereis also a continuing obligation of the company to provide future'services.'" These include advising, administration and investment, hesaid. He also proposed a method calling for consideration of futurerevenues discounted to present value.        Dennis L. Carr, executive vice president and chief productdevelopment officer at ARM Financial Group Inc., provide a real-lifeexperience of developing fair value liabilities for an insurance company.In 1994, he said, the company had negative equity under FAS 115 and wasfacing questions from rating agencies, distributors and others.        Using a draft paper from the American Academy of Actuaries (AAA),input from the firm's outside auditors and its internal asset/liabilitymanagement models, ARM came up with a way to show fair value ofliabilities, which used a mixture of marking to market and making valueestimations. Using this approach, the $14 million in negative GAAP equityat the end of 1994 became $115 million in positive equity.        "Fair value was implemented, and the results have been reasonable,"Carr said. "Questions remain, but they are easier to answer."        Also at the conference the AAA distributed its white paper on fairvalues of liabilities. This describes two general approaches to the matter,a constructive one that focuses on valuing liabilities and a deductive onethat first sets the overall value of the firm, such as in OAVDE.        "While both methods are theoretically defensible and appealing,they can produce different answers and do not yield identical answersexcept in the simplest, most contrived hypothetical case," the paper says.        It adds that the constructive approach is "more consistent withasset valuation and reflective of valuations in the thin secondary GICmarket" while the deductive approach may be more appropriate "in the thincompany or block acquisition market."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996SURPLUS NOTES BACKED IN NEW REPORTDuff & Phelps Credit Rating Co. says in a new report that surplusnotes spreads should narrow as investors come to understand them and theirsimilarity to the debt issued by insurance holding companies.        "Understanding the similarity of 'double leverage' is important inunderstanding the risk of surplus notes compared to traditional debtinstruments," the rating agency said. "Like their mutual counterparts thathave issued surplus notes in the 144a market, many stock insurers alsorecord equity capital on their statutory balance sheets that has beenfinanced in public debt markets."        Because the market for surplus notes issued by healthy companies isrelatively young, many investors do not understand the true risk profile ofthe instruments, DCR said. "Because of this, market spreads on surplusnotes appear higher than necessary," it said.        The rating agency expects the market to grow as new risk basedcapital rules are extended to the P/C sector. It also sees greater use ofthe instrument by stock companies.        "Stock insurers who have issued surplus notes have traditionallydone so privately to their holding companies for various tax reasons,though DCR expects stock insurer issuance in the 144a market to beginshortly," the rating agency said.        In its view, surplus notes are very similar to holding company debtin terms of subordination. "In a holding company structure, the insurancecompany subsidiary's most junior obligation, common equity, is actually thefunding source for the holding company's senior debt," DCR said. "Thismakes holding company senior debt a highly subordinated obligation from theperspective of the organization as a whole."        The rating agency argues that investors should evaluate surplusnotes on a company-specific basis, "by looking at both the credit rating onthe note and the claims paying ability of the issuer." DCR considerssurplus notes in much the same way it looks at debt-financed equity capitalin a holding company structure.        "If DCR believes the positive effect on earnings, operatingleverage and RBC outweighs the future effect of debt service, the additionof debt financed equity capital can improve an insurer's claims payingability," the rating agency said, adding that the same holds true withsurplus notes issued by mutuals.        DCR acknowledges that there are some regulatory concerns that hangover the market but says they are too often misunderstood. "Regulatoryrisks can be more direct for surplus notes than for holding company debtbecause of the ... ability of the regulator to directly suspend interestand principal payments on a surplus note without putting the note intodefault," the rating agency conceded.        But it added that regulators would be mindful of the message thatsuch drastic measures would send in disrupting sales and the ability of anissuer to meet policyholder obligations. It said suspension of surplusnotes payments will occur only "in extreme circumstances."        DCR also said investors can largely disregard the NAIC's officialposition, for RBC purposes, that surplus notes are equivalent to preferredstock.  This "is not tied to the riskiness of surplus notes, but ratherreflects regulatory policy aimed at discouraging insurers from investing insurplus notes." This could lead to an unhealthy pyramiding of capital,regulators believe.--Miles MaguireBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996QUESTIONS TO BE RAISEDThese are questions the AICPA says businesses should be askingabout the impact of tax reform.         What will be the new recordkeeping and reporting requirements? Howshould computer software and information be changed? How will tax staffingrequirements change? How will tax staff be retrained?         Should businesses reconfigure their multinational operations thatare structured around current rules?         How are plans for business reorganizations affected by the changeto a replacement consumption tax?         Given that interest is unlikely to be deductible, shouldbusinesses consider greater use of equity financing? Should businessescontinue to provide health insurance to their employees?         Should partnerships and sole proprietorships considerincorporating now that they are subject to the same tax as corporations?         With all forms of savings tax favored under a consumption tax,should pension plans be altered?         Will the Internal Revenue Service administer the new tax? Will itsbudget over the transition have to be increased?         What are the additional administrative costs of transitioning intoa new consumption tax?Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NEW YORK UNVEILS CROWD-PLEASING REFORMIn an effort to open the playing field in New York, the stateDepartment of Insurance and the governor's office have offered up over 100,or two-thirds, of the 150 insurance regulations to either dissolve orpartially dismantle in the largest regulatory reform effort in thedepartment's history.        Superintendent of Insurance Ed Muhl and Gov. George Pataki issued ajoint release that was a celebration of the marketplace and thepossibilities repealing 24 regulations and reforming 77 of them could holdfor new, more and better insurance products.        The reform weighed critical remarks from the industry and tradeassociations in its process.        For example, an unnamed property/casualty insurer called formodification of the Unfair Claims Settlement Practices regulation because"significant market conduct scrutiny" of the regulation means "insurersdoing business in New York devote inordinate resources to creating paperfiles and record trails."        Thus, the standard claims form of Regulation 64 was identified bydepartment staff as a subject of potential modification.        Others were identified for reform because of the changingmarketplace, with the heavy growth of managed care being a chief element ofthat change.The rule governing minimum standards for sale of healthinsurance, for example, while still the "core of regulatory authority inthe oversight of accident and health insurance," must be modified to meetthe needs of an HMO environment, the department wrote.        Regulations deemed repealable for reasons of obsolescence or burdento insurers included those governing standard claims forms for healthinsurance, investments in revenue bonds, mortgages as authorizedinvestments, underwriting discrimination against females, audited financialstatements and mass merchandising of personal coverage.        The department estimated that the reform package will result in anannual savings to the industry of $25 million to $40 million.        "Regulation always imposes costs, both on the regulated industryand the consumer.... Regulations that do not serve the public interest willbe either discarded or revised," Muhl stated.        The reform effort was made at the mandate of Pataki to cut red tapein business in an executive order early last year. The governor alsoindicated then that new regulations would be subject to a "rigorous cost-benefit analysis."        Trade groups such as the Alliance of American Insurers are pleasedwith the outcome of the governor's order.        "We sent in quite a package of recommendations and are pleased tosay that some of them are in the areas that Pataki has slated for reform,"said John Cucci, vice president of the northeast region for the Alliance.        One, for example, that was of real concern was Regulation 68,overseeing auto no-fault insurance.        "Under the present provisions, a doctor could be treating a victimfor nine months before the insurer even knows about it. That creates roomfor fraud. We suggested a 10 day report time," Cucci said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996TEXAS TO CURB WORKERS COMPAetna, Allstate, Zurich and 14 other insurer groups must cut theirworkers comp rates or justify them to the Texas Insurance Department unlessthey want to face possible rollback hearings, the TDI said.        The TDI gave the insurers, which have a total of 74 companieswriting workers comp insurance, a Feb. 1 deadline to respond.        Many companies cut their rates in response to savings from the 1989reform law upheld by the Texas Supreme Court last February and lossesdropped dramatically, but some carriers have persisted in charging higherrates, TDI Commissioner Elton Bomer charged.        "These letters should come as no surprise to the insurancecompanies. The carriers have known for months of my concern that workers'compensation rates are too high, particularly rates for small businesses,"Bomer said. "TDI's patience has worn thin."        On average, rates are too high by 4% to 17% based on data from 271companies, according to a recent analysis prepared by TDI's actuarialconsultant.But, losses in 1994 were more than half of what they would havebeen without the reforms, the analysis showed. The state comp fund was alsoincluded in the analysis.        A Texas law that took effect in 1992 allows insurers to set theirown workers' comp rates. The law specifies, though, that rates may notexcessive, inadequate or unfairly discriminatory.        Bomer can disapprove rates that violate that standard and can finea company that consistently overcharges.        Letters were also sent to American States, General Accident, GreatAmerican, Gulf, Houston General, Indiana Lumbermens, Nationwide, OldRepublic, Reliance, Royal, Sentry, State Farm, Tokio Marine and Unitrin.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996OCC LAYS PLANS FOR INSURANCE OVERSIGHTThe Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has created a taskforce to examine how national bank insurance agency activities should besupervised and examined if the industry wins the Barnett case, in whichoral arguments are scheduled before the high court Jan. 16.        The OCC won banking industry support Jan. 4 to determine how itshould react if the Supreme Court determines that Section 92 of theNational Bank Act, which says banks can sell insurance from offices intowns of 5,000 or fewer, preempts state laws barring certain banks fromconducting such activities. "They are laying the groundwork for determiningquickly how national bank insurance activities should be supervised," saidone banker familiar with the meeting, held at OCC offices.        Among the questions asked at the session, according to one banker,is whom the agency should consult before finalizing its rules. Among thosewho should be involved, it was suggested, were state insurancecommissioners and bank and insurance trade groups        The areas to be examined include what types of licenses should berequired of national banks selling insurance from offices in small towns.        Another crucial area is whether the rules outlined by the OCC fornational bank insurance sales should be guidelines or regulations. Thedifference is that violations of guidelines is subject to wrist-slapping;violations of regulations bring down the whole panoply of fines, dismissalsand bank takeover mandated in potentially harsh federal bank enforcementstatutes. For example, violation of federal bank agency cease and desistorders can bring fines of up to $1 million a day against institutions aswell as their officers and directors.        The agency decided to proceed after a meeting with representativesof the American Bankers Association and the Bankers Roundtable. Accordingto several bankers who attended the session, those briefing the bankersincluded Konrad Alt, chief assistant to Comptroller Eugene A. Ludwig, andJulie Williams, agency chief counsel. A decision on what to do next wasexpected by Jan. 15.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996HANCOCK FINED FOR CHURNINGAnother life insurer has joined the ranks of those that have beenaccused of being tangled in a culture of improper sales practices. Thistime, it's costing $1 million.        In the shadow of the looming New York State Supreme court decisionon the settlement of New York Life's sales practices, the New YorkInsurance Department fined John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. Jan. 3for more than a decade of numerous violations ranging from the company'sadvertising practices to charges of churning.        The Boston-based company admitted to the violations, signed astipulation and has paid the fine on violations occurring between 1983 to1994. The stipulation listed violations for improper advertising, salespractices and form filing. John Hancock also agreed to mend its ways sosuch failures would not again occur. The company released a statementsaying there are now sales practice and advertising safeguards in placethat are working well.        It also said the issues "raised by New York are no longerproblems." John Hancock tried to distance itself from the unauthorizedactivities by noting they were primarily done by individual agents andemployees and "not John Hancock itself."        The stipulation will also be provided to John Hancock's board ofdirectors and the company will cooperate with the department in any furtherdisciplinary actions against current or former agents, managers andemployees involved in the violations, according to the terms of thestipulation.        New York has announced a move toward deregulation, but violationssuch as those identified at John Hancock are likely to come under closerscrutiny. The department's Reg 60 is one of the few targeted for tougheroversight by the department, which recently released a report promotingmodification or repeal of over 100 state insurance regs.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996GEORGIA BLUES' CONVERSION GETS GREEN LIGHTThe conversion plan of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia Inc. hasbeen approved by the state insurance department with only minor adjustmentsbarely a month after a public hearing in November, pushing it closer tobecoming the first member plan to restructure and setting the stage for atrip to the private placement market.        One of the pair of conditions increases the number of directorselected by the over 160,000 policyholders from two to six to increase theirvoice, the department stated. The policyholders will become stockholderswhen the conversion is completed.        The second condition prevents the name from changing to Cerulean,as proposed in the plan submitted by Blue Cross late in October.        The approval of Commissioner John Oxendine, though expected, marksone of the first approvals of a Blue Cross conversion to a for-profit. Theconversion process in other states such as California and Maryland has beenfraught with discord involving merger and acquisition terms and the use ofnonprofit funds in public charity foundations.        "This could be the first, but we'll have to wait and see," said aspokesperson for the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association.        "The climate is different in each state and in every state theentities need to look at their own climate. What works in Georgia may notwork in another place" she said.        "The next step is the private placement, and then the registrationstatement needs to be approved by the SEC," the Georgia Blues spokespersonstated.        "Under the plan every effort has been made to protect policyholderswhile paving the way for the company to stay competitive in the ever-changing health insurance market," Oxendine stated.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996KEMPER UPGRADE FOLLOWS MERGERMoody's Investors Service has upgraded the senior debt rating ofKemper Corp., to A1 from Baa2, the insurance financial strength rating ofits life subsidiaries to Aa3 from Baa1.        The rating agency took the action after Zurich Insurance Group andInvestment Partners said it completed its acquisition of Kemper. It saidthe action was based on the strength of the companies' ultimate parent,Zurich Insurance Co., which plans to sell off Kemper's troubled commercialreal holdings.        The two subsidiaries are Federal Kemper Life Assurance Co. andKemper Investors Life Insurance Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FASB EXTRACTS LEASES FROM HEDGING PROJECTThe Financial Accounting Standards Board narrowed significantly thescope of the hedging and derivatives project  Dec. 21 when it decided thatleases would not be included.        The project, in its current form, provides the option of markingderivative instruments or all financial instruments to market. While otherfinancial instruments may suffer this fate, the current method to accountfor leases will not be affected by the outcome of the project.        "One reason the Board decided not to include leases was that itwould expand the scope of the project considerably," said Jennifer Clark, aFASB staffer. "The Board decided to remain narrower and deal with theissues that most concern hedging and derivatives."        Robert Conklin, one of the three FASB staffers in charge of theproject, said in the meeting that the Board previously had decided not toinclude leases in the scope of two other FASB statements due to thedifficulty in separating the value of the monetary portion of the leasefrom the nonmonetary portion. The same reasoning applies to the hedgingproject, he said.        He also noted that the staff was concerned about the lack ofvaluation methodologies for leases, another one of the numerous complicatedissues relating to leases. So instead of including leases in thederivatives project, the staff recommended considering a new project on thecapitalization or valuation of all leases.        The Board also agreed that the interest component of a change inthe value of a derivative financial instrument, other than an option,should be recognized in earnings in the period the change occurs, and thatthe interest rate to be used would be the current market rate.        In addition, the initial premium, or the time value component,related to written or purchased options should be amortized into earningson a straight-line basis over the life of the option. Further, any gain ona purchased option should be recognized in earnings to the extent thatexpense has been recognized for the option premium paid.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996COMPREHENSIVE INCOME TAKES TINY STEP FORWARDThe Financial Accounting Standards Board debated Dec. 22 how toreport accounting adjustments, comprising prior-period adjustments andcumulative-effective adjustments, and concluded that they should bereported in the same place. Which place, however, remains unclear.        The decision represents at least another minor step forward inFASB's comprehensive income project, which began deliberations in late falland seeks to define a new location for items currently not reported in theincome statement. The board began discussing the project on Nov. 29 when ittentatively decided that all recognized items of comprehensive incomeshould be reported in one or more statements of income for financialperformance.        The Board began discussing precisely what those items are byexamining prior-period adjustments and cumulative-effect adjustments, ofwhich only the latter is currently included in net income. The matterbecomes complicated because some changes in principle are reported ascumulative effect adjustments in certain situations and prior-periodadjustments in others.        To clarify the matter, the Board requested the staff to developexamples illustrating the three different approaches for reportingaccounting adjustments, which the staff has already outlined. The first oneis the "comprehensive income approach," which would interpret comprehensiveincome strictly and exclude accounting adjustments. The second approach,referred to as "all-inclusive income," would interpret comprehensive incomebroadly, equating it with the all-inclusive income concept, and excludingaccounting adjustments. The final "compromise" approach would report bothcomprehensive income and all-inclusive income, with accounting adjustmentsdisplayed as the difference between the two.        The staff, headed up by project manager Todd Johnson, said that anyof these three approaches would be workable if they were appliedconsistently over time. The staff also said that the current status quoapproach not be adopted as an official standard, as it is not consistentwith either a strict interpretation of comprehensive income or the all-inclusive concept.        The Board members expressed concerns about the effects on otherfinancial statements.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996ACSEC TO EXPLORE BALANCE SHEETThe Accounting Standards Executive Committee, a committee of theAmerican Institute of Certified Public Accountants, is considering a newproject to determine when various types of securities transactions shouldbe recorded on the balance sheet.        Currently, these transactions can be settled in regular ways, inaccordance with normal market practice, or with delayed delivery, where thecounterparties agree on a settlement date. There are also more contingenttransactions, such as those in the mortgage market, which are referred toas "to-be-announced" trades.        The issue AcSEC will consider is whether each of these types oftransactions should be recorded on the balance sheet on the trade date oron the settlement date. Until now, there has been diversity in practice asto when these transactions are recorded, which has raised questions amongusers of the instruments.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-39IA086-000615-B044-9http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021004 text/html 83753HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:29 GMTContent-length: 83566Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in18.html Sample Issue Copyright INSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ROYAL RESTRUCTURING PAVES WAY FOR MERGER (620 words) HSBC CHANGES IMAGE IN MAJOR SHAKE-UP (348 words) CHINESE MARKET BEGINS TO OPEN (372 words) US INSURERS FAIL TO INVEST IN PEOPLE (362 words) PHILIPPINES SET FOR FOREIGN FIRMS (155 words) UNITED STATES: CHUBB TO DEVELOP INTERNET LINK (301 words) FEATURE LLOYDS AND TOUCHLINE TO TEAM UP (1215 words) A RISKY BUSINESS (436 words) DARK DAYS LOOM ON UK HORIZON (1872 words) INSURERS RUN FOR EVEN MORE COVER (1105 words) MID-OCEAN TAKES OVER BROCKBANK (247 words) A GAME OF CRITICAL MASS (2388 words) SURVEY A PICTURE OF HEALTH (2077 words) FEATURE DIRECT WRITERS MAKE THE RUNNING (974 words) CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ROYAL RESTRUCTURING PAVES WAY FOR MERGERROYAL INSURANCE, the UK composite insurer, appears to be taking a bigstep towards merging its two direct writing operations as well asbeefing up their critical mass.Royal is transferring all its personal line motor and householdbusiness done without intermediation of an agent into Royal Direct, thesmaller of its direct writing operations. This move places Royal Directon an equal footing, in terms of number of policies, with The InsuranceServices (TIS), the group's other direct operation.The latest restructuring of the Royal group's direct activities helpspave the way for an expected merger of its two direct operations nextyear.Apart from enjoying the benefits of having an enhanced critical mass, amerged operation would then be in a strong position to challengeChurchill Insurance for the number two position among the directwriters.In fact, Sun Alliance Connections, the direct writing operation ofcomposite insurer Sun Alliance, formed earlier this year, had a ready-made customer base of motor and household policyholders that exceededthose of Churchill. Sun Alliance transferred its non-intermediarybusiness into its direct writing operation which now has about 400,000motor policies and 500,00 household policies, compared with Churchill's600,000 in motor and 250,000 in household.Roy Randall, a spokesman for the Royal Insurance group, explains thatthe business being transferred into Royal Direct is "all the stuff wecome by directly, by people coming into one of our 60 branches aroundthe country or responding to one of our ads with a coupon, without theinvolvement of an agency."He adds that, once completed, it would have about 400,000 policies inforce compared with 45,000 at present, putting it on a par with TIS,which has about 430,000 policies.Since Royal Direct was founded in 1994, stockbrokers', analysts and thepress have queried why the group is running two separate direct writingoperations rather than one.Randall, while acknowledging the fact that "at a certain point in time,a decision will have to be taken," says it would not have to be in thenear future. He adds, that for the time being "we feel there is scopefor two direct brands run by Royal in the market."He supports his statement by explaining that the two direct writers areperceived as quite different animals by the market. TIS is seenprimarily as a motor insurer, while Royal Direct inherits its parent'sstrong brand image in the household insurance segment. Randall alsopoints out that the operations use different marketing techniques fromeach other.While the two operations do indeed maintain distinct personalities,although the latest move could well blur that, Randall's argument issomething of a rationalisation after the fact. Royal started TIS in1987 when direct writing was still something of a novelty. Concerned atthe potentially negative response from insurance brokers, Royal wantedto break into this market, while distancing the direct operation fromthe rest of the group.After market research at the start of 1994, however, showed thestrength, in terms of brand recognition of the name"Royal", RoyalDirect was born a few months later. Randall maintains that Royal Directhas fared better nationally than its parent had foreseen. It is nowbeing beefed up to acquire a higher profile in the market as a whole.With concern for broker opposition a thing of the past, and itsawareness of the value of the Royal brand name, the group has to resortto the argument that its two direct operations serve different marketsto justify their continued separate existence. A merger seemingly looksinevitable.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HSBC CHANGES IMAGE IN MAJOR SHAKE-UPTHE HONGKONG and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) is undertaking amajor shake-up of its insurance activities in the Asia-Pacific region.This move underlines the increasing importance to the HSBC group ofinsurance as well as the growing importance of the region's insurancemarket.The restructuring is aimed at helping the banking group's insurancebusinesses to accelerate their continuing expansion into the fastgrowing markets in that region. It is also aimed at simplifying themanagement of its insurance operations, yielding some cost savings.All, bar one, of its operating insurance companies in that region arechanging their names to reflect that they form part of the HSBC group.A new simpler corporate structure has been designed with a holdingcompany called HSBC Insurance formed under whose umbrella all HSBC'sinsurance companies operating in the Asia- Pacific region will fall.Directly below HSBC Insurance is now a 82.5 percent held non-lifeholding company named HSBS Non-Life Holdings, previously known asCarlingford Lombard, under which will be housed the group's five non-life insurance operating companies.Simon Brett, the former chief executive of Carlingford LombardHoldings, has been appointed chief executive of HSBC InsuranceHoldings. Brett noted that insurance was becoming an increasinglyimportant business for the HSBC group. He maintained that thereorganisation will have the result of ensuring that the business restson a strong base, with effective control, investment and credit risk."Within the Asia-Pacific region, our new identity and management willenable us to grow by drawing on Hong-kong's strengths and distributionnetwork. We intend to expand insurance sales both within Hong Kong,where we are an important force in the industry, and in Southeast Asia,where the bank continues to expand particularly in the retail sector,"he added.As part of the reorganisation, Kenneth Kwok is to succeed Brett aschief executive of HSBC Non-life Holdings. He will, however, alsoretain his current responsibilities as managing director of LombardGeneral Insurance, which is to be renamed HSBC Lombard Insurance.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHINESE MARKET BEGINS TO OPENCHINA revealed during a recent international insurance conference heldin the country that its insurance market will be opened to foreigncompetition through a carefully regulated and managed process.Wu Jie, vice minister of the State Commission for Restructuring theEconomic Systems, speaking at the conference, said that the industrymust develop in accordance with the reality and needs of China and thatliberalisation must take place under the principles of equality andmutual benefit.Despite having 80 international insurance companies and some 120representative offices, China's insurance market is still dominated bythe People's Insurance Company of China (PICC). PICC controls almost 90percent of the country's insurance business with 225,000 branches andagencies employing hundreds of thousands of staff nationwide.In terms of foreign competition, American International Assurance (AIA)of the US and Tokyo Marine and Fire Insurance of Japan - have beenlicensed by the People's Bank of China, the country's insuranceregulator, to conduct restricted business in the country. Bothcompanies are restricted in their activities to the Shanghaimunicipality.However, AIA received permission two months ago to underwrite policiesin Guangzhou. Since it began underwriting life policies in Shanghai twoyears ago, AIA has been able to wrest 30 percent of the city's marketfrom PICC.Yang Wenyou, director of the Foreign Financial Institutions Departmentof the People's Bank of China, disclosed at the same conference thatthe central bank would increase the number of cities open to foreigninsurance companies in the next couple of years. And by the turn of thecentury, liberalisation would affect all major coastal cities.China's insurance market remains vastly undeveloped. Since 1949,insurance - along with all other social welfare benefits - was managedwithin the domain of state-organised rural collectives and urban workunits. Insurance liberalisation began only in the mid-1980s, whenChina's economic reforms demanded considerable availability of personalinsurance products.Today, total insurance revenue nationwide amounts to only $8 billion ayear. National per capita life insurance expenditure is $1.40. Bycomparison, per capita life insurance expenditure in India is $3.50. InJapan, per capital life insurance expenditure is $3,457.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996US INSURERS FAIL TO INVEST IN PEOPLEIN CORPORATE America, investment in human resources generally rivals orexceeds capital spending. However, a recent survey has revealed thatwhile US insurance companies say people are critical to their success,they rank investment in human resources well below other businessissues.Completing a survey of 251 leading companies, the New York consultancyof Towers Perrin found that an $80,000-per-year employee can representa million dollar investment over a ten- year period.Considering the costs involved, Towers Perrin managing principalJeffrey Schmidt, urged companies to treat the hiring of employees as acapital investment, evaluating the costs against the contributions oftheir staff.Schmidt warned that while people costs are a means of investing in acompany's future, few corporations actually measure the fiscal value oftheir prospective employees, or consider how those same employees willhelp the company reach its strategic goals.In the insurance industry, he noted that executives fail to invest instaff according to their perceived importance. One hundred percent ofthe 300 senior insurance executives who were surveyed by Towers Perrinsaid improving employee performance would improve business. Eighty-sixpercent said employees are one of the most important variables in theircompany's success.However, only about one-third of those respondents listed performanceenhancement and people-related investments as key strategies."While executives believe that employees are critical to the executionof their companies' strategies, other investments to enhance corporateperformance are still taking higher priority", said Towers Perrinprincipal, Rick Berry.The Towers Perrin insurance survey questioned senior line and humanresource executives from 28 leading insurance companies, who ratedcustomer satisfaction and financial performance as the top twostrategic issues, at 86 percent and 75 percent respectively. Meanwhile,employee investment in people ranked third and fourth in importance, at39 percent and 36 percent, respectively.Berry warned that insurers may be overlooking the connection betweenemployee performance and customer satisfaction and financial success."To achieve their goals, insurance companies must have the right peoplein the right places, doing the right things, at the right cost," saidBerry.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PHILIPPINES SET FOR FOREIGN FIRMSFOLLOWING AN enlargement of the banking sector earlier this year, thePhilippines will open its insurance market to foreign companies fromnext year.Insurance Commissioner Eduardo Malinis has said that the opening of theindustry is part of the Filipino government's economic liberalisationpolicy and is an effort taken towards complying with World TradeOrganisation rules.The government amended its Foreign Investment Act a year ago to allowten new life insurance licences and ten new general insurance licencesto foreign firms. The rules for investment in the insurance industrywill be reviewed again in October 1996.No firms have yet applied for the general insurance licences, althougheight companies have indicated interest in the life insurance licences,while one other, Aetna Life Insurance, has already been granted alicence. There are currently about 100 general insurance companiesoperating in the Philippines.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNITED STATES:  CHUBB TO DEVELOP INTERNET LINKJOINING THE rush to the Internet, Chubb is working with SunMicrosystems of California and Sedgwick, the sixth-largest USbrokerage, to develop an on-line system to link insurers with riskmanagers and brokers.According to Thomas Cornwell, a vice-president and manager of Chubb'sglobal electronics and technology unit, the project is still in thepilot stage, but the three companies have agreed to work together todevelop a method of swift electronic communication that will allow themto share claims information and other data.They will start by sharing claims data via e-mail, according to SunMicrosystems, which initiated the trilateral partnership based upon itsongoing relationships with Sedgwick and New Jersey-based Chubb.Sun, a $5.9 billion computer corporation, envisages an interactive, on-line marketplace with a full range of insurance and risk managementproducts and services accessible via the Internet.The World Wide Web has become the new marketplace of choice forinsurers, and according to Stephen Lowe, principal for Tillinghast-Towers Perrin, electronic marketing and distribution systems willeventually alter operation and compensation structures throughout theindustry.Kemper and Northwestern Mutual are among the large insurers which haverecently established sites on the Web, offering information regardingratings, assets, products and services, the companies' organisationalstructures, and agent/broker information.Kemper, along with American RE, UNUM and several other insurers, hasestablished a centralised Web site, known as Insweb, which serves as anelectronic hub for multi-company services.Cornwell noted that while Chubb is expecting to put its entire companyon the network within the next year, the insurer is moving cautiouslyin terms of on-line security issues, and is currently working to devisecomputer security systems that will protect its proprietary data.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LLOYDS AND TOUCHLINE TO TEAM UPIn what is probably the first and certainly the biggest UK deal betweenan independent direct writer and a banking group, Lloyds Bank hasteamed up with Touchline Insurance Company to offer private motorinsuranceTHE TEMPERATURE in an already overheated, overcrowded and fiercelycompetitive UK private motor insurance market is set to rise stillhigher. Lloyds Bank, a major banking group that already has well inexcess of 1.2 million general insurance customers, is to enter thismarket at the start of next year.Lloyds Bank, through its insurance arm Lloyds Bank Insurance Services,has forged a strategic partnership with Touchline, in order to extendits product portfolio into the motor insurance market. The new productwill be marketed by Lloyds Bank Insurance Services under the LloydsBank Insurance Direct brand name.Touchline, owned by the giant French insurance group GAN, will do boththe underwriting and administration of the service, including premiumquotations and claims handling. Touchline is a direct writer in thehousehold market as well.This new venture is yet another example of how increasingly bankinggroups are forging new links with insurers through establishingstrategic alliances. It also underlines the trend by banking groups tooffer an ever wider range of personal insurance products to theirclients.In one important sense, this partnership breaks new ground in thedirect writing field in the UK. It looks to be easily the mostsignificant, if not the only major one, judged in terms of winningpotential customers that has been struck between two independentparties, both of which are part of unrelated financial services groups.The partners, however, do not share in each other's profits or lossesgenerated by their respective operational functions.More recently, the route chosen by other banking or building societiesis to set up joint ventures with traditional insurers to sell into thepersonal lines insurance market. Moreover, as in the cases of AbbeyNational, a banking group, which has teamed up with Commercial Unionand the Woolwich, a building society, with Legal & General, both havean equity stake in the underwriting company run by their respectiveinsurer.The framework does allow for these initially relatively small stakes inthe underwriting company to change markedly in the longer term.Both the Abbey National and the Woolwich will do all the marketing, buttheir customers will not be in direct contact with the insurer as inthe Lloyds/Touchline set up. But, apparently, the people employed byTouchline to handle incoming calls re- routed from Lloyds Bankdivisions will have been partly trained by the bank to ensure they knowabout the other services on offer.According to Sandy Dunn, managing director of Touchline, no discussionswith regard to setting up an operation along similar lines of the AbbeyNational and Commercial Union joint venture took place. Nor for thatmatter did "we look at it." Obviously, he thinks the way thepartnership with Lloyds has been structured reflects "a sensiblestrategy in a highly competitive market."Clearly Lloyds Bank Insurance Services has decided to stick with itspreferred way of doing insurance business, in that at this stage, atany rate, it does not want to get involved with the underwriting side.It uses a panel of insurers for the range of insurance products,including mortgage related products, travel insurance, but works solelywith Sun Alliance for a particularly successful contents productoffered.The set-up with Touchline is noticeably different from its arrangementwith other insurers. Both Touchline and Lloyds Bank Insurance Serviceswill be competing directly with each other when it comes to winninghousehold business.Naturally, Touchline is pleased that it was chosen by Lloyds InsuranceServices as the partner for this venture ahead of rivals. At first,Lloyds Bank ran a pilot scheme with Landmark, the US giant insurancegroup AIG's direct writing operation in the UK, for several months tooffer motor insurance to its customers. Landmark was the underwriter,but there was no full marketing campaign to Lloyds' customers. InOctober Landmark was replaced by Touchline. However the test runs willcontinue until the end of this year before the fully-fledged operationgoes live. Dunn maintains that Touchline's own customers who were wonthrough its usual direct writing communication channels will "not paymore" but "the same" for an identical policy marketed under the LloydsBank Insurance Direct brand.Understandably, no information as to how the contract between LloydsInsurance Services and Touchline has been structured with regard to theterms, such as commission paid, is being divulged.Presumably, for Touchline this deal is an attractive way of helping itsecure critical mass, estimated to be in the region of 500,000policyholders for non-niche players. It will only have been in businessfor three years by the end of this year. At present it has only 150,000policyholders, both motor and household.Based on the assumption that Touchline has done its homework properly,after paying commission to Lloyds it will still be able to acquire newcustomers profitably over the longer term. One advantage could be thatLloyds Bank customers may prove, on average, to be more loyal thanthose generally acquired through the normal channels by a directwriter.Dunn says Touchline was chosen "not on the basis of size but for thequality of our service." In a statement issued to the press, KeithGibbs, marketing director at Lloyds Bank Insurance Servicescomments:"Lloyds Bank aims to provide customers with quality productsand excellent customer service at competitive prices. I am delightedthat Lloyds Bank Insurance Services will be entering the motorinsurance market in partnership with Touchline, who share our focus onquality, customer service and competitiveness."The banking group has some 6 million customers to whom it can sellmotor insurance. In time, the marketing approach adopted as well as thelevel of intensity of the advertising campaigns should become clear. Nodoubt, the fact that GAN has the financial muscle and expertise to backTouchline was viewed favourably by the Lloyds banking group. GAN, whichis undergoing restructuring, is among the world's ten largest insurersand the third largest in Europe. In part the Lloyds/Touchlinepartnership underlines a trend that is gaining momentum. More directwriters are looking to cement links with affinity groups, such asprofessional bodies, especially with competition so strong, while aproliferation of recent entrants fight hard to achieve critical masswith leaders determined to increase market share.In some respects, the Lloyds/Touchline partnership does resemble thatof an affinity group type set up, acknowledges Dunn. The benefits ofpicking up a large number of customers through the affinity group typeroute is generally seen as attractive by direct writers.It is certainly not going to be plain sailing for Lloyds InsuranceServices to make serious headway into the motor market. It does have apotentially huge customer base to cross-sell into as well as anestablished Lloyds Bank brand name to exploit. However, if both partiesget their act together, the Lloyds Bank Insurance Direct brand couldyet become a major force in the marketplace.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996A RISKY BUSINESSThe findings of a study completed by the Insurance Services Office doesnot make pleasant reading for US property-casualty insurersTHE PROPERTY-CASUALTY insurance industry in the US appears to containgreater risks and generate less profit than non-insurance industries,according to a study recently completed by the Insurance ServicesOffice (ISO). It found that while property- casualty (PC) insurancecompanies are less profitable than other firms, they share the same orgreater risks.The ISO study measured risk as the variability in return on year- endnet worth for the 20 largest insurers and 20 largest firms in 30 non-PCinsurance groups, including life and health.According to ISO, the 1979 to 1993 median rate of return for the 20largest PC insurers was 9.6 percent, 1.6 percent less than the averageof the corresponding medians for the 20 largest firms in each of thenon-insurance groups.Risk was determined to be higher among insurers than most non-insurance groups by about three to one, based on the following threefactors: variability in rate of return; variability adjusted forindustry cycles; and an ISO composite index that measures the averageof the first two.The ISO study also found that stockholder-owned insurers earn higherreturns but face greater risks than mutuals, that commercial lines havebeen more profitable but face more risk than personal lines, and thatagency companies are generally more profitable and riskier than directwriters.PC companies also have a higher failure rate than other industries,according to ISO research, which found that while the annual failurerate for the economy as a whole averaged 0.7 percent between 1969 to1994, the property-casualty insurer's failure rate for the same periodwas 0.9. Failure rates for PC are also more variable than the generaleconomy, owing to catastrophe losses.Despite the high risk factor, the ISO pointed out that the US PCindustry has enjoyed its lowest combined ratio since 1988.According to figures just released by ISO and the National Associationof Independent Insurers (NAII), the industry's 1995 nine-month combinedratio was 105.4, with an after-tax income of $14.7 billion for the sameperiod. That sum more than triples the $4.8 billion netted during thefirst nine months of the previous year. While premium rates have notrisen, some of the improvement can be attributed to a reduction in CATlosses.Analyst Jay Cohen of Merrill Lynch noted that reduced losses,particularly in workers' compensation claims, have also contributed tothe overall improved performance.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DARK DAYS LOOM ON UK HORIZONBacon & Woodrow's analysis of the motor insurance business results ofthe leading UK players is revealing. It provides both a good insightinto what has been happening in the  motor insurance market, as well asdrawing conclusions about where it is headingTHE UK motor insurance market has been enjoying the best of times asthe findings and principle figures presented by Bacon & Woodrow show.But the market is undergoing dramatic change with dark days seeminglylooming.Indeed, this independent firm of consulting actuaries, the largest inEurope, expects that insurers' motor profits will plunge in 1996, withmany players racking up losses.In the private motor insurance sector, the direct writers continue toincrease competition. Many of the traditional insurers that do bothcommercial and private motor insurance have set up or are in the throesof setting up direct writing operations to stay competitive. Moreover,a continual trickle of new entrants, often backed by rich foreignparents, add competitive pressure.Bacon & Woodrow has produced a range of graphs, tables and some bulletpoints under key headings in a report (containing no writtencommentary) that provides a clear picture of the major aspects of themotor insurers' business results.It is their fifth annual in-depth analysis of the motor market thathighlights major trends, and arrives at important conclusions about thepossible future direction of the market. Naturally, there is a specialfocus on 1994 figures.Their study of the 1994 DTI returns for 43 leading companies and 28Lloyd's Insurance Market Syndicates, showed that profitability wasmarginally higher on the previous year's record profits. Companies thatdid well in 1994 by improving both their profitability and market shareinclude Direct Line, London & Edinburgh, Preferred, Royal, CIS, GANMinster and Churchill.What is surprising is that in 1994 the companies released a significantchunk of their reserves, that boosted their profits to yet anotherfresh peak. The benefits of the sharp reduction in reserves, the firstsince 1987 is shown by the graph that charts the reserving effect,measured as a percentage, on the bottom line (profit figure).Indeed, the natural expectation is to find confirmation that companies(no matter what type of industry or market they operate in) generallyuse their reserves for claims to smooth their profit flow, and not toaccentuate the troughs and peaks. Actually, the adjustments made by themotor insurers to reserves over the past decade largely are countercyclical to their profit or loss performance in many of those years.The Bacon & Woodrow study concluded that the companies made 16 pence ofinsurance profit (underwriting profit plus investment income) for every#1 of insurance premium in 1994.But James Rakow, an associate working in the general insurance area atBacon & Woodrow, points out that the equivalent of about 3 pence ofinsurance profit for every #1 of earned premium came from reducingreserves in 1994. In other words, more than a fifth of the market'stotal profits were generated by writing back reserves established in1993 and prior years.Rakow notes that when the insurance cycle was at a bottom in 1990 and1991, reserves were strengthened noticeably. This had the effect ofdepressing really poor results even further. Most observers think therewas a general recognition by the companies at the end of 1991 that theyhad not made nearly enough provisions, by way of example for bodilyinjury. The sceptics argue that once the results were so awful, it didnot make much difference that they were made worse by pushing throughprovisions to cushion future performance.Rakow takes the view that what happened in 1994 "is a sound naturalrelease from prior years. Their reserves are really quite strong"compared with the past, given a background of improving claimsexperience.Bacon & Woodrow has developed its own benchmark for determining theadequacy of existing reserves. "If our benchmark is correct, there willbe future releases in future years. The motor insurance industry issitting comfortably above the benchmark. Against our benchmark furtherreserves to the tune of seven pence (for every #1 earned insurancepremium) could be released over the next few years," maintains Rakow.Meanwhile, the top ten players have consistently dominated in terms ofthe market share they have had over the past decade. That is despitethe jockeying for leading places with Direct Line emerging from nowhereover this period to secure pole position in the private motor market.But in terms of net written motor insurance premiums, a few traditionalinsurers that also have large books of commercial motor business wrotemore business in 1994 than did Direct Line. The leader was Eagle Starfollowed by Norwich Union, although Direct Line is fast closing thegap.Another major underwriter of motor insurance business is a range ofsyndicates at the Lloyd's insurance market, which together have about a15 percent market share. No split between the syndicates' commercialand private motor business is available, although some estimatessuggest that more than half is for personal motor. This implies thatthe Lloyd's syndicates collective share of personal motor market isprobably a couple of percentage points more than that of Direct Line's12 percent share.Most, if not all, of the top ten have critical mass (for the standardinsurer it is about 0.5 million). They usually enjoy decent economiesof scale benefits that give the biggest insurers a big competitiveadvantage. In a market where competition is expected to remain intense,size will be important.Not surprisingly, those players that can maximise cost savings, have astrong brand and good distribution, are at a distinct competitiveadvantage. One area where insurers, with critical mass, could reapmajor benefits but do not at present is through using own large-scalerepair garages.Bacon & Woodrow estimate that if insurers use their own repair garages,annual cost savings benefits equivalent to about 11.5 percent ofpremiums could be enjoyed. But it will probably take about five yearsfor an insurer to establish a full network of own garages.Meanwhile, Direct Line and Churchill have taken the lead by opening ownrepair centres and have plans to open several more over the next fewyears. The rest of the pack have so far not announced any moves on thisfront.The idea of using own garages is borrowed from car hire firms that werethe first to go down this cost savings route. In the past, insurershave owned garages that were not, however, exclusively for their ownrepairs. This approach did not work.Rakow admits that more research needs to be done as"the premium savingsdo not necessarily take fully into account the payback on capitalinvestment." Nonetheless, the savings would still be significantlyhigher than other approaches.Benefit can also be gained from using a focused network approach byusing a small number of recommended repairers, equivalent to premiumsavings of about 4 percent, he points out.The class of the insurer, be it best of breed, average or poor, as wellas whether it uses the direct or broker route are key factors shapingthe cost profile of the insurer and determining success. This is putinto sharp perspective by an analysis showing the cost of buying onepolicy for differently categorised insurers as well as future costs,depending upon retention rates.It shows on all counts that the direct route for the best of breedenjoys a strong comparative advantage over the others with the buyingcost #45 per policy, #12 in a future year when retention is 85 percentand #21 when 55 percent. Whereas for the best of breed via the brokerroute the buying cost is #54, #40 when retention is 85 percent and #44when 55 percent.Interestingly, an average insurer using the broker route is generallymuch better-placed than an average direct writer. Similarly, this isthe case for poor insurers using brokers compared to poor directwriters. In fact, the cost of buying one policy for a poor directwriter is a high #300, nearly as much as the average premium of acomprehensive private motor policy.Rakow estimates that on average the better-rated companies retain theircustomers for between four to six years with the middle- rankedcompanies keeping them on average for between two to four years.What all of this analysis suggests is that certain insurers, especiallythose some way towards achieving critical mass and achieving decentbrand awareness, are faced with making a tricky decision as what is thebest strategy to adopt. It may even be to leave the field.As Rakow says, each company has to look at its own strategy, itsposition in the marketplace, the cost of acquiring policies and expensedynamics. Certainly, in some cases spending more money on advertisingmay prove less cost effective than providing focused incentives toretain existing customers. Rakow makes the point that niche players canhave critical mass which only amounts to a fraction of the number ofpolicies others need to have critical mass.Consolidation in the industry has not as yet happened as Bacon &Woodrow predicted. The firm still expects it to take place. Rakow notesthat one of the major reasons why this has not occurred so far, is thatthere is no squeeze on with only two out of the 43 insurers monitoredmaking a loss in 1994.Another reason is that different insurers have different strategies.Some, particularly a number of new entrants, are in the market for thelong-term, despite making heavy losses in the short-term.Rich parents, especially those foreign giants, can afford to bide theirtime while absorbing the pain in the meantime. But if the bleeding getsworse and no end is in sight, some will surely head for the exits.As the accompanying graph for the companies' average adjusted operatingratio (where 100 percent is a breakeven insurance result, takingunderwriting profits and investment income into account) shows,excellent profits were made in 1993 and 1994 and bad losses in 1990 and1991. This graph suggests that in the 1990s the swings in the cyclehave become considerably sharper.With average premium rates down noticeably since 1994, while underlyingcosts are still going up, market profitability on the underwriting sidehas deteriorated considerably.Rakow notes that underwriting profits were pretty small in 1994 withthe bulk of insurers' profits coming from their investment income.Moreover, they can no longer rely on the claims frequency continuing toimprove, he adds.Already the likes of Peter Wood, chief executive of Direct Line, aresounding off about how nearly all of their competitors will be makingunderwriting losses.Against this gloomy background, there is the prospect that companies'investment income will fall, with interest rates still heading lower. Abig dipper plunge in the insurers' profitability, with a shake-out tocome, looks to be underway.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INSURERS RUN FOR EVEN MORE COVERAfter re-evaluating their asbestos and environmental exposures, USinsurers are finding that they have to strengthen their reservessignificantly. Tess Critzer reportsTO BOLSTER its resilience to asbestos and environmental claims,Nationwide has added $1.1 billion to its reserves. The sixth- largestUS property-casualty (PC) insurer, Ohio-based Nationwide, has becomethe latest leading insurer to take stock of its asbestos andenvironmental (A&E) exposures.Earlier this year, Aetna Life and Casualty, the 12th-largest PC insurerin the US, shook up the industry by announcing an environmentalliability of $1 billion. The insurer nearly tripled its loss reservesfor pollution claims by making a pre-tax addition of $750 million,bringing its total environmental reserves to $1.2 billion.Firemen's Fund and Cigna also boosted their reserves this year, by $1.4billion and $1.2 billion respectively. According to the InsuranceInformation Institute (III), insurers have begun to take on $35 billionto $50 billion in liability.Nationwide's $1.1 billion addition brings its total reserves to $1.5billion, and generates a "perception of strength", according to EricSimpson, a spokesperson at ratings agency AM Best.Nationwide is a mutual, like most of the other companies which haveboosted reserves this year. Its reserve enhancement is expected toincrease 1995 policyholder surplus to more than $5 billion, up $0.2billion from last year's figure. Premium-to- surplus ratio is expectedto remain strong, increasing by 0.1 to about 1.5, according toNationwide.The company boosted its reserves not only to cover possible exposures,but to assert its position of market strength, and AM Best senior vicepresident, Jack Snyder, said the insurer has the financial strength tocarry off its reserve action. However, he noted that smaller insurersmight not survive their future reserve needs.AM Best has estimated that pollution costs in the US will top $132billion, or 72 percent of the industry's current capital and surplus.According to Snyder, the worst-case scenarios could see a number ofinsurers experiencing surplus depletion over the next two decades, withsome being forced into insolvency or mergers with stronger companies.Snyder noted that the US Environmental Protection Agency has identifiedmore than 36,000 hazardous waste sites in the country, most of whichwill require remediation."It is hard to overstate the potential extent of theenvironmental/asbestos liability problem for the insurance industry",said Snyder, adding, "environmental liability . . . represents thesingle largest threat to the property/casualty insurance industry'sfinancial health for the next several decades. Its financial impactcould exceed the costs of continuing natural disasters".Indeed, the sum could equal the cost of a major catastrophe every yearfor the next 30 years, according to Allan Levin, managing director ofStandard & Poor's ratings service.Ratings companies have led the way in urging accountability ofinsurance liabilities in the US pollution crisis. S&P's has conductedstudies and ratings adjustments for companies based on their pollutionexposures, noting that 39 US insurers are now carrying the greatestpercentage of those exposures.AM Best expects environmental and asbestos exposures to total about$260 billion, spread over 15 years for asbestos claims, and 25 yearsfor environmental claims. According to Snyder, these projections assumethat reserve additions will add an average of 1.8 points a year to theindustry's combined ratio.Amy Bouska, a principal and consulting actuary for Tillinghast/TowersPerrin, noted that insurers can expect four types of costs relating toenvironmental/asbestos clean-up. Those include the actual clean-upcosts, legal costs, including costs for coverage litigation against thepotentially responsible parties (PRPs, in this case referring toinsured corporations which have generated pollution), amounts paid tothird parties claiming bodily injury, property damage or other loss,and natural resource damage.The Superfund solutionThe 1980 Superfund Act, which heavily taxed polluters such as chemical,mining and forest product companies, was seen as the solution toAmerica's pollution problem. Superfund, or CERCLA, was established inresponse to the 1978 Love Canal crisis in upstate New York, whereresidential ground water was contaminated by blow-off from the HookerChemical Company.CERCLA was reauthorised with more punitive changes in 1986 as theSuperfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act, SARA, and again in 1990 byPresident Bush with no significant changes.The 1990 authorisation for Superfund expired last year, but theprogramme had enough surplus capital to operate until the end of 1995.However, Congress has vowed it will not reauthorise the act unlesssignificant changes and reforms are made, and the Clintonadministration has called for significant cuts to the programme, whichgobbled up $1.3 billion in EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)appropriations during 1995.Current reform initiatives call for a reduction in 1996 spending to$1.16 billion, based on projected costs. According to an EPAspokesperson, up to 60 of the nearly 1,300 Superfund sites might not befunded if the reduced budget is passed.The December 16 shutdown of the Federal Government, due to a budgetimpasse between Clinton and the Republican Congress, has furtherdelayed the progress of reform and reauthorisation for Superfund,although the programme does have trust funding based on industry taxes(85 percent of financing for the fund is gained from taxes on chemicalfeed stocks).According to Bouska, the ultimate Superfund reform bill is likely toinclude increased community participation, increased certainty inregard to share allocation, as well as implementation of a nationalstandard for site remediation and new guidelines for future land andwater use.Levin is sceptical that the industry will receive significantassistance from the government in meeting its future environmental andasbestos claims losses."We believe right now that Congress will notrelieve insurers, though they could surprise us", he said.Superfund ($million)Fiscal Year   Budget Authority1981              $751982             $1901983             $2101984             $4601985             $6061986             $2611987           $1,4111988           $1,1281989           $1,4101990           $1,5631991           $1,6291992           $1,6151993           $1,5891994           $1,4971995           $1,337Total         $14,975Based on industry returnAsbestos and       Actual at YE 93     Normalised at YE 93Pollution                   Net A/E    Net A/E  Adjusted  Net A/E($'000,000)        Surplus  O/S        O/S      surplus   O/SAetna/AmRe(1)       7,840   645        1,567     7,218    22%Travelers           9,326   656          826     9,211     9%AIG                15,224   386          693    15,017     5%CIGNA               6,575   743        1,134     6,311    18%Hoome                 698   189          392       561    70%Gen Re              4,761   888          945     4,723    20%(1) Aetna and American Re results combined, based on the assumptionthat historical market share is combinedSource:  Standard & Poor'sCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MID-OCEAN TAKES OVER BROCKBANKMID-OCEAN, a large Bermudan reinsurer, has acquired 51 percent of theequity of an enlarged Brockbank Group, one of the most successfulLloyd's market managing agencies that also owns Admiral, the UK directmotor insurance writer.Mid-Ocean has invested #50 million in the enlarged group to get controland provide capital support to the syndicates managed by Brockbank. Itssyndicate 253 provides much of its capital for underwriting UK privatemotor insurance, particularly business from Admiral.Brockbank controls 80 percent of the equity of rapidly- growingAdmiral, which expects to write more than 130,000 new motor insurancepolicies in 1995. Apparently, some of the new capital from Mid-Oceanwill be used to fund the expansion of Admiral's business and Mid-Oceanhas no intention of selling Admiral.The Mid-Ocean deal highlights that the changes made by Lloyd's to itsregulatory system are encouraging insurance companies to acquirecontrol of a managing agent or set up operations in the market. Mid-Ocean, however, can unscramble the Brockbank deal if Lloyd's rescueplans fail.In other recent deals, that are changing the face of Lloyd's, TerraNova, a UK-base reinsurer, has acquired the continuing business of theOctavian managing agency; Cox Insurance Holdings, a corporate investor,has bought the 75 percent of the Cox managing agency it did not own; aBermuda-domiciled insurance company, Western General has bought theholding company of Catlin, a managing agency.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996A GAME OF CRITICAL MASSChurchill Insurance, one of the fastest growing UK direct motor andhousehold insurers, launched in June 1989 is now the second largestdirect writer in the market. III spoke to David Hiddleston, executivedirector in charge of new business and sales, about Churchill'sstrategyCHURCHILL INSURANCE is determined to remain a leading player in theintensely competitive and increasingly overcrowded direct writingfield.The gap between it and the largest, Direct Line, is wide when it comesboth to number of policyholders and profitability. But there is a pack,including some newcomers such as Norwich Union Direct with ready-madecustomer bases, that will be chasing hard after Churchill's tail.Armed with #65 million of capital and employing about 1,000 people, ithas quickly become the second largest direct writer in the privatemotor sector, a position it intends to hold. It has the backing of arich parent, Winterthur, a giant Swiss-based insurance company. Lastyear Churchill made profits of about #1.5 million with gross premiumswritten of about #130 million on private motor and about #16 million onhousehold. Since start-up it has sold more than 1.5 million policies.This insurer remains committed to a strong sales and profit growthstrategy that will keep it moving forward at a healthy pace. A two-pronged sales growth approach is being pursued at present. The numberof its customers is moving up through both organic and acquisitiongrowth. The strategy is also focused on extending the range of alliedservices and products provided which, in turn, helps increase profitsas well as strengthen customer loyalty.Churchill's strategic thrust is aimed at keeping the growth momentumgoing. This has recently been underlined by what appears to be well-timed good moves on two different fronts.Firstly, the deal to buy Refuge Insurance's household insuranceportfolio, beating Direct Line, the biggest direct writer, and others,to the finishing line. For about #5 million Churchill expects to pickup about 160,000 household policyholders, almost trebling the householdcustomer base in one fell swoop.Secondly, the entry, the first by a direct writer, into the credit cardmarket. Churchill expects its card to deepen its relationship with itspolicyholders and bring marketing benefits."Our view," says Hiddleston, " is that direct writing is a game ofcritical mass. Critical mass is probably in the order of 0.5 millionpolicyholders." Churchill with 600,000 motor policyholders and nearly250,000 household policyholders, post the Refuge transaction, with thenumbers still rising, has easily passed the low water critical massmark.He points out that merely taking the word "direct" and adding it to thename of a business or describing the business as a direct writingoperation is insufficient. "Direct writing, in our view, is as much aphilosophy and culture as it is just owning an operation. You need tocreate a rapport with the customer. Customer service, including theclaims side, is fundamental." He notes that if the 0.5 million customerbase critical mass criterion is applied then it becomes evident thatfew players have achieved this. "Everyone else is struggling."He adds that apart from Direct Line, with 2.8 million, and Churchill,there is only Royal Insurance's two direct writers, which together haveabout 0.5 million policyholders. "The rest fall away." Royal is in thethroes of deciding whether or not to merge the two operations, namelyThe Insurance Service and Royal Direct, and trade under one brand name.There is also Sun Alliance, with a ready-made direct customer base ofabout 400,000 customers in motor and about 500,000 in household.Earlier this year Sun Alliance formed its own direct writing businessunder the name Sun Alliance Connections. This is non-intermediarybusiness but, for Hiddleston, is does not count as most of its businesshas not been won by a stand-alone direct writing operation.In terms of Churchill's growth plans, "getting 1 million customers iseasily achievable before the turn of the century. I suspect if you addup everyone's growth plans you probably get to about three times thesize that the direct writing market will be by 2000."Hiddleston stresses that low premiums and better service than thatprovided by competitors are of major importance to the company.Churchill describes itself as offering "competitively- priced premiums,often at considerably lower cost than its competitors, with the veryhighest levels of customer service." But he admits that he does not"believe we can catch up Direct Line when it comes to market sharesize. We need to be better than them."In what he sees is "a very overcrowded private motor insurance market anumber of people are not going to make it. You effectively have atpresent 1992 premium levels with 1996 expenses."He hopes as well as believes that "rates will move higher next year. Asrates rise, it should bring relief." He points out that marketconditions are so tough that it is difficult to predict what willhappen to rates, and that if they do go up whether someone will breakranks by holding them. "There is always someone who holds back."But whether the rate increases will be enough for hard-pressed players,particularly the marginal ones that do not have parents with deeppockets, is most questionable.Hiddleston notes, that the players, have in recent times " been througha honeymoon period with regard to their claims ratios. If we have a badwinter it would be horrific for some new groups, as they would sufferfrom sharply higher claims costs." As he says, "when the cycle changes,then the problems surface. More people will then exit from the marketbecause they either get rated out, sell their portfolios or withdraw."Moreover, when premiums begin to go up, "more people start to movearound and retention rates suffer if you are not slick." Perversely,under this type scenario, with premium rates rising, life wouldseemingly get tougher not easier for the weak.Given the competitive state of the market, getting new customersthrough advertising is proving much more expensive these days. That iseven after taking into account the fact that advertising rates are muchhigher than a few years ago. With so many more competitors all tryingdesperately to achieve critical mass or increase sales, " responseratios are not as good as they were two or three years ago. People noware ringing up many more companies. The trick is to make those peoplering us."In this game, "retention is a key, just as important as acquisition(winning a new customer through the traditional sources)." More sogiven that the cost of getting a new customer has gone up noticeably inrecent years. At least one company is at present paying well over theodds to buy new customers, he points out."Keeping a customer is critical. Our retention rates are good withconversions holding up. In fact, our retention rate went up in October.We are working hard at retaining our customers, and are good at keepingcustomers."Creating a strong brand name awareness helps enormously in attractingnew customers. The more established and bigger players with decentreputations are at a distinct advantage to new entrants, as theybenefit tremendously from personal recommendations. This lowerssignificantly their costs of getting a new policyholder, especiallycompared to the embryonic players.Churchill claims that " approximately 40 percent of new business nowcomes from personal recommendations and its retention rate is wellabove the industry average." Hiddleston maintains that Churchill isstill increasing its share of the motor market.Churchill is on the acquisition trail and, at the right price, is keento snap up the right businesses. "We would be more than happy." Oncecritical mass has been reached, with fixed costs acceptable and largelystatic, then additional sales bought at appropriate prices can prove tobe highly profitable.In time more companies are expected to come onto the market for sale,especially when the expected consolidation in the personal line sectorgathers more momentum. Hiddleston says Churchill would be keen to do asimilar deal to the one struck with Refuge. He remains tight-lippedabout what prospective deals may be in the pipeline but does admit "weare talking to all sorts of people."In the meantime, with the going really hard in the market place,Churchill continues to work hard at launching and developing productsthat it can cross-sell to customers or be used to attract newcustomers. But Hiddleston says it does not always pay off financially."We had a flurry into mortgages from which we learnt a lot."But he stresses " we have a few other things we are going to test. Wehave looked at a number of products and found some that look attractiveto us."Churchill is focusing on developing further relationships and sharecustomer bases with other groups that are not competitors. "We areworking with car distributors." Churchill has had some good success inrecent months from the move to get new business from affinity groups.It has built its own large-scale repair garage in Rotherham, and plansto open several more in the next few years. These are expected toproduce significant economic benefits for Churchill. Hiddleston notesthat there are not many direct writers that have sufficient criticalmass to set up their own repair garages.In an innovative drive to generate new business, Churchill has openedmulti-media kiosks with Camden Motors,the UK's 7th largest car retailerand a subsidiary of Barclays Bank. These kiosks provide customers witha wide range of information, including the cost of insurance beforedeciding on their car and enabling them to obtain the best deal whenbuying a car. This saves customers both time and money.What has also helped is the greater use of more sophisticatedassessment of the insurance risk profile of customers through the useof linear modelling, he notes.There are figures bandied about in the marketplace that suggest thatwhen it comes to financial performance Churchill is performing poorly.Churchill provides the public with little data about its financialperformance.Indeed, included in Direct Line's returns to the DTI is an analysisthat clearly shows that of the major insurers in 1994 Churchill had theworst private car operating ratio and worst relative operating ratio.It did show, however, that Churchill has the fourth lowest expenseratio. Hiddleston contends that "unless you look at the whole pictureyou can not make direct comparisons. We have two companies: one is amanagement company and the other an underwriting company." For peoplenot privy to the right information, he suggests that it is virtuallyimpossible for them to form a proper and complete picture as to howChurchill is really performing.Meanwhile, Winterthur (Churchill's parent) is looking to set up adirect writing operation in Switzerland and is, no doubt, drawing onChurchill's expertise. Churchill does help manage Winterthur's Danishdirect writing operation, Tell, which originally was not the case.According to Hiddleston, Tell is now " a clone of Churchill."Meanwhile, Tell, which has been in the private motor insurance businessfor about 18 months, started selling household insurance in August.But Hiddleston points out that Churchill, will probably only be used inan advisory capacity should Winterthur set up more direct operations inEurope - something that looks to be very much on the cards.The main reason why "we have adopted an advisory role" is the dangerthat "we could take our eye off the ball if we became too involved withother operations." But a replicant type Churchill can lower the Swissgiant's entry costs into new markets. As Hiddleston says "the formulais here" as well as the systems, although he is not "sure the formuladoes translate into every country."He maintains that the parent "has a very hands-off management styleprovided their planning requirements are complied with. We always haveperformed to their requirements."Interestingly enough, as to whether a move into the commercialinsurance sector is on the cards, Hiddleston maintains "we are not evenlooking at it. We are sticking to our knitting. We know we are good atpersonal products." He adds, with a twinkle in his eye,"if we findsomething that we can sell to make a bob or two we will sell it."Sales - "the nerve centre"THE SALES team is seen as "nerve centre and life blood of ourorganisation," according to sales manager Carrie Moore.There are at present about 140 people employed in the sales division,made up of 14 teams each of ten people, including one team leader. Themajority are full-time employees.Everyone works in a single large open plan office that occupies almostan entire floor of a building located in Bromley in Kent, which isrelatively easy commuting distance from central London.At present, there are only 13 teams operating, including two workingnight shifts, as November and December are traditionally the quietestmonths of the year. Busiest months are August, with new registrationsat a peak, and March, when there was the collapse of an insurancecompany some years back.Incoming calls from potential customers are automatically diverted bythe sophisticated switchboard system to the appropriate teams.At present there are just three teams that quote only on household,three teams which are multi-skilled (both household and motor),including those that handle affinity group calls, and the rest onlymotor.Moore says the objective is"to have everyone trained to handle bothhousehold and motor insurance queries by the end of March." Multi-skilled sales persons can see on their individual telephone screenswhether the enquiry is for household or motor insurance or from anaffinity group member.Staff are paid a fairly good basic salary on top with the possibilityof receiving commissions once certain sales ceilings are surpassed.Thanks to their commissions, top sales people earn considerably morethan senior management.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996A PICTURE OF HEALTHThe Singapore insurance industry is booming, with insurers profits andpremium income growing impressively. The outlook for further stronggrowth looks promising.  Foo Boon Ping reviews the industry and itsprospectsTHE LATEST Insurance Commissioner's annual report in Singapore showedthat insurers in Singapore had a splendid year in 1994 - particularlythose operating in the general insurance sector. And all the evidenceso far suggests that 1995 will be another good year for them. (TheCommissioner's annual report is normally published some eight monthsafter the current year).The Singapore insurance industry has attracted numerous foreigninsurers, with about three-quarters of all direct insurers foreign-owned, including those that operate as branches or subsidiaries ofinsurers. Firms from more than 12 countries have been attracted to thismarket, and most of the professional reinsurers registered in Singaporeare also foreign-owned.Of the 141 direct insurers, reinsurers and captive insurers operatingin Singapore, 119 are involved solely in the general insurancebusiness. Another 12 operate as composite insurers.Insurance representative offices in Singapore may not become involvedin the business of insurance. The main activities conducted by therepresentative offices are servicing of existing clients,communications and liaison work on behalf of their head offices, andmarket research. There are currently 16 insurers with representativeoffices in Singapore.During the year, in line with efforts to develop Singapore as a premierregional reinsurance centre, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)rationalised its policy on the establishment of representative officesby overseas insurance and reinsurance companies.In particular, the MAS believes that reinsurance representative officeswould be able to play a more significant role in the development ofoffshore reinsurance business in Singapore if they upgrade theiroperations to a branch or subsidiary level.Hence, the five insurance and reinsurance representative offices inSingapore were encouraged to upgrade their operations. These companies,if they wish to continue their presence in Singapore, are required toupgrade by January 1 1997, by submitting a formal application to theauthority for approval.The MAS has also required that in future all general direct insurersand reinsurers submit an annual statement attesting to the adequacy ofloss reserves.In filing the statement, the principal officer is required to examineall aspects of the company's or branch's loss reserving systems and tosatisfy himself that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, the lossreserves are adequate.Since 1990, the General Insurance Association of Singapore (GIA) hasimplemented a scheme requiring all agents contracted by its members tobe registered with the Agents' Registration Board of the Association.By January 1995, there were 890 corporate agencies and 5,263 individualagents registered with the GIA.The total number of persons involved in general insurance selling wasestimated at 7,100. However, only 12 percent were considered full-timegeneral insurance agents. Most of the individual agents registered withthe GIA are also life insurance agents.A primary objective of the GIA's registration scheme for agents is toensure that those engaged in selling general insurance have insurancequalification and competence. All prospective agents must thereforeattain the Certificate in General Insurance (CGI) or equivalentqualifications before they can be appointed by general insurers.By January 1995, about 60 percent of general insurance agents hadattained minimum insurance qualifications, up from 55 percent on theprevious year. The others were deemed to be qualified because of theirexperience.The Singapore Insurance Brokers' Association (SIBA), working with theGIA to upgrade professionalism in the general insurance industry,requires its members to meet certain minimum standards on insurancequalification.By January 1 1995, there were 66 general insurance brokers employing484 broking staff. Of this number, about 92 percent had insurancequalifications equivalent to or higher than the CGI.In addition, general insurance brokers must comply with certain minimumfinancial and solvency standards stipulated by the SIBA. On July 11994, all insurance broking companies were required to have a minimumpaid-up capital of $200,000.The minimum paid up capital will be increased progressively over thenext two years to $300,000. All insurance companies must also maintaina minimum surplus of assets over liabilities equal to 50 percent of thestipulated minimum paid-up capital.The Singapore general insurance business sector has continued toperform well as it continues to ride on the back of the fast- expandingSingapore economy, and 1994 was a good year. Overall turnover of theindustry measured in terms of gross premiums of domestic and offshoregeneral business topped S$2.6 billion ($1.8 billion), representing anincrease of 10.1 percent over 1993.This was largely due to the good performance of the domestic sector, asopposed to the offshore sector where plenty of business is conducted inother countries in the region. As a result, the share of domesticgeneral business to total general business had increased to 53.5percent.In line with the robust performance of the Singapore economy, domesticbusiness expanded strongly by 13.6 percent in 1994. Consequently,general insurance expenditure per capita rose by a healthy 11.2percent.Like the economy, the growth of the domestic insurance business sectorwas broad-based. All classes of business recorded premium increases,ranging from 6.5 percent to 20.6 percent. Motor and miscellaneousaccident business, which together accounted for 62 percent of totaldomestic insurance business, were the main engines driving growth.Motor business, the largest class written by general insurers,contributed significantly to the overall growth in domestic business.Gross premiums grew by 15.7 percent to $482 million.Insurers attributed the strong performance to premium rate increasesfor third-party insurance and covers for certain types of vehicle aswell as a general increase in car values. But premium rates for privatemotor insurance remain highly competitive.Miscellaneous business continued to enjoy good growth in 1994. This waslargely because of the buoyant construction industry, which in turn ledto an increase in the demand for construction- related insurance. Someinsurers also reported an increase in the amount of professionalindemnity insurance they write.A directive from the MAS to limit the amount of stand-alone accidentand health insurance policies that can be written by life insurers ledto a significant transfer of business from life insurers to generalinsurers.Composite insurers had to transfer the accident and health businessfrom life insurance funds to general insurance funds. The 1994estimates revealed that about half of the working population hadinsurance coverage provided by their employers, a big improvement fromless than a third in 1989.As miscellaneous business had, over the past few years, grown fasterthan the other classes, its share of total domestic gross premiums hadincreased significantly to 27.5 percent in 1994. It remained the second-largest class after motor insurance, which accounted for over one-thirdof total domestic business.On the other hand, fire business had decreased in importance, with itsshare down from 16.6 percent in 1990 to 13.5 percent in 1994. For theother classes, the shifts in their share of the total market wereinsignificant.In terms of net premiums, similar shifts in the composition of domesticbusiness were evident in recent years. Motor and miscellaneous businessare easily the two largest classes, together accounting for 68.1percent of the industry's total net premiums.In 1994 the general insurance business sector staged a dramaticrecovery. The players collectively turned in an underwriting profit of$102 million compared with a loss of $34.2 million in 1993.This was the first time that underwriting profits from domestic generalbusiness had exceeded the $100 million mark. Also, professionalreinsurers writing domestic business reported an underwriting profitafter notching up losses for many years.The impressive turnaround was largely due to the significantimprovement in overall claims experience and to a lesser extent, someimprovement in commissions and management expense ratios.Some insurers took the view that the standardisation of the commissionrate for workmen's compensation business to 10 percent contributed tothe improvement in the overall commissions ratio to 14.3 percent. Butothers said they had received higher profit commissions from theirtreaty reinsurers during the year.Apart from the significant improvement in underwriting results, netinvestment income from domestic business also increased by 22.2 percentto $93.7 million. Besides focusing on underwriting profitably, insurershad also realised the need to maximise returns on their assets withoutsacrificing prudence and safety. Consequently, the industry reported asubstantially increased operating profit of $195.7 million in 1994.In 1994, offshore business continued to grow, with premiums up 6.4percent. Unlike previous years, this growth was largely attributed tothe growth generated by both the direct insurers and captive insurers.Professional reinsurers, on the other hand, registered only marginalgrowth in 1994.The double-digit growth in offshore business achieved by professionalreinsurers during the past four years, was not sustained in 1994.Offshore business written by professional reinsurers expanded by a mere0.4 percent in 1994.As a group, reinsurers remained the major writers of offshore business,accounting for $747.7 million or 61.7 percent of offshore businesswritten.Growth arising from business brought in by newly-admitted reinsurersand rate increases in certain markets was dampened by the adoption of amore selective underwriting policy by a number of professionalreinsurers. It was also blunted by a reduction in the premiums reportedby a few reinsurers in run-off.In contrast, offshore business written by direct insurers advancedimpressively last year by 23 percent. The buoyant economic growthgenerally enjoyed by the countries in the region, and the emergence ofnew markets such as China, Myanmar and Vietnam have created muchincreased opportunities for direct insurers to expand their offshorebusiness.Offshore business written by captive insurers grew at a faster pace of15.4 percent in 1994. Growth was supported by the contribution fromnewly-admitted captive insurers and increases in coverage and premiumrates.According to sources at the Insurance Commissioner's Department, theoutlook for the general insurance industry for 1995 is generally good.General insurers are optimistic that the expansion of the domesticinsurance business sector will keep pace with the expected good growthof the economy.Indeed, the economy grew by a surprisingly robust 9.1 percent in thethird-quarter of 1995. Competition in the market place is expected toremain keen, but insurers caution that this might have a dampeningeffect on their premium growth.Likewise, growth prospects for offshore general business are good.General insurers and reinsurers continue to be upbeat about theirgrowth prospects, especially given expectations of much strongereconomic growth from a number of countries in the region.Top ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of profits for 1994Direct insurers                             Operating profit                                            (S$'000) 1  Insurance Corporation of Singapore      18,267 2  *Mitsui Marine & Fire                    8,689 3  United Overseas                          8,191 4  # NTUC Income                            8,025 5  # *American International Assurance      7,916 6  # Keppel Insurance                       6,808 7  Asia Insurance Company                   6,491 8  *Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance       6,356 9  Taisho Marine & Fire Insurance (Asia)    6,34010  *Sumitomo Marine & Fire                  6,311# Composite Insurers* Foreign InsurersSource:  Insurance CommissionTop ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of assets atDecember 1994Direct Insurers                             Total Admitted                                            assets/liabilities                                            (S$'000) 1  # NTUC Income                           208,961 2  #Insurance Corp. of Singapore           139,350 3  India International Insurance           115,852 4  Asia Insurance Company                  110,838 5  People's Insurance Company              103,715 6  *Commercial Union Assurance              88,494 7  Cosmic Insurance Corporation             85,580 8  # Keppel Insurance                       74,238 9  *Guardian Royal Ex.\Assurance            65,27610  Axa Sime Assurance                       63,210# Composite Insurers* Foreign InsurersSource:  Insurance CommissionTop ten general insurers in Singapore in terms of premiums for 1994Direct insurers                             Gross premium less                                            return premiums (S$'000) 1  # NTUC Income                           137,828 2  Insurance Corporation of Singapore      128,854 3  Cosmic Insurance Corporation             64,673 4  Asia Insurance Company                   64,167 5  People's Insurance Company               59,033 6  Taisho Marine & Fire Insurance (Asia)    55,161 7  *American Home Insurance                 54,153 8  *Commercial Union Insurance              49,236 9  India International Insurance            48,66310  # Keppel Insurance                       47,872# Composite Insurers* Foreign InsurersSource:  Insurance CommissionCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DIRECT WRITERS MAKE THE RUNNINGA report on the UK insurance industry prepared by Price Waterhouse forthe Association of British Insurers assesses thoroughly the currentshape of the industry, its achievements, strengths and challengesIN THE European Union, the UK insurance industry is the clear leadernot only taken as a whole, but also when it comes to the separate lifeand general insurance market. This was the conclusion arrived at byresearchers at Bournemouth University when they recently published areport on the international competitiveness of EU insurance industries.The claim by the researchers accurately reflects the achievements andstrengths of the UK insurance industry, maintains the Price Waterhousereport on the UK insurance industry commissioned by the Association ofBritish Insurers (ABI). The report by the management consultants looksat the UK industry's achievements and strengths as well as identifyingthe criteria for future success.The conclusion that the university researchers drew was formed afterthey judged the various EU members' respective industries using fourprincipal measures, namely: the absolute size of the industries asmeasured by premium income; the relative size of the industriesmeasured by premium income relative to GDP; the adjusted overseasbusiness share and the perceived competitiveness ranking derived fromsurvey responses. Briefly, the Price Waterhouse report outlined theindustry's major achievements as: making widely available insuranceprotection; providing competitively priced and attractive products;promoting savings across a wide social spectrum; contributing to the UKbalance of payments and providing finance for industry and government.The report described the industry's strengths as having: a long trackrecord of innovative product design and distribution; a strongregulatory framework; a competitive market with low entry barriers;technical expertise and international focus with UK insurers having thehighest overseas business share in the EU.With regard to the UK having a highly competitive market, there havealways been low entry barriers as the existence of 821 authorisedinsurance companies show (according to the DTI's 1994 report). Of thesecompanies, 573 are in general business only, 191 in life business onlyand 57 are composites, undertaking both life and general insurance.In total, at least, 600 are actively writing new business. The marketis highly fragmented with no dominant players. The largest has only a 7percent share of the domestic market. There are 150 foreign-ownedinsurers with close to nearly half from the EU.The consultants note that "unlike the building society sector, therehas been only limited rationalisation in the insurance industry. Thenumber of authorised and active insurance companies has remainedrelatively constant over the last ten years."The consultants also make the point that dramatic growth has comelargely from banks and building societies breaking their ties withinsurance companies and setting up their own operations.Bancassurers, on the other hand, have so far shown limited interest inunderwriting general insurance business even though they are importantdistributors of these products. Importantly, "this situation is likelyto change."Not surprisingly, the report concludes that the direct writers havebeen the major new form of competition in the personal motor insurancemarket over the past decade. "The direct writers have demonstrated thatthey can achieve considerable competitive advantage by adopting acompletely new approach to the market."As the accompanying graphs show the direct writers have clearly mademajor inroads into the private motor insurance market. Their share bythe end of 1994 was 25 percent, more than doubling in just four years.The evidence to date suggests that they are continuing to grow theirmarket share strongly.The direct writers have only really started targeting the householdinsurance market in recent years. Indeed, in 1994 they managed to morethan treble their market share, albeit from a very low base, to 7percent from 2 percent at the beginning of that year.The management consultants outline the reasons why the direct writershave been successful, but do not provide any new breathtaking insights.They point out that their success is because of their "ability to pricevery competitively due to their lower cost base and provide streamlinedand customer friendly telephone based services. Direct writers havemade innovative use of technologies to create centralised and efficientadministration centres, avoiding the need for costly branch networks."They add that the majority of established and traditional insurers havenow set up direct operations to complement their sales through brokersand have also centralised functions such as claims handling.What is rather interesting is that they note that after success ofdirect writing in the personal lines general insurance market manydirect writers are already turning to commercial lines generalinsurance products. The direct writers are also turning to less complexlife assurance and other savings.With regard to the overall criteria for future success of the UKindustry, the report identifies these as: improving public confidence;increasing customer orientation; working with government andregulators; harnessing new information technology developments; cuttingcosts and seizing opportunities to expand into foreign markets, notablythose in the developing economies of Asia, Eastern Europe and SouthAmerica.The consultants do venture to take a bold peek into what the future ofthe industry might look like. They think that a rationalisation of theUK market is inevitable, especially with more than 800 insurancealready licensed and new competitors still entering the market.Among the more interesting predictions is that a new breed of financial"Supermarkets" will emerge where customers will be able to get alltheir insurance needs. But they do expect, however, "that mostcustomers will prefer to shop around and the industry will be dominatedby large specialist providers, who sell more selectively to carefullydefined customer groups."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B02-40IA086-000615-B044-49http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021030 text/html 66410HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:32 GMTContent-length: 66223Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in08.html Sample Issue Copyright INSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 11, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS CARRIER WIN ON LATE NOTICE GROUNDS (347 words) SD NY DENIES CARRIERS JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF COVERAGE, LOST POLICY (957 words) NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUP COVERAGE CASE TO PROCEED IN BOTH NJ AND NY (1000 words) SECOND CIRCUIT RULES IN DISPUTE OVER NATIONAL GYPSUM COVERAGE (909 words) CA HIGH CT. RULES SURETIES NOT EXEMPT FROM PROP. 103 (756 words) CA CT. APP.: LENDER MUST BEAR LOSS FROM PHONY PREMIUM FINANCING (588 words) D AK: INSURER CANNOT RESCIND POLICY BASED ON BOUNCED CHECK (479 words) DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTY INSURER OBLIGATED FOR UNDERINSURED COVERAGE (617 words) MI CT. APP. ALLOWS DEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVE AIDE IN INSURANCE CASE (371 words) INSURER NOT LIABLE FOR FAILURE TO SETTLE MALPRACTICE SUIT (485 words) CA SUP CT.: INSURERS REQUIRED TO NOTIFY PUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION (853 words) ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLED TO LOSS OF INCOME FROM THEFT OF EVIDENCE (592 words) MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS $374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESS FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT (341 words) VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATE POLICY LIMIT APPLIES TO EACH MOLESTATION VICTIM (284 words) MO APP. CT. FINDS INSURER NOT LIABLE FOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT (307 words) MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATA BARS EX-DIRECTORS' SUIT AGAINST INSURER (424 words) CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996IL APP. CT. AFFIRMSCARRIER WIN ON LATENOTICE GROUNDS     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers thatit might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste sitecannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists InsuranceCo. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 thatit faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination ata site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sentused machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellatepanel wrote that the policyholder should have notified itscarriers at that time.     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. sent dirty solventto the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.  Inoperating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemicalburied more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials atthe site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while otherhazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.     After testing by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),the American Chemical site was designated as a Superfund site.Industrial Coatings' insurance policies provided that in theevent of an occurrence, written notice to the insurers giving theparticulars was required "as soon as practicable."  The insured,however, did not give written notice to the insurers until morethan 14 months after it had received the EPA's letter requestingvoluntary participation in the site cleanup.     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatingsgave its insurance companies late notice, that it therebybreached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurancepolicies and that the company therefore had no right to obtaincoverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted againstit.     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delayin notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay ofeven a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as amatter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry ofsummary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SD NY DENIES CARRIERSJUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OFCOVERAGE, LOST POLICY     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the SouthernDistrict of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment toLumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmentalliabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD)(SD NY).     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that NorthCarolina law should be construed so as to find that nooccurrences triggering coverage happened during their policyperiods.     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for itssubsidiary JFD Electronics Corp. a television antenna productionfacility sited in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the site and operatedthe facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979, JFD sublet thesite to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp., which alsoassumed the facility's operations.  The following year, JFDpurchased the remainder interest from Unimax and conveyed thesite to Ventura.     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in thesite's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup thefollowing year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought aComprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and LiabilityAct cost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  TheEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) notified the insureds thatthey were regarded as potentially responsible parties withrespect to the site in the fall of 1989; the policyholdersasserted they first learned of the contamination in August 1988.     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to bothLumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensivecatastrophe liability coverage over 1969-1971; the insuredsasserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primary policiescovering 1968-1972.  Liberty Mutual issued the policyholdersprimary comprehensive general liability (CGL) coverage over 1975-1979.     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summaryjudgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, anoccurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, andthat an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existedbetween the laws of the interested states.  "This case," wrotethe judge, "is centered on insurance policies -- i.e. contracts -- and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State'scontract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rulesfor contract interpretation."     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injuryresults during the policy period."  The judge further noted thatunder either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to bephysical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual'scontention that the insureds never responded to its summaryjudgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurredwithin the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motionwas that contamination was not considered under the law to beproperty damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffystated.     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motionfor summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty todefend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, findingthe insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law wereapplicable to the dispute.     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "anendorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollutionexclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement wasmisleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must beconstrued in favor of the insured."     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment againstLiberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine ofmaterial fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,Liberty Mutual had argued, and therefore its notice was untimely.     The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived itslate notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it hadinsufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discoveryhad commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgmenton the waiver issue.     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment withrespect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  Withrespect to the 1968-1971 policy (1ZL policy), the court notedthat the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZL numberthat were turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "The onlypages known to be missing are two endorsements and the policyjacket," wrote the court.  "I find it incredible that Lumbermenswould retain this file, which imposes liability, but lose thedocuments that may have relieved Lumbermens of liability."  JudgeDuffy stated that liability would be measured according to theterms of the policy as discovered in the insurer's files.     As to the 1971-1972 policy (8ZL policy), the judge foundthat the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due to areference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The court deniedthe insureds summary judgment, however, finding that materialissues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy's content.     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,New York; and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warrenand Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  RobertL. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,represents Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996NJ APP. CT.: CLEANUPCOVERAGE CASE TO PROCEEDIN BOTH NJ AND NY     After granting leave to appeal to 76 insurers who challengedthe New Jersey Superior Court's refusal to stay or dismiss anenvironmental cleanup coverage dispute, the New Jersey SuperiorCourt Appellate Division found that the trial court properlyrefused to stay or dismiss the case even though an identical caseinvolving the same parties is pending in New York state court.American Home Products et al. v. Adriatic Insurance Co. et al.,No. A-5209-94T2 (NJ Super. Ct., App. Div.).     In rejecting the insurers' argument that the trial courterred in applying a forum non conveniens analysis in its decisionto allow the case to proceed, the appellate panel held that NewJersey's interests in this case constituted sufficient specialequities to justify denying the comity-stay application.     American Home Products (AHP), a Delaware corporation, is amanufacturer and distributor of agricultural, food and healthcareproducts.  In April 1991, AHP and its subsidiaries filed actionsin Delaware state court, seeking coverage for various governmentand private actions stemming from contamination at 32 sites in 11states.  One of these sites is located in New York; there are nosites in Delaware.     The New York action was filed on June 27, 1991, by EmployersInsurance of Wausau, which sought a declaration that it is notobligated to provide coverage for contamination under its eightexcess policies.  Wausau named AHP and the remaining 76 insurersas defendants.  AHP moved for dismissal of the New York action,and 14 of the insurers moved for dismissal of the Delawareaction. The New York Supreme Court stayed AHP's motion pendingthe outcome of the dismissal motion in the Delaware court.     The Delaware court dismissed the action on forum nonconveniens grounds in November 1991.  Upon termination of thecase, the New York trial court dismissed as moot AHP's motion todismiss the New York action.     On June 1, 1992, AHP filed an action in the Superior Courtof New Jersey, seeking declaratory relief against 80 insurancecompanies.  Forty-three insurance companies are the appellants inthis appeal, which involves the same issues and the same partiesas the case pending in New York.  One month after this action wasfiled, AHP moved to dismiss the New York action on forum nonconveniens grounds.  Wausau and other insurance companies opposedAHP's motion and cross-moved, seeking an order enjoining AHP fromfiling an action in any other district but New York.     In December 1992, the New York Supreme Court dismissed theaction except as to a single New York site.  Several insurancecompanies appealed, and in December 1994, the New York SupremeCourt Appellate Division reversed the dismissal, reinstating theNew York action in its entirety.  The appellate court did notenjoin AHP from proceeding in New Jersey.     Meanwhile, AHP moved its corporate headquarters from NewYork to Madison, NJ.  Several of the insurers moved to dismiss orstay the New Jersey action on the basis of comity and the entire-controversy doctrine.  The New Jersey Superior court, however,permitted the action to proceed, finding there were "specialequities" involved.  The court then granted the insurers' motionfor leave to appeal in June 1995.     In refusing to stay or dismiss the action, the New JerseySuperior Court noted that although an action involving the sameparties and similar issues is pending in New York, this does notbar the New Jersey court's jurisdiction; however, the New Jerseyaction can be stayed until the New York action is adjudicated.     The trial court referred to the New Jersey Supreme Court'sdecision in Yancoskie v. Delaware River Port Auth., 78 N.J. 321(1978), which held that when an identical action is pending inanother state, the court "which first acquires jurisdiction hasprecedence in the absence of special equities."     In the appeal, the insurers contended that the court "made aclear error of law" when it did not stay the case pending the NewYork action.  They further maintained that the court erred inapplying a forum non conveniens analysis, which relieved AHP ofits burden to prove special equities to avoid a stay based oncomity.  Under a forum non conveniens application, the defendantmust prove that serious inconvenience would occur if the case istried in the plaintiff's chosen forum.  Under this application,it is also required of the defendant to prove that the plaintiffwill not suffer hardship if the case is transferred.     The insurers sought to have the case dismissed on comitygrounds, and that AHP needs to prove the existence of "specialequities."  However, the appellate panel noted that the forum nonconveniens factors such as convenience, fairness and connectionswith the respective forums can be examined in a comity analysisto determine whether making a stay in New Jersey would be unjustor unfair to the interests of the parties.     In affirming the trial court's holding, the panel noted that1) AHP was formerly headquartered in New Jersey, 2) 10 of thesites allegedly covered by the policies are located in NewJersey, 3) six of the defendant insurers are headquartered in NewJersey, 4) one-third of the estimated $89 million in cleanupdamages may be attributable to New Jersey sites, 5) New Jerseylaw will probably be applied to the coverage issues regarding theNew Jersey sites, and 6) the New Jersey case was "well along" anddiscovery has been proceeding for the past two years.  The panelalso found that AHP has a "legitimate presence" in New Jersey.     "We think the judge fairly and within his sound discretionconcluded that New Jersey's interests in this case constitutedsufficient special equities to justify denying the comity-stayapplication," held the panel.  "These factors would be relevantto a forum non analysis and would have justified a denial of amotion to dismiss...," the panel continued. "However, we find noabuse of discretion in also considering these factors as "specialequities" for comity-stay purposes."Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SECOND CIRCUIT RULES INDISPUTE OVER NATIONALGYPSUM COVERAGE     In a lengthy opinion issued Dec. 13, a panel of the SecondCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled on numerous issues affectingthe scope of insurance coverage available to Asbestos ClaimsManagement Corp. (ACMC), formerly known as National Gypsum Co.,for asbestos-related personal injury and property damage claims.Stonewall Insurance Co. v. Asbestos Claims Management Corp. etal., Nos. 93-7314(L) et al. (2nd Cir.);  see Insurance IndustryLR, July 23, 1992.     Some of the rulings -- those concerning trigger of coverage,the expected or intended exclusions, and coverage for settlementspaid by National Gypsum through the Center for Claims Resolution-- appear to favor ACMC.  Other rulings -- those concerning theallocation of liability for periods during which National Gypsumwas uninsured and the calculation of deductibles for propertydamage claims -- appear to favor the insurers.     Some of the panel's rulings apply only to coverage forasbestos personal injury claims.  In particular, the panel:--      ruled that the district court correctly determined thatunder applicable New York and Texas law, the occurrence-basedpolicies sold to National Gypsum could be triggered throughout agradual disease process where injury can be shown by apreponderance of the evidence to be occurring at each point inthat process;--      affirmed a jury finding against Commercial UnionInsurance Co. that injury occurred continuously from firstexposure through claim or death for all asbestos diseases;--      upheld a trial court finding applicable to other insurersthat injury occurred continuously from exposure throughmanifestation for non-cancer cases but not for cancer cases, andremanded for further consideration of the court's finding withregard to cancer claims "in view of the ambiguity in the DistrictCourt's application of the injury-in-fact approach to cancerclaims";--      upheld the district court's allocation to National Gypsumof the pro rata share of liability attributable to those periodsduring which National Gypsum was uninsured;--      affirmed a district court ruling that National Gypsum didnot expect or intend bodily injuries from its products; and--      upheld district court rulings that payments made byNational Gypsum through the Asbestos Claims Facility and theCenter for Claims Resolution in settlement of asbestos claimswere reasonable and are covered by the policies sold to NationalGypsum.     Some of the court's rulings apply only to coverage forasbestos property damage claims.  Specifically, the panel ruledthat:--      the costs of removing and replacing asbestos productsfrom buildings are properly considered "property damage" as theterm is used in the policies;--      the district court properly determined that NationalGypsum could not establish by a preponderance of the evidencethat property damage was occurring continuously or at any givenpoint following installation of National Gypsum's buildingmaterials; and--      the district court erred in holding that, for purposes of"per occurrence" deductible provisions in the policies, all theasbestos property damage claims arose out of a single occurrence-- National Gypsum's decision to manufacture and sell asbestos-containing building materials.  Instead, each installation ofNational Gypsum's products was a separate occurrence, requiringthe application of another deductible, the panel said.     The Insurance Environmental Litigation Association (IELA), atrade association of 20 major insurers, applauded the rulingsrequiring National Gypsum to assume a share of liability forperiods during which it was uninsured and requiring applicationof another deductible for each installation of National Gypsumasbestos building products.     The Second Circuit's decision "properly limits insurers'liability to the their fair share of the risk," said Thomas W.Brunner, counsel to IELA and a partner at Wiley, Rein & Fieldingin Washington, DC, in a prepared statement.     "The Court's formula enforces a policyholder's consciousbusiness decision to forgo insurance and rejects thepolicyholder's attempt to obtain a windfall of coverage for itsuninsured periods," he added.     The court ruled in an action brought by Stonewall InsuranceCo. for a declaratory judgment that it has no duty to indemnifyNational Gypsum for property damage claims arising from asbestosproducts made by the company between 1931 and 1981.  The actionalso named other National Gypsum insurers.  National Gypsum latercounterclaimed for coverage of asbestos personal injury claimsagainst it.  All of the policies at issue in the action areoccurrence-based, that is, they are triggered by personal injuryor property damage which occurs during a policy period.     Commercial Union opted for a jury trial to resolve itscoverage dispute with National Gypsum.  All of the other insurersopted for a bench trial.  After the two trials, the districtcourt entered a series of partial declaratory judgments whichdetermined coverage for asbestos personal injury claims underCommercial Union policies involved in the jury trial, determinedcoverage for asbestos bodily injury claims under insurancepolicies involved in the bench trial, and determined coverage forasbestos property damage claims.  The district court alsocertified its rulings for interlocutory appeal under 28 U.S.C.Section 1292(b).     Asbestos Claims Management Corp. assumed liability forNational Gypsum's asbestos liabilities in the company's Chapter11 bankruptcy proceedings.  It is represented in the action byThomas M. Reiter, Donald E. Seymour and Gail Kamnitz withKirkpatrick & Lockhart of Pittsburgh.     Twelve different insurance companies participated in theproceedings in the Second Circuit.  Amicus briefs were filed byMid-American Legal Foundation, Insurance Environmental LitigationAssociation, Armstrong World Industries, Inc., The Flintkote Co.,Western MacArthur Co. and Owens-Illinois, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CA HIGH CT. RULESSURETIES NOT EXEMPTFROM PROP. 103     The California high court ruled Dec. 14 that the suretyindustry is not exempt from Proposition 103, a 1990 act imposinga 20 % rate rollback on premiums, because the exemption did notfurther the purpose of the initiative.  Amwest Surety InsuranceCo. v. Wilson et al., No. SO37405 (CA Sup. Ct.).     "It is true that excluding some forms of insurance wouldallow the commissioner to focus greater resources upon theremaining forms of insurance...but this premise cannot furtherthe purposes of Proposition 103 because voters did not limit itsprovisions to a few forms of insurance of greatest concern to thepublic...," the panel held, affirming a state appeals courtdecision.     In 1988, California passed Proposition 103, or the InsuranceRate Reduction and Reform Act, which imposed a rate rollback, andrequired any subsequent rate increase be approved by the stateinsurance commissioner.  The proposition states that it may notbe amended by the state legislature "except to further itspurposes."     Two years later, the California legislature enacted Section1861.135 of the state insurance code, thereby exempting suretyinsurance from Proposition 103.     On Nov. 9, 1988 -- one week after Proposition 103 wasenacted -- Amwest Surety Insurance Co. filed a suit againstGovernor Pete Wilson and Insurance Commissioner Chuck Quackenbushin Los Angeles Superior Court, challenging the validity ofProposition 103 as applied to surety insurance.  In 1990, VoterRevolt, the organization that drafted Proposition 103, intervenedin the suit to challenge the validity of Section 1861.135,asserting that it did not further the purposes ofProposition 103.  The superior court disagreed, finding thesection valid.  Voters Revolt and the insurance commissionerappealed.     A divided California Court of Appeal panel reversed thetrial court's opinion, holding that Section 1861.135 was, infact, invalid.  The panel noted that under the stateconstitution, the legislature cannot amend an initiative statutewithout voter approval unless the statute specifies otherwise.The panel found Proposition 103 permits legislative amendmentsthat further the purposes of the initiative, but that Section1861.135 did not serve such purposes.  Amwest appealed to thestate Supreme Court.               The high court agreed with the appeals panel, holding that"exempting surety insurance from the rate rollback provision ofProposition 103 [did not] further the purposes of the initiativefor the reason that a rate reduction was unnecessary in the caseof surety insurance."     Amwest and its amicus curiae, Surety Company of the Pacific,argued that the high court is limited to Proposition 103'sexpress statement of purpose, which is to protect customers,encourage competition, and ensure that rates are fair andaffordable.  The panel disagreed, referring to California HousingFinance Agency v. Patitucci, 22 Cal.3d 171, 177, which held that"when a constitutional amendment is subject to varyinginterpretations, evidence of its purpose may be drawn from manysources."     Amwest further contended that clarification of Proposition103 is needed, because the materials about the proposition whichwas distributed to the voters did not mention surety insuranceand did not include a summary of Section 1851.  Thus, Amwestargued, the voters probably did not understand that theproposition applied to surety insurance, and that "it wouldfurther the purposes of the proposition to make it say what thevoters thought it meant."     The panel struck down the surety's argument, holding that itis "merely a collateral attack upon [the proposition] which hasbeen adopted by a majority vote of the people who must be assumedto have voted intelligently...."  The panel further noted thatthe insurance regulations set forth prior to the passage of theproposition applied to surety insurance, and that the initiative"altered the substance of those regulations, but did not purportto alter the scope."  Thus, the panel concluded, Proposition 103applied to surety insurance.     Amwest then maintained that exempting surety insurancefurthers the purposes of the proposition because the rates forsurety insurance "have long been stable and reasonable" and itwas thus unnecessary to apply the provisions to surety insurance.Once again, the panel disagreed.     "If the rates for surety insurance already were fair andreasonable, the rate rollback might, in large part, be avoided,"held the panel.  "Exempting surety insurance from this provisiondoes not further [the proposition's] purpose."     The panel added that exempting surety insurance from therequirement that the commissioner approve any rate change priorto its use likewise fails to further the provision's purpose,because the requirement is to prevent future abuses in settingrates.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CA CT. APP.: LENDERMUST BEAR LOSS FROMPHONY PREMIUM FINANCING     Losses stemming from a fraudulent insurance premiumfinancing transaction arranged by an agent which is notauthorized by the insured must be borne by the lender, not theinsurer, the California Court of Appeal, First District, ruledDec. 13, upholding a state Superior Court decision.  CaliforniaIndemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. v. Fireman's FundInsurance Co., No. A068421 (CA Ct. App.).     The panel found that because the transaction was notauthorized by the insured, the lender must bear the loss underthe California Insurance Code.     In 1992, an insurance agent used unauthorized premiumfinancing transactions in an attempt to convert funds to hispersonal use.  The agent signed the premium financing documents"on behalf" of the insureds without obtaining theirauthorization, then kept the cash proceeds of the unearnedpremium without paying the required monthly payments to thelender, California Indemnity Insurance Premium Finance Co. (CII).     When CII tried to cancel the insured's policies, issued byFireman's Fund Insurance Co., it discovered that the insureds didnot seek premium financing, and that the policies were alreadypaid in full by the insureds.  Thus, Fireman's Fund refused tocancel the policies.  Meanwhile, the agent filed a bankruptcypetition, leaving a $36,000 loss to be absorbed by either CII orFireman's Fund.     The matter was tried in Marin County, CA, Superior Court,which held that CII must bear the loss.  CII appealed.     The California Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of thetrial court, referring to Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff,which noted that Section 2309 of the California Civil Code, whichwas amended in 1973, provides that "an insured could not escapefrom a premium financing agreement, which the insurance agent hadbeen orally authorized to sign, merely because the insured didnot give that agent written authorization to cancel the policythus financed."  (Pacific Auto Insurance Co. v. Wolff, [1977] 72Cal.App.3d 537, 541.)     However, the appellate panel noted that Section 2309 doesnot allow insurance agents to make legally binding premiumfinancing arrangements which were not authorized by the insured;rather, it allows the insured to authorize another party toexecute the right to cancel.  "In light of [this], we are notimpressed by CII's argument that the implicit intention of the1973 amendment was that authorization by the insured was nolonger necessary," held the panel.     CII maintained, however, that the Doctrine of LatentEquities provides that "where an assignee purchases an assignmentfor value in good faith...the assignee takes the claim free fromequities of all others except the original obligor."     The panel refused to apply the doctrine to this case, notingthere was no valid assignment of rights to CII; thus, there is noquestion of latent equities following a valid assignment.     CII also argued that the trial court erred in its decisionbecause the agent received the funds "in a fiduciary capacity"under Section 1733 and was guilty of theft.  While the panelagreed with this conclusion, it dismissed CII's argument, holdingthat the agent received the funds from CII as proceeds from afraudulent financing arrangement, not from the insureds aspremium payments.     The panel also found CII's additional arguments to bewithout merit.     Arguing for CII were Todd F. Haines and Joshua N. Willis ofthe Law Offices of Raymond A. Greenberg, Calabasas, CA.  Arguingfor Fireman's Fund was Arthur D. Levy of Ewell & Levy, SanFrancisco, CA; and Douglas Cole Grijalva of Fireman's Fund,Novato, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996D AK: INSURER CANNOTRESCIND POLICY BASEDON BOUNCED CHECK     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 22 thatan insurer is obligated to pay an uninsured motorist claim eventhough the policyholder's premium payment check was not honoredby her bank, because the policy did not expressly provide thatcoverage would be resinded in such a situation. Davis v.Criterion Casualty Co., No. 94-36141 (9th Cir.).     Plaintiff Mary Davis' car insurance policy with CriterionCasualty Co. was canceled in Dec. 1992, when Davis failed to makea premium payment.  After purchasing a new car, Davis went toCriterion to reinstate her policy.  She paid the premium by checkon January 13, 1993, which was deposited by the insurer.     On January 28, Davis was hit by an uninsured driver.Unfortunately, on the same day of the accident, Davis' checkbounced.   Criterion mailed Davis a notice of cancellation andrefused to pay her claim.  Davis filed suit against the insurerin Alaska state court, seeking uninsured motorist coverage.Criterion removed the case to U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Alaska based on diversity of citizenship.  Bothparties moved for summary judgement.     Criterion maintained that because Davis' initial policy wasnot immediately reinstated, the second policy was not a "renewal"of the first policy, but rather a new policy.  Thus, the insurerargued that it had the right to rescind the new policy becauseDavis' check did not clear.     The district court granted Criterion summary judgment,finding no Alaska statute precluded the insurer's "common lawright of rescission," and that the Alaska Supreme Court wouldfind that the policy in this case was properly rescinded.  Davisappealed.     The Ninth Circuit panel reversed the lower court's grant ofsummary judgment.     First, the panel found that the second, disputed policyexplicitly provided that a service fee of $10 would be added tothe insured's account if her check were not honored by her bank."This language clearly signals that the penalty incurred forbouncing a check is a $10 fee, not the absence of coverage," thepanel noted.     The panel concluded that the facts of this case favor Davismore strongly than the "intermediate doctrine" outlined by JohnA. Appleman's Insurance Law and Practice, which states that if aninsurer accepts a check as payment of a premium and issues areceipt, it waives its right to rescind the policy even if thecheck is dishonored.     "Under these circumstances," the panel held, "the honoringof Davis' check was not a condition precedent to Criterion'sprovision of insurance.  Accordingly...there was coverage untilcancellation."     The panel noted that Criterion could have protected itselfby simply providing in the policy that no coverage would exist ifthe insured's check is not honored.     The panel also found that Criterion did not meet Alaska's20-day notice requirement for cancellation when it rescindedDavis' policy.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DE SUPER. CT.: NONPARTYINSURER OBLIGATED FORUNDERINSURED COVERAGE     An insurer is obligated to make underinsurance coveragepayments to a policyholder after a state Superior Courtarbitrator determined that her injuries were caused by a thirdparty, even though the insurer was not a party to thearbitration, ruled the Delaware Supreme Court, thereby reversingan opinion by the state Superior Court.  Sutch v. State FarmMutual Automobile Insurance Co., No. 183 (DE Super. Ct.).     In its Dec. 28 opinion, the court found that the insurer hadample notification of the policyholder's suit against the thirdparty and thus would have been able to defend its interests.     Deborah Sutch was injured in a three-car accident on Dec. 5,1991.  Sutch filed a negligence suit in Delaware Superior Courtagainst a third-party tortfeasor.  After arbitration, the trialcourt found in favor of Sutch for $100,000.  Sutch's carrier paidhalf of the award, which was the limit of the third-party'sliability coverage.     Sutch demanded the remaining $50,000 from her underinsuredmotorist insurer, State Farm Mutual Insurance Co.  When StateFarm refused, Sutch filed suit against the insurer in DelawareSuperior Court, contending that she was entitled to the sum underDelaware insurance law, and that the collateral estoppel bar inDelaware Superior Court Civil Rule 16.1(j) "does not entitleState Farm to relitigate the issues of liability and damages."     Sutch and State Farm then filed cross-motions for summaryjudgment.     After an arbitration hearing, the trial court grantedsummary judgment to State Farm, holding that the judgment enteredagainst Dale was not binding because State Farm was not a partyto the underlying suit.  Sutch appealed to the Delaware SupremeCourt, contending that the superior court erred in holding thatState Farm had shown prejudice resulting from Sutch's failure tocomply with the notice provisions of her policy.     The court reversed the decision of the trial court, holdingthat Rule 16.1(j) is not applicable to this case because theparties did not request a trial de novo after the arbitrationdecision became final.     The court noted that Rule 16.1(j) expressly provides thatwhen an arbitrator's award is entered as a judgment, "after thetime for requesting a trial de novo has expired, the judgmentshall have the same force and effect as a judgment of thesuperior court in a civil action except it shall not be subjectto appeal."     Regarding the issue of collateral estoppel, the court heldthat although State Farm was not a party to the arbitration, itwas notified of the decision a month before the entry of judgmentin the superior court.  "Thus, State Farm had the opportunity tointervene in the proceedings between Dale and Sutch to protectits interests, once it was notified of the demand for payment ofunderinsurance benefits," noted the court, holding that thearbitration decision was binding upon the insurer.     In addition, the court disagreed with State Farm'salternative argument that Sutch did not notify State Farm of hersuit against the third party until the arbitrator's decision wasrendered, as required by her policy.               "This court has held that the lack of notification to acarrier does not necessarily relieve the carrier of makingpayments pursuant to the policy," noted the court.  "When theinsured fails to comply with a notification provision, thecarrier has the burden of showing it was thereby prejudiced."     The court found that because State Farm had notice of thesuit, it did not show such prejudice.     Arguing for Sutch was David H. Erisman of Erisman & Curtin,Wilmington, DE.  Arguing for State Farm was Francis J. Jones Jr.and Eileen K. Anderson of Morris, James, Hitchens & Williams,Wilmington, DE.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MI CT. APP. ALLOWSDEPOSITION OF LEGISLATIVEAIDE IN INSURANCE CASE     A state Senate aide must give deposition testimonyconcerning disclosure of confidential information about aninvestigation by the state Insurance Bureau, a Michigan Court ofAppeals panel ruled Nov. 14, holding that the aide is notshielded by the Speech and Debate provision of the stateConstitution because the questions do not concern matters withinthe legislative sphere.  Michigan Education Special ServicesAssociation v. Insurance Commissioner et al., No. 171303 (MICt. App.).     The nonprofit Michigan Education Special ServicesAssociation is a third-party administrator for a teachers union'sBlue Cross/Blue Shield health plan; the union is politicallyactive, primarily on behalf of Democrats.  The association suedthe state insurance commissioner in Ingham County, MI CircuitCourt, alleging that an Insurance Bureau investigation waspolitically motivated.     Judge James R. Giddings issued a temporary restraining orderprohibiting the bureau from releasing any information about theinvestigation.  However, a Republican state senator learned ofthe investigation and issued a press release announcing that thebureau would soon investigate the association.     Senate aide John Prange was deposed but refused to disclosehow the senator's office learned of the investigation.  Prangecontended he cannot be constitutionally compelled to answerquestions regarding the content of statements the senator made tohim because they were made in the confines of the senator'soffice and not disclosed to the public. Judge Giddings disagreedwith Prange and granted the association's motion to compeldiscovery.     In an opinion by Judge Kathleen Jansen, the Michigan Courtof Appeals panel rejected Prange's argument that the informationsought is privileged under the Speech or Debate Clause of theMichigan Constitution.  The communication between Prange and thesenator in the senator's office was not within the sphere oflegitimate legislative activity because it related to anadministrative agency's actions, the panel held.     Even if the senator had been involved in introducinglegislation concerning health care coverage for teachers, thequestions asked of Prange were not an integral part oflegislative deliberations, noted the panel.     On the insurance commissioner's cross-appeal, the paneldeclined to overturn the temporary restraining order againstreleasing information about the investigation to the public.However, it found the commissioner may raise the issue on remand.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996INSURER NOT LIABLEFOR FAILURE TO SETTLEMALPRACTICE SUIT     An HMO's malpractice insurer is not liable for more than its$2 million policy limits although it refused to settle for thatlimit until jury deliberations began, a federal judge in Missouriruled Nov. 3, holding that the insurer's obligation to tender thepolicy limits at the time of negotiation was not certain enoughto make its insistence on a release from the HMO wrongful.Humana Kansas City Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company,No. 93-1248-CV-W-6 (WD MO).     In 1989, Humana Kansas City was sued in Jackson County, MO,Circuit Court for obstetrical malpractice.  It sought defense andindemnification under its $2 million professional liabilitypolicy from Continental Casualty.  Humana initially assessed thesettlement value of the case at $100,000, but the patientdemanded a settlement for the policy limits.     As the malpractice trial opened and started to go poorly forthe HMO, Humana demanded Continental tender its policy limits;later in the trial, a lawyer predicted a verdict of about$2 million and a $1.5 million settlement value.  The patient thenoffered to accept $3.25 million by a specified deadline or$4 million after the close of evidence.  Continental refused totender its policy limits unless Humana waived indemnification forany amount above $2 million; Humana agreed, allegedly only if thecase were settled, not if it went to verdict.     Before the jury returned its $13 million verdict, theparties settled for $5 million.  Humana then filed adiversity-based complaint in U.S. District Court for the WesternDistrict of Missouri alleging bad-faith refusal to settle.     Senior Judge Howard F. Sachs granted summary judgment infavor of Continental.  First, he found sufficient evidence thatthe parties had mutually agreed that Continental would tender thepolicy limits in exchange for Humana's release of anyindemnification claim, even if Humana had no other choice underthe circumstances.     Furthermore, the judge found the insurer's obligation totender the policy limits had not been established at the time ofthe negotiations because there had not yet been a verdict of atleast $2 million.  As a result, the insurer's agreement to do sofurnished adequate consideration to support Humana's release, hesaid.     Next, the judge rejected Humana's argument that a releasefrom liability for a bad-faith claim is not a proper subject forcontract and violates public policy.     Although the estimated settlement value of the case began torise from less than $2 million once the trial began,Continental's obligation to tender $2 million was not so certainthat its demand for a release was wrongful, Judge Sachs held.  Healso rejected Humana's duress claim, saying any economic exigencythat existed cannot be attributed to a wrongful act by theinsurer.     John E. Turner of Kansas City, MO, and Donald W. Vasos ofKansas City, KS, represented Humana.  James D. Griffin andM. Courtney Koger of Overland Park, KS, represented Continental.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CA SUP CT.: INSURERSREQUIRED TO NOTIFYPUC OF POLICY EXPIRATION     A divided California Supreme Court panel ruled Dec. 29 thata highway carrier insurer is liable for an accident that occurrednine years after the policy expired, because the insurer failedto provide the state public utilities commission with therequired 30 day cancellation notice after the policy'sexpiration.     The panel found, however, that an insurer is entitled toseek reimbursement from the carrier under the public utilitiescommission's regulatory scheme.     In 1989, an Amtrak train and a truck owned by TabTransportation, Inc. caused three deaths and several injuries,resulting in $6 million in legal claims against Tab for wrongfuldeath, personal injury, and property damage against Tab.  Tabsought recovery under three insurance policies.  Two of the threeinsurers contributed a total of $1.6 million to a globalsettlement.  Transamerica Insurance Co., however, did notparticipate in the settlement.     Transamerica filed an action in May 1992 for declaratoryjudgment in the San Francisco County Superior Court, assertingthat it was not liable for damages under the $500,000 one-yearliability policy it issued to Tab for the period between February1, 1980, and February 1, 1981.     The Public Utilities Commission (PUC) of California requiresthat liability policies issued to highway carriers may only becanceled after 30 days' written notice is submitted to the PUC.Transamerica did not give the PUC the required notice ofcancellation when Tab failed to renew the policy. Although Tabreplaced the Transamerica policy with a new policy issued byanother insurer, neither party notified the PUC of thecancellation of the Transamerica policy.     Transamerica asserted that if it were liable for damages, itwas entitled under PUC regulations to be reimbursed by Tab forany payments made under the policy.  Tab filed a cross-complaintcontending that it was entitled to coverage under the policybecause Transamerica had filed with the PUC expressly statingthat its policy was effective in 1980 until canceled.  The trialcourt granted Tab's motion for summary adjudication on thisbasis.     The case was tried on the remaining issue of whetherTransamerica was entitled to reimbursement by Tab.  The trialcourt ruled in favor of the insurer, referring to a PUCendorsement attached to the Transamerica policy providing for Tabto reimburse Transamerica "for any payment made as the result ofobligations arising under the endorsement."     Both parties appealed.  Transamerica challenged the trialcourt's summary adjudication in favor of Tab on the coverageissue, and Tab cross-appealed on the issue of Transamerica'sright to reimbursement.  The California Court of Appeals reversedon the coverage issue, concluding that the Transamerica policyhad, in fact, expired on Feb. 1, 1981 and that Transamerica hadno obligation to give written notice of cancellation to the PUC.Tab filed a petition for review in the California Supreme Court,which was granted.     The high court panel reversed the appeals court'sdetermination, referring to Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. AllstateIns. Co., supra, 234 Cal.App.3d, which held that a 30 day noticeof cancellation submitted to the PUC is required before a policycovering a highway carrier is terminated.     "In addition to providing an efficient means for the PUC toadminister the financial responsibility requirements imposed onhighway carriers, the policy on file with the PUC serves asassurance that the public is protected...," noted the panel."These important considerations far outweigh the slight burdenimposed by the statute on an insurer of providing the PUC with 30days' written notice of cancellation."               On the issue of whether Transamerica is entitled toreimbursement by Tab for payment of damages resulting from theaccident, the panel found that the regulatory scheme of the PUCallows highway carriers to pay damages to the public, butprevents the carriers from "reaping an undeserved windfall" byallowing the insurer to seek reimbursement from the carrier.     However, the panel noted that if the carrier is insolventand cannot reimburse the insurer, the risk of loss falls on theinsurer.The Dissenting Opinions     Judge Armand Arabian and Judge Marvin Baxter dissented withthe majority.  "I agree with the holding of the Court of Appealon the coverage issue," Judge Baxter wrote, "and would affirm thejudgment of that court.  Since the Court of Appeal determined theissue of coverage in favor of Transamerica, it did not reach oraddress the further issue of Transamerica's right toreimbursement under the terms of the standard form endorsement.I would likewise refrain."     Judge Baxter noted in a similar case that the Ninth CircuitU.S. Court of Appeals found a distinction between "non-renewal"and "expiration" of a policy, and held that notice is onlyrequired in the event of cancellation, not expiration.     Judge Arabian agreed with Judge Baxter on the issue ofreimbursement, but added that although Transamerica     "The reimbursement 'consolation' plainly and unjustlyignores the reality that resort to expired insurance coveragewill only be necessary if the insured...is insolvent.  If forthis reason an injured claimant cannot recover full damages, anindemnitee insurer obviously will fare no better," Judge Arabiancontended.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ATTORNEY NOT ENTITLEDTO LOSS OF INCOME FROMTHEFT OF EVIDENCE     A personal injury attorney is not entitled to recoverdamages resulting from loss of income after $433 worth ofevidence he was planning to use in court was stolen from hisoffice, because he could not show his practice was suspended orharmed by the theft, the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsruled Dec. 29, upholding a California federal court decision.Winters v. State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. et al., No. 93-56412(9th Cir.).     Jack Winters was representing a man who was injured whileusing an electric-powered handsaw purchased from J.C. Penney,Inc.  Winters purchased five handsaws to aid in arguing his case,and kept them in his office.  Unfortunately, they were stolenfrom the office and never recovered.  The court ruled in favor ofJ.C. Penney.     Winters submitted claims for theft of the saws and lostincome to his business insurer, State Farm Fire and Casualty Co.The insurer paid Winters $433, the cash value of the saws, butdenied his loss of income claim.     Winters filed a claim in the San Diego County Superior Courtagainst State Farm, alleging breach of contract.  State Farmremoved the action to U.S. District Court for the SouthernDistrict of California and moved for partial summary judgment.     The district court granted summary judgment to the insurer,holding that the business personal property loss provision ofWinters' policy "covers only the value of the property involved,and does not cover the insured's potential legal liability tothird parties in contract or in tort."  The court concluded thatWinters' recovery was limited to the cash value of the saws.     The lower court further determined that Winters failed todemonstrate that the theft of the saws prevented him fromcontinuing to practice law, and that Winters' claim did notconstitute recoverable "extra expenses" because the losses werenot sustained during a "period of restoration," as required bythe policy.     Winters appealed, contending that the court erred inawarding summary judgment because the value of the saws is adisputed issue of material fact.  Moreover, he argued that theterm "legally liable" is ambiguous.     The Ninth Circuit panel affirmed the district court'sdecision, finding that courts interpreting policy language nearlyidentical to the State Farm policy held that coverage is onlyprovided for the cash value of the property -- not for liabilityto third parties.     In addition, the panel found that the personal propertycoverage section of the policy requires property loss to beadjusted on the basis of actual cash value.  Furthermore, if"legally liable" were interpreted as Winters urged, the personalproperty section "would be redundant of the business liabilityportion of the policy," held the panel.     The panel also determined that under the "limit ofliability" provision, Winters is only entitled to actual cashvalue where he did not inform State Farm he had replaced the sawswithin one year of the loss.     Finally, the panel upheld the district court's holding thatany loss stemming from the theft is "speculative" because hecould not prove that he would have won the case if the saws hadnot been stolen.  Furthermore, because Winters' practice was notsuspended, he is not entitled to losses under the policy, thepanel found.     Arguing for Winters was Robert E. Adams of Winters &Associates, San Diego, CA.  Arguing for State Farm was Stephen E.Smith of Ramsay, Johnson & Klunder, Irvine, CA; and PeterAbrahams and Holly R. Paul of Horvitz & Levy, Encino, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MI APP. CT. UPHOLDS$374,319 AWARD TO BUSINESSFOR BREACH OF CONTRACT     The Michigan Court of Appeals Dec. 1 affirmed a $374,319award against an insurer that failed to honor a policyholder'sbusiness interruption claim, holding that the policyholderpresented sufficient evidence that its business losses werecaused by physical damage to its insured computer system.Synchronized Design & Development Company Inc. v. Chubb Group ofInsurance Companies, No. 164340 (MI Ct. App.).     Synchronized Design & Development Co. obtained a broadinsurance policy from Chubb Group.  The policy covered businessinterruptions caused by damage to a covered risk.  Afterlightning storms caused power surges and outages that damagedSynchronized's computer equipment, the company filed a claim fordamage to the equipment and for several thousand dollars inbusiness interruption losses.     A dispute arose over the amount of loss, and Chubbeventually rejected the proof of loss after paying out $114,294.A breach-of-contract complaint was filed in Macomb County, MI,Circuit Court. Chubb counterclaimed to void the policy on thebasis of an allegedly falsified and inflated damage claim and torecoup its $114,294.     At trial before Judge Deborah A. Servitto, the jury awardedSynchronized $291,777 and rejected Chubb's counterclaim for fraudand false swearing.  Judge Servitto denied Synchronized's motionfor sanctions.  Judgment was entered for $374,319 plus costs andpost-judgment interest.     The Michigan Court of Appeals panel affirmed in a per curiamopinion, finding that Chubb was not entitled to a directedverdict because the jury could reasonably conclude that thephysical damage to the computers caused the claimed businessloss.  Nor was there an abuse of discretion in the trial judge'sdenial of post-trial defense motions on the fraud counterclaim,the panel held.     On procedural issues, the panel rejected defense challengesto the admission of evidence from Synchronized's experts, to thejury instructions on Chubb's counterclaim and to exclusion ofevidence about the tax fraud conviction of Synchronized'smajority shareholder.     On cross-appeal, the panel upheld the denial of sanctions,holding that Judge Servitto had not clearly erred in ruling thatthe counterclaim was not frivolous.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996VA HIGH CT.: SEPARATEPOLICY LIMIT APPLIES TOEACH MOLESTATION VICTIM     A per-occurrence policy limit applies to each victimmolested by the same assailant even if the attacks were part of apattern of criminal conduct, the Virginia Supreme Court ruledDec. 13, setting the maximum exposure of an insurer at$7 million, or $1 million per purported victim, rather than atthe $1 million policy limit collectively for all the victims.S. F. (Doe) et al. v. West American Insurance Company, No. 950120(VA Sup. Ct.).     West American issued a business liability policy to theowners of Harbor View Apartments, whose resident managerallegedly molested seven children on multiple occasions.  Thepolicy provided up to $1 million coverage per occurrence.     The victims sued the Harbor View owners on a theory ofnegligent hiring, selection, retention and supervision of theresident manager, who was previously convicted of childmolestation and was on parole when hired.     West American filed a declaratory judgment complaint in Cityof Norfolk Circuit Court.  Judge John E. Clarkson ruled theinsurer is at risk for only the $1 million policy limit becausethe allegedly negligent hiring constituted only a singleoccurrence.     The state high court reversed in an opinion by Justice LeroyR. Hassell Sr.     The policy's definition of occurrence was ambiguous and thusmust be construed against West American and interpreted in a waythat grants rather than withholds coverage, the court held.  Forexample, as written, an occurrence could be deemed as theinsureds' negligent hiring, or their negligent supervision ortheir negligent retention of the resident manager, noted thecourt.     Moreover, the court held that although each victim wasmolested more than once, those attacks constituted only oneoccurrence per victim.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MO APP. CT. FINDSINSURER NOT LIABLEFOR MOLESTATION JUDGMENT     A homeowners' insurer is not liable for a molestation-related judgment because child sexual abuse is inherentlyintentional misconduct, the Missouri Court of Appeals ruledDec. 5, rejecting a victim's attempt to garnish his assailant'sinsurer.  M.A.B. et al. v. Nicely et al., Nos. WD 50462 &WD 50528 (MO Ct. App.).     The panel also ordered the victim to pay the insurer'sattorneys' fees and costs in the garnishment action and appeal.     M.A.B. claimed he was sexually abused by Kenneth Nicelywhile Nicely's homeowners' policy from Union Mutual Insurance Co.was in effect.  The policy included bodily injury coverage butexcluded damage "which is expected or intended by the insured."     M.A.B. won a $100,000 personal injury judgment againstNicely, then brought a garnishment action against Union Mutual inJackson County, MO, Circuit Court to collect.  Judge Jon R. Grayrejected Nicely's denial of the assaults but quashed M.A.B's writof garnishment.  He also denied Union Mutual's motion forindemnification of attorneys' fees and costs.     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, modifiedthe lower court's ruling in an opinion by Chief Judge Gary A.Fenner.     The panel agreed with Judge Gray that Union Mutual is notliable for the underlying judgment because of the exclusionarylanguage in the policy.  In the context of child sexual abuse, aninferred-intent standard applies, the court held, so themolestation of M.A.B. is deemed by law to have been intentionalon Nicely's part, noted the panel.  Intent to molest is the samething as the intent to harm, the panel noted.     On the insurer's cross-appeal, the panel said M.A.B. isrequired to pay Union Mutual's fees and costs for defense of thegarnishment action.  In an unsuccessful garnishment action orappeal, court rules require taxing the garnishor for thegarnishee's expenses, said the panel.Back to Headline List CopyrightINSURANCE INDUSTRY LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MO CT. APP.: RES JUDICATABARS EX-DIRECTORS'SUIT AGAINST INSURER     Res judicata bars former officers and directors of acorporation from suing the company's insurance broker for failingto obtain adequate coverage for securities fraud claims, theMissouri Court of Appeals ruled Nov. 28, finding a prior Kansasdecision blocking the ex-directors' suit on statute oflimitations precludes relitigation in Missouri.  Bendis et al. v.Alexander and Alexander Inc., No. WD 50698 (MO Ct. App.).               The four plaintiffs were officers and directors ofComprehensive Health Care Systems Inc., a Kansas corporation.Alexander and Alexander, a Maryland corporation authorized to dobusiness in Kansas and Missouri, procured insurance forComprehensive, including an officers and directors policy.Coverage was obtained from Federal Insurance Co. and HartfordAccident & Indemnity Co.     In 1986, Comprehensive merged with TBG Inc.  TBG later fileda federal court complaint accusing the ex-directors ofmisrepresenting Comprehensive's financial status and violatingsecurities laws.  When Federal and Hartford refused to defend orindemnify, the ex-directors sued them in the District of Kansas;the insurers won on summary judgment.     The ex-directors sued Alexander and Alexander in theDistrict of Kansas for failure to perform a risk evaluation forComprehensive and for failure to obtain insurance to defend andindemnify them against the underlying securities and common lawclaims in the TBG case.  Alexander and Alexander won summaryjudgment based on the Kansas statute of limitations.     The ex-directors then filed a petition against the broker inJackson County, MO, Circuit Court, with the same allegations astheir unsuccessful Kansas federal complaint.  Judge Jon R. Graygranted summary judgment in favor of Alexander and Alexander.     The Missouri Court of Appeals, Western District, affirmed inan opinion by Judge Laura Denvir Stith, finding the suit barredby res judicata.  There was an identity of parties, underlyingfacts, causes of action and issues in the Kansas federal andMissouri state litigation, held the panel.     A potential difference over whether the Kansas or Missourilimitations period applies does not preclude res judicata, foundthe panel, because the statute of limitations is an affirmativedefense and has no effect on subject matter jurisdiction.  Inaddition, adopting the ex-directors' position would allowplaintiffs to forum-shop for a state with a longer limitationsperiod, defeating the purpose of the res judicata doctrine.     The court denied the broker's request for damages for afrivolous appeal.     David W. White, Alan V. Johnson and William F. Logan ofOverland Park, KS, represented the ex-directors.  Eric T. Swansonand Theresa Shean Hall of Kansas City appeared for the insurancebroker.Back to Headline List WT03-B02-41IA086-000615-B044-75http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021116 text/html 32693HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:33 GMTContent-length: 32506Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in03.html Sample Issue Copyright THE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NAIC: 'RE-ENGINEERING' NEW BUZZWORD (618 words) FLA. BILL TO EXPAND POLLUTION LIABILITY (633 words) MISSOURI LOSES GRIP ON STOP-LOSS (469 words) DEFINITION OF TERMS (236 words) CONN. AGENTS PUSH LANGUAGE COVERING BANKS (479 words) NEW YORK SNAGS TWO AUTO INSURERS (267 words) STATE SURVEY NORTHEAST ZONE: MAJOR REFORM SLATED FOR N.Y. WORKERS COMP (268 words) MIDWEST ZONE: KANSAS HMO BILL HEADED TO LEGISLATURE (331 words) WEST ZONE: TEXAS BRINGS VIATICALS TO REGULATORY TABLE (292 words) TAX REFORM TAX SIMPLIFICATION COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETS (814 words) CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NAIC: 'RE-ENGINEERING' NEW BUZZWORDThe NAIC era of heavy growth and large regulatory nets is over,marked by the resignation of David Simmons, the NAIC executive vicepresident, and the embracing of "regulatory re-engineering," as theassociation's new strategy.        The upcoming annual commissioners retreat beginning Jan.19 willcarry regulatory efficiency forward under the guidance  of Brian Atchinson,the NAIC's new president, Kansas Commissioner Kathleen Sebelius and IowaCommissioner Terri Vaughan, according to Atchinson.        Happy to leave regulation to the regulators, Simmons is working onarranging to take a position as a lawyer in private practice.        Simmons remarked that during his tenure, the NAIC experienced a lotof growth while improving the quality of service to its membership.        The rate of growth will now abate considerably, he said, which itperhaps should. "I think its time to slow the rate of growth," he said.        Whether or not that is adopted as an official strategy, those whoare championing regulatory re-engineering appear determined to pruneexcessive regulations.        The project picks up where last year's regulatory efficiency effortleft off, according to the regulators involved.        Atchinson pointed to the comments and suggestions made by theindustry on how to improve and streamline insurance supervision during theDecember meeting of the Regulatory Efficiency Special Committee as aguideline in configuring the re-engineering effort.        Sebelius serves as chair of the newly-formed Regulatory Re-engineering Special Committee, Vaughan as vice-chair. They were appointedby the officers in December.        "We're going to put our energy into that," Atchinson said. He saidinsurance deregulation, the focus of a recent New York study, is but oneissue involved.        Others issues to be considered or resolved by the NAIC according tothe minutes from the Regulatory Efficiency meeting in San Antonio includethe coordinated market conduct examinations due to the expense of marketconduct examinations and their redundancy, simplification of agentlicensing standardization requirements for admission and licensing.        "Re-engineering needs to be done because we have limited resourcesbut global market. The demand of a global marketplace truly presentschallenges," he said.        It will be done "in a manner that doesn't compromise consumers," headded.        While noting the new direction of the NAIC, Simmons' denied hisdecision to leave was in any way related to the new leadership  andbudgetary priorities that could leave favored activities such as theproducer database and system for electronic rate and form filing (SERFF)out on a limb. Instead, he just became fatigued with NAIC work, he said.         In fact,he said he told Utah Commissioner Robert Wilcox that evenif Wilcox was elected NAIC president, he would leave. Wilcox later withdrewhis challenge of Atchinson for the chief regulatory position (See IR Nov. 6);.        Simmons gave notice fellow regulators about a week ago that he willleave the association March 15. He first vocalized his intentions to themembership during the NAIC Winter meeting in early December during a closedmeeting of the Executive Committee.        "I don't consider myself a regulator," Simmons told IR. "I'mbasically a lawyer." Simmons had been general counsel for the NAIC inKansas City before rising to the executive position four years ago.        "The position wears you out," Simmons said, noting that he wasthinking of leaving last year but decided to stayed on a while longerbecause he could serve as an "institutional memory" for many of the newregulators.        "Now they are seasoned and I feel freer to leave," he said.        Meanwhile, the NAIC's general counsel in Washington, Kevin T.Cronin, will assume the position of acting executive vice president whilethe NAIC conducts a national search for someone to replace Simmons. Croninhas already become the point-man on several issues that require informationsensitive to the NAIC.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FLA. BILL TO EXPAND POLLUTION LIABILITYThe Florida House of Represent-atives is preparing a draft for apollution liability bill that would force insurers to rewrite policylanguage  to expand their exposure and possibly reduce premiums.        The bill targets insurance industry language describing liabilityparameters for pollution claims and is being drafted by the House InsuranceCommittee under the watch of its chairman, Rep. John F. Cosgrove, D-Miami.It is intended to  bind insurers to statements made to regulators in 1970.        Proponents of the bill at the Tallahassee law firm of Greenberg,Traurig, Hoffman, Lipoff Rosen & Quentel submitted a white paper to theHouse through their involvement in the Coalition to Preserve EnvironmentalInsurance Coverage that details a proposed amendment enforceable throughthe state insurance department.        The paper argues that the 1993 state Supreme Court case, DimmittChevrolet v. Southeastern Fidelity Insurance Corp., 17 Fla. Law W. S 579,on rehearing, undermined the state's pollution abatement efforts andshouldn't be allowed to influence the outcome of litigation over aninsurance claim.        The final Dimmitt decision upheld insurers' denial of gradualpollution claims and ruled that the language of the pollution exclusion wasunambiguous and didn't cover events that were "unexpected and unintended,"only those that were "abrupt or instantaneous."         The problem is that insurers had vouched to regulators that theywould still cover events that were unexpected and unintended, i.e., gradualunintentional pollution, in seeking to exclude intentional pollution actsin 1970, according to arguments and amicus briefs cited in the white paper.        In 1970, the insurance industry had made representations to theinsurance department that although liability would exclude intentional actsof pollution, it would still cover events that were "unexpected andunintended," according to a Dimmitt amicus brief filed by the attorneygeneral's office.        The phrase was supposedly a clarification of "an abrupt andinstantaneous event," which is a covered claim.         However, the court ruled that statements made to state regulatorsby insurers couldn't be considered by the state courts because the languageof the exclusion itself was unambiguous.        Therefore, Fred Baggett, a partner at Greenberg, Traurig is urgingCosgrove's office to include in its bill:         That liability insurers, upon receipt of a claim for coverage forenvironmental damages, construe the policies under which the claim wasbrought in accordance with the statements they have made to stateregulators in 1970 regarding the language of those policies.         A right of action in the event an insured is damaged by itsinsurer's failure to comply with this requirement.         Make violations of this requirement an act that may be prosecutedby the insurance commissioner.         The rules would not apply retroactively to closed claims andwouldn't require an insurer to take into account oral statements madeoutside the regulatory record; only written statements on the record wouldserve as the basis for coverage.        "If Dimmitt is allowed to stand, it will mean that there was amassive reduction in coverage provided to insurers in 1970 with noreduction in premiums for over two decades, the white paper asserts.        Furthermore, the author suggests that Hurricane Andrew's aftermathdrew sympathy from the courts towards the policies of insurance companies.        The possibility "that such considerations did have an influencerequires increased scrutiny and immediate action by the legislature," thewhite paper.        While the draft of the bill by Cosgrove and the insurance committeeis underway, it probably won't be ready for a few weeks. The Floridalegislature's session begins in early March.        The proposed amendment to 18 Fla. Law W. S 400  shouldn't cause anyfinancial burden on insurers in Florida, Baggett argues in his paper.        Since insurers haven't "been issuing policies with the 'sudden andaccidental' exclusion since the mid-1980s, the amendment directly addresseslargely historical policies, not current policies, and will have no effecton current underwriting," it concludes.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996MISSOURI LOSES GRIP ON STOP-LOSSMissouri became the first state to lose its stop-loss jurisdictionaltogether after a recent court decision, potentially setting a damagingprecedent to other states seeking to amend their stop-loss statutes toapproach the NAIC model act.        In a decision that marked a victory for employers and some insurersto keep the NAIC out of the self-funded health care market, a Cole Countycircuit court judge ruled that the Missouri insurance department has nostatutory authority to regulate stop-loss coverage issued to employers onbehalf of self-funded, noninsurer health plans.        The department was seeking to implement terms of the model law onstop-loss adopted by the NAIC in September when it was sued by a lifeinsurance company and three state business associations in November.        In Associated Industries of Missouri, The Missouri Chamber ofCommerce, General American Life Insurance Co. and St. Louis Area BusinessHealth Coalition v. the Missouri Department of Insurance and Jay Angoff,Director, No. CV195-1326CC, the court said the proposed regulation isdirectly pre-empted by Erisa.        The plaintiffs had only sought to enjoin the amendments to therule, not the rule itself, and the department has been talking with themsince the decision to clarify that point as a basis for future legalaction, according to a department spokesperson.        Other departments such as Maryland's have sought to adjust theirstop-loss provisions and are responding to lawsuits over theirimplementation of the NAIC model act,and if not, according to the positionof the Self-Insurance Institute of America, soon will. (See IR, Nov. 20).        The Missouri rule, set to take effect on the first of the year,would have established when stop-loss coverage would be deemed a medicalexpense, established that the purpose of stop-loss coverage is to covercatastrophic losses and specified which insurance laws are applicable tostop-loss coverage.        The NAIC set a $20,000 attachment point for employee group healthclaims, under which they are considered health insurance. But stop losscoverage is issued to an employer or self-funded health plan to pay forcatastrophic losses over and above the expected claims for the plan, so isnot under the rubric of employee-benefiting group health insurance,according to the judicial opinion.        Missouri's rule would have raised the attachment point to $10,000from $7,500 as a compromise. Now, no attachment point exists, meaning grouphealth insurance plans could have a lower limit as low as $1 theoretically,according to a department spokesperson.        But adding stop-loss group health insurance to the definition ofgroup health insurance, Angoff is "illegally usurping authority over stop-loss coverages under the guise of regulating group health insurance,"according to the opinion.        The department will appeal, saying the decision due to go intoeffect Jan. 27, will affect hundreds and hundreds of thousands of peopleand threaten the viability of group health market.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996DEFINITION OF TERMSNAIC President Brian Atchinson came up with the loaded buzzword"regulatory re-engineering," but now it will be up to the other NAICmembers to define it  and put it into effect.        In business, re-engineering typically has referred to redesigning acompany's working structure from the ground up, rather than an effort topeel costs and staff off the core, although a reduction in costs is oftenthe result. However, the "increasingly limited resources" of the NAIC, asone regulator put it, will probably result in some old-fashioned down-sizing. According to Terri Vaughan, vice chair of the regulatoryreengineering committee. Atchinson and Kathleen Sebelius, the committee'schair, re-engineering includes:         Streamlining and consistency: Consistency in reporting forms isone element of re-engineering. Variations in forms such as annual statementand continuing education forms will be examined for creating moreconsistency among them.        However, total uniformity is not the goal, just eliminating thoseareas that are a result of failure to better coordinate.         Deregulation: There is a proposed charge to look at thefeasibility of deregulating some commercial lines of insurance."Deregulation is perhaps an exercise that each of the states will evaluaedepending upon where they are," Sebelius noted.         Reassigning limited resources: There will be a push to focus onthe big picture and draw back from nit-picky activities, Sebeliussuggested.        For example, pulling employees away from rote file approvals andrefocusing them on market conduct records.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CONN. AGENTS PUSH LANGUAGE COVERING BANKSInsurance agents in Connecticut are proposing regulatory languageaddressing bank sale of annuities in a 15-16 page working draft soon to becirculating among state insurance and banking department officials.        "The goal is not to inhibit the banks but instead have them realizetheir unique position among financial institutions," according to anindustry representative working on a draft for the department.        Meanwhile, the banks are waiting and remain in the dark aboutdevelopments in the working draft, according to a banking lawyer, who hasnot yet seen an internal insurance department working draft, whose nextstop is said to be the state banking department.        "There is no draft," an insurance department spokesperson said.        New regulatory language is necessary to guide the way for nationalbanks in Connecticut to sell annuities. Banks have been able to apply forlicenses since a partial settlement was reached with Shawmut National Banklast fall, but no bank has yet applied because institutions are waiting tosee the regulatory language, the department's director of licensing hassaid before.        That's not entirely true, suggested Rob Taylor of the Hartford lawfirm Day, Berry & Howard.        Some banks are delaying as they await the outcome of the Shawmutand Barnett Bank decisions as well as the completion of the Shawmut/FleetNational Bank merger, he said. But if banks would apply, perhaps thedepartment would feel pressured to promulgate the regulatory language soon.The department has said that it would deliver a decision on a bank'slicense within two to three weeks of receiving an application.        Taylor helped represent Shawmut when the insurance department suedit for attempting to sell insurance from one of its local branches.        "Our position is to make sure that the bank people are properlytrained," said Warren C. Ruppar, the executive vice president of theIndependent Insurance Agents of Connecticut.        Other provisions the agents have been trying to work into the draftinclude consumer protection language that would prevent banks fromaccessing a bank customer's personal financial records and minimizing thepotential for coercion. "For instance, if you are applying for a loan, theissue of separation is very, very important," he said.         The access to personal financial records worries the industrybecause it is worried about a level playing field, Ruppar noted. Forinstance, if you are applying for a loan, the issue of separation is very,very important.        He isn't sure which of the various suggestions to level that field,which include exclusion of records or equal access to them, will make itinto the final regulatory language.        "We're in the midst of a regulatory discussion on whether it shouldbe a straight and full prohibition of access or various other ways," hesaid.        Also, the assurance that there is full disclosure and a signedcustomer acknowledgement that the insurance products aren't FDIC-insuredshould be necessary, according to the agents.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NEW YORK SNAGS TWO AUTO INSURERSA Pennsylvania insurer got slapped with $142,590 fine from the NewYork Insurance Department for myriad claims violations in connection withits automobile insurance policies, while a New York company received a$105,520 fine for similar violations.        Worldwide Underwriters Insurance Co. of Frazier violated the lawwhen it failed to send to insureds initial and follow-up no-faultapplications and verification forms in a timely manner, the departmentcharged.        The department's charges are based on a market conductinvestigation of Worldwide that revealed that violations occurred betweenMay 1991 and April 1992.        Country-Wide Insurance Co.'s slighter smaller fine reflects aslighter smaller list of offenses uncovered in a market conduct examconducted between June 1993 and May 1994. Country-Wide, of New York City,for example, didn't get cited for failing to report losses to the NationalInsurance Crime Bureau within specified time limits, as was Worldwide.        Among the other charges included in the stipulation signed byWorldwide include failure to resolve claims within specified time framesand provide insureds with notices explaining delays in claims.        The company also failed to follow guidelines for the inspection anddocumentation of damaged vehicles and failed to make timely good faithoffers to policyholders.        The company also committed calculation errors. It failed toappropriately calculate overdue no-fault benefits and reimburse claimantsfor lost wages up to their policy limits. It also failed to use the correctfigures in calculating the value of lost or stolen vehicles.        Worldwide must review all no-fault and total loss payments madebetween July 1994, and December 1995. Country-Wide must conduct similarreviews and also perform quarterly self-audits.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NORTHEAST ZONE: MAJOR REFORM SLATED FOR N.Y. WORKERS COMPThe governor of New York has announced he is directing stateregulators to introduce a sweeping reform plan for workers compensationduring the 1996 legislative session.        In his state-of-the state address Jan. 3, Gov. George E. Patakichallenged the existing workers comp laws by stating that "they do notfairly serve either workers or employers."        "In recent years, costs skyrocketed, and the injured workerreceived no better service or medical care," Pataki stated.        Pataki was riding the theme of creating more jobs and greateropportunity and diminishing "pointless" regulation in his speech, acontinuing theme for his administration whose early momentum brought abouta recently concluded plan for regulatory reform in the state insurancedepartment.        There appears to be a lot of force behind the push to reform in NewYork.        The industry has been working closely with the business communityto make sure that workers comp reform and other problems that plague.theindustry are dealt with, said a representative for the American InsuranceAssociation's Northeast region. "Other attempts at change were Band-Aids;more serious surgery is required," she said.        Pataki has charged Labor Commissioner John Sweeney and WorkersCompensation Board Chairman Robert Snashall as well as his director ofregulatory reform, Bob King, with submitting a reform plan to him within 90days. The governor will be proposing a bill to both the state Assembly andSenate.        The New York Workers Comp Action Network of Syracuse, whichorganized two years ago to produce reform, will also be introducing a bill.        Last year, managed care was introduced into workers comp and ratesdecreased by 5%, according to Pataki.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996MIDWEST ZONE: KANSAS HMO BILL HEADED TO LEGISLATUREKathleen Sebelius, the Kansas insurance commissioner, is callingfor a major update of the consumer protection elements of the state'smanaged care market months after she defined insurance to create moreclarity in the marketplace.        And she's looking to her neighbor in Missouri HMO law for help.        The state legislature opened its chambers for the 1996 season lastweek and Sebelius was there with her legislative agenda, which includesnotice of a bill draft on the Kansas HMO act.        The act has not been significantly amended since it was firstapproved by the legislature in 1974, Sebelius has pointed out. Sebeliusissued a bulletin in late November outlining the parameters of "insurance"for managed care regulatory purposes, a step both Ohio and Florida havealso undertaken. (See IR, Dec. 11).        The draft bill will include provisions found in the current NAICmodel act, except in the areas of solvency and deposit requirements andgrievance procedures, where the bill will follow the provisions in theMissouri HMO law.        Additional disclosure requirements of the financial agreementsbetween providers and managed care organizations are also on the agenda.        The solvency standards in Missouri are done on a sliding scalebased on revenues detailed in the company's marketing plan and has run over$1 million in capital, according to a spokesperson for the Missouridepartment. To enter the state, a group health plan's capital thresholdmust be $150,000.        HMOs in Missouri must have an internal grievance procedure for thefirst wave of complaints, the spokesperson noted, referencing the 1983state law and its further provisions.        Sebelius also hopes to follow the route Missouri took for enrolleeparticipation in the business operations of the HMO and for payment foremergency room care.        Enrollees in Missouri receive the annual statement of their HMO'sfinancial condition, full descriptions of organizational changes, where andhow to obtain services and a detailed description of the complaint process.All these requirements are fleshed out through market conduct procedures,the spokesperson said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996WEST ZONE: TEXAS BRINGS VIATICALS TO REGULATORY TABLEThe Texas Department of Insurance is closer to joining almost adozen other states that have implemented viatical settlement protectionrules with a hearing Commissioner Elton Bomer held Jan. 9.        The proposed rules to protect terminally ill Texans who sell theirlife insurance policies for immediate cash were described as "bare bones"reporting standards by a department spokesperson.        The reporting would have the viatical company reveal suchinformation as the location, size and key employees of a viatical company.The department would also seek enough information to ascertain whethercustomers were being treated fairly, according to the spokesperson.        Misleading advertisements and marketing schemes would be ruled as aviolation of departmental regulations, as would dishonoring the privacy ofthe applicants. All advertising material, forms and marketing plans must beapproved by the department, under the proposed rules.        Insurance companies no longer could hold the policy for longer thanthey should when they find out it is to be used for a viatical settlement,as some have, the spokesperson said.        The viatical policies must also reveal the tax consequences ofsettling to the applicant, as well as other consequences,such as loss ofwelfare or Medicare benefits. The company must also notify applicants of a15-day right of rescission in their decision to sell their policies underthe proposed rules.        However, no capital requirements of viaticals will be necessary inTexas.        Companies will need a certificate of registration to do businesswithout which they will be in violation of regulations and be subject torevocation of their certificate. The department may deny certificate ofregistration.        Bomer is reviewing the testimony of the 16 parties who testified atthe hearing will make a decision on the final rules in the near future, thespokesperson said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INSURANCE REGULATOR via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996TAX SIMPLIFICATION COULD BLAST BALANCE SHEETSTax simplification could have a drastic effect on corporate balancesheets, wiping out as much as $3 trillion in equity, according to taxexperts at the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants who havejust completed a major study of alternatives to the current system.        Many observers in Washington and on Wall Street believe thatCongress will undertake a major overhaul of the tax system by the turn ofthe century. But the new AICPA study indicates that the "unintendedconsequences" of some of the tax reform plans that have been put forth areso great that the proposals will collapse of their own weight.        "The level of discussion in the last two or three years (about taxreform) has gotten to be significant, but once you look at some of thisinformation you become less certain that people will want to jump intothat," said Deborah Walker, a KPMG Peat Marwick partner and chair of theAICPA's Tax Executive Committee.        "The AICPA has long been an advocate of tax simplification, butthere are many, many unanswered questions," said Barry C. Melancon, AICPApresident.        Various proposals have been made in Washington, and they differ inmany significant ways. But in general they would do away with the currentincome-based system of taxation and replace it with one based onconsumption.        Byrle M. Abbin, a retired partner and now a consultant at ArthurAndersen, warned of "dire" effects on financial statements from taxsimplification.        First, there would be some gains from the elimination of thecorporate income tax. He noted that $600 billion in deferred taxliabilities would no longer be owed while just $100 billion in deferred taxassets would be wiped out by a flat tax.        But the big crunch would become with the imposition of aconsumption tax.        "Without transition relief, deductions for depreciation of existingassets would not be allowed under the new tax, and the entire proceeds froma theoretical sale of assets at the end of the reporting year for theinitial application of the new tax law would be included in the tax base,"the AICPA said in its new study, "Flat Taxes and Consumption Taxes: A Guideto the Debate."        Assuming a 10% tax rate and given that corporations have $20trillion in tax basis, "it is possible that $2 trillion of deferred taxliabilities would be created upon the enactment of this new tax," the AICPAsaid.        Under FAS 109, this entire amount, which could be higher with ahigher tax rate, would have to be booked in the year of tax change.        "This would more than wipe out total corporate profits in any oneyear and severely reduce the amount of shareholders' equity," the AICPAwarned. "Thus financial statements would have to reflect the enormousincrease in future taxes that results from lost depreciation deductions ortaxable gain on sales due to the elimination of tax basis."        "The desire for efficiency and simplification has to be balancedwith problems of fairness," Abbin said. He acknowledged that some of theseproblems could be reduced or resolved with appropriate transition rules.But he predicted a battle royal over those rules.        "Even if you do have transition rules, first you are going to havestrong discussions involving FASB, the SEC, the accounting profession andCongress," he said. "It would be a tough, tough confrontation."        Tax simplification could present additional problems for insurers.Not the least of these would be the loss of tax advantaged status for manylife products and for policy payouts. In addition, however, insurancecompanies and other financial service providers may find themselves subjectto a special tax regime.        "Because it is difficult to identify and value services provided byfinancial institutions, no country with a consumption tax has been able totax financial services in a manner consistent with consumption taxprinciples," the AICPA said. "Exemption of financial institutions fromconsumption tax generally results in overtaxation of financial servicesprovided to businesses and undertaxation of services provided toconsumers."        In general the tax burden would increase for labor-intensivebusinesses, such as insurers, and decrease for capital-intensive ones, theAICPA said. While tax rates may be cut dramatically, tax outlays couldactually increase.        "Even though the (proposed) rates sound low, you have to rememberthat people don't pay rates, they pay taxes," Abbin said. "There'll be awhole host of companies with lower rates that will have higher taxes to paybecause major components of their business cannot be deducted."        Another area where there could be surprising consequences to taxreform is in international operations. "The exclusion of exports from grossreceipts provides large tax benefits to those firms that export," the AICPAsaid.        In addition, Abbin said that the "U.S. could become a tax haven"under some of the reform proposals. "This could bring retaliation fromforeign countries where we have operations." --Miles MaguireBack to Headline List WT03-B02-42IA086-000615-B044-116http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/in19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122021156 text/html 97124HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:29 GMTContent-length: 96937Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/in19.html Sample Issue Copyright LIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet January 1, 1995 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EUROPE'S PENSIONS TIME BOMB IS STILL TICKING (467 words) FEATURE THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES (2077 words) PRUDENTIAL MOVES INTO THAILAND (404 words) POLAND: TAX ON COMMISSION STARTS ROW (149 words) CU GETS PAKISTAN PERMIT (221 words) AIG WINS RUSSIAN LICENCE (159 words) VIRGIN CHALLENGES `NEANDERTHAL' INSURERS (439 words) LIFE COMPANIES EXPLOIT DIRECT LEADS (213 words) HALIFAX SETS DIRECT TARGET (194 words) ZURICH SCORES ALLFINANZ COUP IN ITALIAN MARKET (214 words) SWEDEN: TRYGG-HANSA PLANS BANK (121 words) AUSTRIA: DIE ERSTE LAUNCHES FUND-LINKED PRODUCT (141 words) UNITED KINGDOM: MIDLAND REVAMPS SALESFORCE (159 words) POLAND: WARTA AND PKO LINK UP (194 words) AIG LINKS WITH ITALIAN UNION (254 words) BERLUSCONI GROUP SEEKS BANKING STATUS (281 words) BELGIAN POST OFFICE SEEKS PARTNER (214 words) AMB AND AGF PULL CLOSER (203 words) ALLIANZ, BERNER TO CO-OPERATE (233 words) NEW YORK AND ST. JAMES CAPITAL LINK (237 words) BRADESCO MOVES INTO ARGENTINA (221 words) CZECHS SLATE NEW PENSION PROPOSALS (481 words) BRITISH GOVERNMENT MAKES FRESH PENSIONS MOVE (240 words) UNION TO SUE OVER UK PENSIONS SCANDAL (233 words) NEWS BRIEF VITAL REQUESTS SHARE SUSPENSION (200 words) PRUDENTIAL MAKES FRAUD PROVISION (150 words) IRISH LIFE FINED BY LAUTRO (145 words) CORPORACION MAPFRE FORECASTING RISE IN PROFITS (106 words) TRAVELERS GROUP SPREADING ITS NET (293 words) IMPERIO ALLIES WITH BCP TO BID FOR BPA (172 words) FEATURE INSURERS SANGUINE ON EU (1261 words) GATEWAY TO ASIA (2016 words) FRENCH BANKS TURN TRADITIONAL (1786 words) CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995EUROPE'S PENSIONS TIME BOMB IS STILL TICKINGRANIERO VANNI, Commissioner for Financial Services, has made good histhreat to withdraw the draft Pension Directive. Vanni had warned lastyear that this might be necessary, after the June 1994 Internal MarketCouncil failed to make any progress towards adoption of the Directiveon Freedom of Management and Investment of Funds held by Institutionsfor Retirement Provision.Instead, the European Commission has issued a Communication on Freedomof Management and Investment, stressing the "urgent need" to clarifyits intentions in the pensions field.The Commission will ensure, it said, that any restrictions that applyin particular Member States will be "fully justified on the prudentialand other grounds upon which such restricutions have been applied andthey are proportional to their objectives".The Communication said that the Commission had to withdraw the proposalbecause it"refused to make the text acceptable to a majority of memberstates by inserting certain amendments which risk to completely changethe sense of the Directive".The draft directive was dogged by conflict on the issues of scope,localisation of assets and currency matching. The currency matchingprovision - requiring that a minimum proportion of funds should beinvested in the currency in which pensions would be paid - was mosttroublesome and was the main contributor to the downfall of the draft.Most member states wanted to keep the power to require 80 percentcurrency matching, ensuring consistency with the insurance Directives.The Commission, backed by the UK, Ireland and the Netherlands, wasdetermined to give pension funds the ability to invest freely inwhatever markets they wanted - subject to prudent limits. Sixtypercent, the commission felt, was a reasonable limit - given that thosewith complete freedom to invest rarely exceed 40 percent.The Commission's move comes as European think tank, Federal Trust,released a report The Pension Time Bomb in Europe, which predicts that,without radical changes, maintaining level of benefits provided by Pay-As-You-Go schemes in line with present expectations will impose anunacceptable burden on future generations of taxpayers, will worsen thecompetitiveness of industry and will harm the prospects for employmentand the economy.The three original aims of the draft Pension Fund Directive - freedomof cross-border membership, freedom to provide the service of managingpension funds and freedom of cross-border investment of fund assets -should not be abandoned, the report argues, but should be pursued byother means.Drastic cuts in benefits or rises in contribution, it maintains, can beavoided by establishing a partnership between Pay-As-You- Go andprivately-funded pension schemes. Maximisation of benefits and theminimisation of costs under private schemes requires that fund managershave the maximum freedom to invest, subject to prudential safeguards.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHESThe New Year may herald a new era in the UK life insurance business,with onerous new disclosure requirements. Alison Jarman reportsAFTER A year which saw the UK life industry's reputation shredded bythe scandal of mis-sold pensions, 1995 is widely expected to bring bigchanges as insurers begin providing full details of fees and chargesand the effect these have on the return to investors.Prompted by consumer complaints that front-end loading of fees resultedin minimal surrender values - almost non-existent generally during thefirst five years of a 25 year policy - the Securities and InvestmentsBoard (SIB) has finally put in place a disclosure regime which givesthe customer a clear idea of the return of a policy and the factorsaffecting it.January 1 saw the introduction of the long-awaited commissiondisclosure rules, but while pundits have welcomed the greatertransparency, insurers are now waiting to see how the public reacts tothe latest rattling of skeletons from their closets. Aware thatbrazenly admitting that in the case of many policies, the first twoyears of premium is eaten up in commission and other charges would notbe wise, companies have been working hard to create a structure whichwill make the new regime workable and limit the damage as far aspossible.Under new SIB rules, before customers buy a life or pension product,they must be presented with paperwork outlining the type of product,its workings and, where appropriate, surrender values. A key feature ofthis is to illustrate how commission charges and other fees affect thepolicy, how much of the premium goes to the salesperson and return forearly surrender at certain dates. After July the information will haveto be even more specific, relating directly to the customers ownfinancial circumstances and lifestyle, rather than the insurers'generic models.Although easily explained, the process of introducing these featureshas been taxing the industry throughout 1994, and has resulted inrevamping of products and restructuring of salesforces and the waythese and independent financial advisers are paid. With comparativetables likely to become widely available, enabling customers to shoparound for competitive products, companies have been forced to addressnot only the question of front-end loading but the nature of commissionpayments themselves.They have also been forced to take a hard look at the types of productson offer. During the final months of 1994, Allied Dunbar, thePrudential and Clerical Medical all launched flexible life and savingsschemes. Allied Dunbar, one of the country's leading pensionssuppliers, went so far as to withdraw its product range and replace itwith a smaller selection of new products. Other insurers are expectedto follow this shake-up as they struggle to cope with changing customerneeds.New style policies reflect the changing labour market whichincreasingly relies on short-term contracts. The concept of a job forlife is becoming rarer. Essentially the change means that, for theindustry, the standard sale now longer exists.Potentially the greatest threat stemming from disclosure is that publicreaction to the charges will result in a switch entirely away from lifeand pensions products. Research conducted by consultants NationalEconomic Research Associates (NERA) forecasts that sales will drop by10 percent following the introduction of disclosure.Last year's public reaction to concern over mis-selling was to stopbuying, a public vote of no confidence which hit profits and sharevalues. There is little to suggest that providing more information willprevent the same thing happening again.Within a smaller market, public awareness of costs will force companiesto cut costs further, with a resulting squeeze on profitability. Butthese cuts are likely to be achieved through greater use of technology,particularly EDI systems, and a squeezing out of less competitiveplayers on both sides of the selling line. Behind the factfinds andreams of new customer- friendly information is the knowledge thatcommission levels remain largely unchanged - only the way they are paidhas been altered.Commissions paid during 1992 are estimated at #2.5 billion ($3.96billion or half the total cost of winning new business in that year.According to NERA, the disclosure shake-up will cut industry costs by#800 million. Part of the commission bill will be cut by smallersalesforces, but commission levels are not falling.How commission is taken has become as flexible as the new-stylepolicies. How much a product will cost in future and how much it willgenerate for company and salesperson will depend on the agreementbetween the company and the seller. It will reflect the complexity ofthe product and a willingness to buy add-ons.At Standard Life, commission levels to Independent Financial Advisers(IFAs) are being maintained, although surrender values are also beingincreased. In this case, the company is financing the initial costsitself, deducting them over the life of the entire policy. IFAs arebeing allowed to pick and choose between level commission, indemnitycommission or any combination of the two. If they decide to rebatecommission this will not cause problems.Clerical Medical, which distributes its products through IFAs, iscommitted to protecting its salesforce, and has introduced a completerange of flexible products and commission structures. "We believe thatour commission flexibility options meet the majority of IFA'srequirements," says Mike Elcock, Clerical Medical's disclosure productmanager."Once the new regime is in place and IFAs can measure the impact ofthese changes on their business, we will need to review our initialarrangements to ensure that IFAs get the help and service they need tooperate efficiently and effectively."While the possible initial reaction may be to drive some customers awayfrom the market, the impact on the shape of that market in the long-term is not limited to 10 percent of business. Bacon & Woodrowforecasts that the number of companies operating in the market willdrop by 40 percent by the end of the decade, as price competitionforces them out. Changes in the IFA market are expected to arrive farmore quickly, as many move to become member of larger networks."We're likely to see growth in networks, with perhaps fewer, biggernetworks," predicts Geoff Show, life and pensions financial controllerat Norwich Union, which draws heavily on the IFA sector for its sales.The advantage to the customer of larger networks will be that greatersize and income means that "they will be able to offer more talent,research and skills", providing a competitive edge to smaller firms."IFAs will be able to decide how best to present commission charges,"according to scales of commission previously registered with NorwichUnion, and ask for a quotation as they feel appropriate.The IFA's key sales point - the independence to choose products fromacross the entire market - should also provide them with an advantage,providing the service matches the cost.Switching to operating on a fee-only basis appears a strongpossibility, although customers are being warned that depending on thecomplexity of the work accumulated hourly fees could outweighcommission charges unless a substantial portfolio is involved. TonyShepherd, chairman of the Institute of Financial Planning (IFP),comments: "Typically, most members of the IFP register charge between#75 and #125. If any adviser is charging more than #150 per hour, thereneeds to be a good reason for it."The dilemma facing many IFAs as well as members of direct salesforcestherefore is not whether commissions will drop, because sufficientstructures have been put in place to protect this, but whether theywill see commissions at all. Pressure will fall this year on the IFAsector where competition on pricing will force many into networks orout of business altogether. Direct salesforces felt the first pain ofdisclosure last year.Banks, building societies and insurers forced to withdraw salesforcesfor retraining took the opportunity to reduce them in size at the sametime and switch them from commission-only to salaried status.In its annual survey of industry employment, the Life InsuranceMarketing and Research Association (LIMRA) reported that the industrysalesforce declined by one-sixth in the first nine months of 1994. Forevery six salespeople at the beginning of the year, there were five byOctober. Its findings suggest that the trend will continue downwards.Leavers are not being replaced on a one-for-one basis and recruitmentis far more stringent. "What we are seeing is a steady upgrading of thequality of the salesforce," comments Frank Fletcher, LIMRA Europe'sresearch director. "Companies are being increasingly selective in thepeople they retain and even more selective in the quality of peoplethey take on."Although it doesn't anticipate heavy job cuts, Midland Bank has takenthe decision to integrate its 850-strong life and pensions salesforceinto its branch network (see page 6), which will bring about economiesof scale.It is impossible to judge how the public will react to the increasedamount of information which the industry has so assiduously provided,but undoubtedly perceived value for money will be an important salesfactor.Research undertaken for consulting group Merchants indicates thatconsumers are increasingly proactive when it comes to purchasingproducts, indicating that the industry adage that products are "soldrather than bought" is a false one.Up to two-thirds of customers approach companies to make a purchase, afactor which demolishes many arguments that an established salesrelationship will generate more business. The highly stable market ofrecent years has meant that "the nuances and foibles of consumers haveoften been shielded from the life assurance companies by intermediarysalesforces", Merchants concludes.In the survey, only 22 percent said that commission levels are a "veryimportant" factor when choosing a product, although overall value formoney is an important factor. As a result, consumers may use the newdisclosure information to take a longer-term view of their investmentchoice, rather than leaping at the lowest commission figure. "Thecompanies which are most likely to suffer a consumer reaction . . . arethose with uncompetitive charges or return on investment record - notthose companies which operate high commission channels," saysMerchants. Soft factors, such as speed and accuracy of response, and acomplete answer to queries, also rate highly, indicating that attentionto pricing and good service will help companies build their competitiveadvantage.For the increasing numbers of customers familiar with purchasingfinancial services over the telephone, direct sales of life andpensions products will offer an attractive low-cost high-servicepackage. In addition to established direct writers such as Direct Line,1995 has seen the news that entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Groupwill be launching a direct life and pensions company, Virgin Direct(see page 5). A spokesman for Virgin said that the new company willbeat all traditional suppliers of pensions and life cover on price andcosts.Norwich Union, which is joint, equal partner in the operation,providing third-party administration and fund management expertise,will in return benefit from connections with an organisation built onstrong service-led principles and affordable products. It should alsobe borne in mind that Branson has assiduously avoided getting involvedin any business which would damage the Virgin brand, indicating that hewill avoid the structures which have hampered and harmed the rest ofthe life industry.Virgin's low-cost approach will be followed by that of another trustedUK brand, Marks & Spencer. Its concept of reliable quality at slightlyabove average pricing is likely to prove a success in this sector as ithas in others. It has an extensive network of shops in the UK, which isalso growing worldwide. Like Virgin, and perhaps unlike the industry,it too is strong on brand protection.Disclosure represents a major step change which will alter the face ofthe industry. Its supposed new transparency which will be of suchbenefit to the consumer is largely cosmetic compared with the knock-oneffect for the industry itself. For well-known new entrants, like Marks& Spencer, disclosure offers an opportunity and a shock as it entersthe only industry which legally has to admit by how much a product ismarked-up between wholesale and retail price.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995PRUDENTIAL MOVES INTO THAILANDPRUDENTIAL CORPORATION of the UK has broken into Thailand, buying a24.99 percent stake in a small local insurance company, Thai SethakitLife Assurance PLC (TS Life), at a cost of some #13 million ($20.2million). Prudential is acting through a joint- venture company Staple,set up with local businessman, Roan Asvinvichit and other affiliates.It plans to bid for the remaining shares of TS Life in a tender offerthrough Staple. Thai insurance law prohibits foreign entities fromowning more than 25 percent of a Thai insurance company.Eventually, Asvinvichit will acquire between 15 percent and 20 percentof TS Life, while the rest will go to minority shareholders, predictedsources at advisers Peregrine and Morgan Grenfell. The tender offer,priced at Baht 65 ($2.59) per share, will be made in February.Prudential may give a new lease of life to languishing TS Life. It mayalso provide competition for American International Assurance (AIA),the only wholly-owned foreign entity of the 12 life companies operatingin the country.Thailand has some 6 million life insurance policyholders, with totalpremium for 1994 forecast to reach Baht 37 billion. Thai insurers haveteamed up to combat the threat posed by AIA, which has carved out amarket share estimated at 58 percent of the total life premiums and 20percent of policyholders. Last year, AIA quit the Thai Life AssuranceAssociation, citing irreconcilable differences with the members.Most recently, Thai insurers have charged that AIA infringed Thaiinsurance law by opening offices outside Bangkok, the capital. Overseasinsurance companies are restricted from conducting their insurancebusiness outside the capital city, but AIA contends that the officeshave no relation to its insurance operations, are not connected to theactivities of the Bangkok head office and do not contribute financiallyto it.AIA has established a superior branding image, backed up by a moreefficient organisation and an aggressive salesforce.To boost efficiency, domestic companies have agreed not to poach salesstaff from each other. The association is committed to spending up toBaht 1 million in training and has roped in US- based Life InsuranceManagement and Research Association (LIMRA) to assist.Soontorn Boonsai, president of the association and Ayudhya LifeAssurance plc, said that all these measures cannot ensure that localcompanies will be able to compete effectively with AIA.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995POLAND:  TAX ON COMMISSION STARTS ROWTHE JANUARY 16 introduction of 22 percent VAT (value added tax) oncommissions of Polish insurance brokers and agents has stirred theAssociation of Insurance Brokers to write a letter of protest to theMinistry of Finance.Chairman Leon Kozicki, objects to the tax largely because insurancecompanies are exempt. It is too early for such a tax as brokers havenot yet reached full profitability," he said. Brokers have beenoperating in Poland for two to three years. "This is a three-prongedproblem," argued Grace Zrodlowski-Kabat, managing director of SedgwickPoland."A new developing industry is being curbed; the move isinconsistent with EC law on VAT registration; and it will stifle theentire insurance market."Polish insurance premiums are not subject to VAT, and the questionarises now as to whether they will have to go up to compensate.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995CU GETS PAKISTAN PERMITCOMMERCIAL UNION (CU), the UK's largest composite insurer, has beengranted permission to write life business in the newly- opened Pakistanmarket.CU is the largest non-life foreign insurer in Pakistan and has beenkeen to get a life licence since the market, nationalised in 1972, wasopened up to local life insurers in 1991, Steve Corfield, lifedevelopment manager in CU's overseas division, told LII.It is the second foreign life insurer to win entry - in May last year,American International Group, the largest international US insurer, wasgranted initial permission to set up a life company."We still have plenty of work to do as the penetration of lifeinsurance is very low," Corfield said. Only 2 million people, out of apopulation of 120 million, have life insurance cover."We will now gointo a stage of developing our infrastructure for a life operation,working on product development, systems and so on," he said.Corfield said CU expects to build its own distribution network as thestate company has a substantial tied agency force .The company also hopes to build on its non-life contacts - it has a 5percent market share, with approximate net written premiums of 160million rupees ($5.2 million) last year.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995AIG WINS RUSSIAN LICENCEAMERICAN INTERNATIONAL Group (AIG), the US's leading internationalinsurer, has become the first American insurer to receive a licence tooperate a sizeable partnership business in Russia.AIG's Russian partners are Moscow-based Stolichny Bank of Savings andthe recently-formed, joint-stock company Garant- Invest.The new company, RUS AIG, will be managed by AIG, which capitalised the$3 million venture. AIG's central European senior executive BengtWestergren, will chair the board. Russian insurance expert, AndreiSaznov, will act as general manager in Moscow.RUS AIG, which will open in St Petersburg later this year, will offerindividual health, travel and motor insurance, as well as commercialinsurance.Russian partner, Garant-Invest, was formed in September 1992 to providefinancial and investment services. Stolichny Bank of Savings is one ofRussia's largest retail and commercial banks, with 30 branches - italso has the Federation's largest network of automated cash dispensers.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995VIRGIN CHALLENGES `NEANDERTHAL' INSURERSAFTER REVOLUTIONISING the airline industry and taking Coca-Cola head-on, entrepreneur Richard Branson is to tackle the UK's "Neanderthal"financial services industry.Virgin Direct, a joint venture between Virgin Group and Norwich Union,will begin selling its first product, a no-fee Personal Equity Plan(PEP), at the end of February.Virgin aims to be a niche player in the life and pensions market, withno intention of becoming "a mainstream direct banker", according tospokesman Will Whitehorn. He stressed that the company would "like tobe a major player in a non- essential market".Virgin targets niche markets for non-essential products, placing itsemphasis on bettering rival services at a lower price. Operating adirect telesales service is an astute move on cost grounds and this,combined with Virgin's service reputation and strong brand, willattract custom - as will Richard Branson's image for challenging thestatus quo. The group claims that there are 18 million Britons workingwithout pensions provisions.Norwich Union is providing fund management and third-partyadministration for the 50:50 joint venture, with the Virgin fund beingmanaged exclusive of Norwich Union business.Speculation has surrounded Norwich Union's recent research into thedirect market - despite its widely stated commitment to the broker andIndependent Financial Adviser (IFA) market.Before Christmas, the insurer said it was keeping up to date ondevelopments in the direct market. Once news of the Virgin jointventure broke on January 1, a Norwich Union spokesman said that thelaunch does not rule out further direct ventures, but at the same timesaid the company remains "committed to the intermediary market".Initially, telesales staff will operate from Norwich. The productrange, designed to Virgin's specifications, will roll out over the nextyear to provide four or five cost-effective products, including asingle premium life and pensions product and a unit trust.The inclusion of a flexible life and pension policy suggests thatVirgin has spotted this niche quicker than established insurers who areonly just beginning to design products which reflect today's flexibleemployment market.Virgin earlier rebuffed several approaches to bring its high- service,low-cost approach to the financial services market, but a combinationof 1994's pensions scandal and the disclosure regime had suggested anopening in the market for Virgin, Whitehorn said."This highlighted the expensive, Neanderthal selling structure of theindustry, while disclosure represents a major regulatory change whichbreaks down barriers to entry. There was obviously an opportunity for a`green field' operation to dramatically reduce costs across themarket."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995LIFE COMPANIES EXPLOIT DIRECT LEADSUK LIFE companies are using rival direct insurers to drum up salesleads. Standard Life, which generates most of its life and pensionsbusiness through independent financial advisers, has confirmed itslinks with direct writer, Churchill Insurance.Churchill, with 600,000 policyholders the UK's second-largest house andmotor direct writer after Direct Line, is acting as an introducer forStandard Life. The direct insurer follows up sales leads from customerswho have requested further financial services information on publicityand proposal forms. Telesales staff explain different products andarrange an appointment with a Standard Life salesperson - although insome cases they complete sales of products such as term assurance.In addition to contributing towards the training of Churchill telesalesstaff, Standard Life pays Churchill commission on sales generated.The arrangement is not the only one of its kind. Sun Life usesProspero, the direct arm of Provincial insurance, to generate leads,while Admiral, the Lloyd's of London direct insurer, was an appointedrepresentative of Scottish Amicable until the middle of 1994.A spokesman for the Scottish Life house said that Admiral hadinvestigated whether it was possible to"cold-sell term assuranceproducts". Admiral is now pressing ahead with its own direct lifeinsurer.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995HALIFAX SETS DIRECT TARGETHALIFAX BUILDING Society plans to move into direct life and generalinsurance sales if a proposed direct personal banking service takesoff, according to general manager David Gilchrist. Both developmentspartly depend on whether the planned merger between the UK's biggestbuilding society and Leeds Permanent goes ahead.Gilchrist said that both societies are interested in telephone banking,and providing this service as a merged operation would reduce theexpense. Developing this to offer classes of insurance is also apossibility, he said.The two societies announced merger plans in November 1994. Should theygain the support of members, they would then convert to a PLC (publiclimited company) to become the country's third- largest bank.Failure would not preclude developing the service: both societies havefledgling life insurance arms (Halifax launched its company on January9), and, following changes to the Building Societies Act, are able towrite housing-related general business.Bradford & Bingley has announced plans to launch a telephone mortgageservice in spring. It will target borrowers with substantial equitywith an exclusive discounted mortgage, unavailable through its branchnetwork.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995ZURICH SCORES ALLFINANZ COUP IN ITALIAN MARKETZURICH INSURANCE'S Italian branch office is to establish a life companyin conjunction with Banco di Napoli, Italy's sixth- largest bank.The new company will sell its products at over 800 Banco di Napolibranches. It has yet to get a licence, but should be operational byautumn, according to Peter Schenker, Zurich senior vice-president forSouthern Europe.Zurich will sell simple life products through the bank branches, hesaid."As there is still a legal barrier in Italy, preventing banks fromselling products for which advice is necessary, it is only possible tosell standard products."The insurer already had some local co-operation agreements in Italy butwas keen to develop a countrywide distribution network - Banco diNapoli was the last of the top eight Italian banks without an allfinanzlink.Zurich, with a network of about 600 agents, is a small player on theItalian life market - last year's estimated premiums written of L260billion ($159.6 million) represents a market share of about 1.5 percent- and Schenker said the company hopes the new agreement will help it tobreak into the top ten life insurers. The market leaders, Generali, RASand INA, have market shares of 10 percent-15 percent.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995SWEDEN:  TRYGG-HANSA PLANS BANKTRYGG-HANSA, the leading Swedish life insurer, has received a bankinglicence and is to open a niche bank focusing on deposits and individualpension-savings products. Trygg-Banken, which will open in the secondquarter of 1995, will target Trygg-Hansa's 1.7 million policyholders.Lars Thunell, chief executive of Trygg-Hansa, noted that the move willallow the company to operate on the same terms as other Swedishinsurers. Rival insurer Skandia, with 1.5 million policyholders,launched SkandiaBanken on October 3 1994 (see LII 64).Skandia created the bank both to expand its product range to includedeposit accounts and other standardised banking products and to allowit to offer higher rates to its pensions customers.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995AUSTRIA:  DIE ERSTE LAUNCHES FUND-LINKED PRODUCTDIE ERSTE Osterreichische Sparkasse, the fourth-largest Austrian bank,has become the first bank to introduce a fund-linked insurance producton to the market. The launch in December, was in conjunction withGerman insurer Nurnberger Lebensversicherung.The bank's insurance subsidiary, Versicherungs Makler Gesellschaft,will manage the product - the insurer already offers traditional lifeinsurance and some general insurance products and 99 percent of itsbusiness is with individuals.Die Erste's 240 outlets will be used as the distribution channel,according to Anton Freitag, Die Erste's head of market segmentation.The development of fund-linked insurance products in Austria will, hepredicts, be similar to that in Germany. Freitag envisages that it willbe a niche product.Nurnberger Lebensversicherung AG is the biggest provider of fund-linked insurance products on the German market.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995UNITED KINGDOM:  MIDLAND REVAMPS SALESFORCEMIDLAND BANK, the UK's third-largest, is integrating its 850- stronglife insurance and pensions salesforce into its network of 1,740 bankbranches.Midland is retraining staff to meet the new rules on product andcommission disclosure which came into effect on January 1 (see pages 10-11).The bank recently revamped life, pension and investment business andclaims that it is going beyond the regulations by including commissiondisclosure on life and non-life regulated products and client-specificillustrations. Midland investors will be informed about surrender andmaturity values and the effect of charges.Midland has also made unit trusts and PEPs more competitive, reducingthe initial charge from 6 percent to 4 percent, and halving the minimumregular savings contribution from #100 to #150 ($155.35-$233).At the same time, Midland has introduced a new payment structure forits salesforce, based on a considerably higher salary compared withcommission.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995POLAND:  WARTA AND PKO LINK UPWARTA, POLAND'S second-largest insurer, is to create a life insurancecompany with the state-owned bank PKO BP. Both will hold a 40 percentstake in the new company, Warta-Vita.Warta-Vita intends to compete with Panstowy Zaklad Ubezpiecen (PZU),which controls 95 per cent of the market and concentrates on groupinsurance.Warta-Vita will emphasise"western-type" individual products, saidWarta's Olga Doan, who has been involved in planning the venture forthree years and will be on the board of directors of Warta- Vita. Itwill also introduce one new group product.Fund-linked insurance products are a definite consideration for thefuture - Thomas Klaricki, director of banking investment at PKO BPK,noted that the bank should have important input in fund management.Klaricki believes the venture will influence product design to suitcustomer needs. Allfinanz is not a new notion for PKO BP, which beforethe war offered life insurance products to its customers.Products will be distributed through Warta insurance agents and the 800branch network of PKO BP. Warta-Vita has applied for its licence andexpects to start operating in April.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995AIG LINKS WITH ITALIAN UNIONAMERICAN INTERNATIONAL Group (AIG) has teamed up with an Italian tradeunion, Cisi, to access the growing demand for private pensions andinsurance cover in the market. Unionvita, owned 51 percent by the tradeunion and 49 percent by Alico, AIG's Italian life subsidiary, wasauthorised at end-December - its management will come from the Americaninsurer.Guido Laudini, Unionvita managing director, said the joint ventureshould be highly beneficial to both parties. "Alico does not have asales network or any existing agreements so we were keen to fill thegap," he said."In many ways the venture will be similar to a bancassurance link, withupfront costs reduced to the minimum and a large captive market towhich the requisite products can be offered."Cisi was keen to find an international partner, Laudini said. "Theypreferred a foreign company because a similar link-up with an Italianoperator would find itself competing with the partners existing salesnetwork."The union has 4 million members and already operates a consultancyservice for pensions, insurance and fiscal matters - also available to non-union members."Italy is significantly underinsured as a country," Laudini noted."In1992, only 0.8 per cent of Italian GDP went on life insurance premiumsso the prospects for growth are very good. In addition, the range ofproducts is likely to expand because most life insurance is still usedas a saving instrument rather than as cover against a person's death."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995BERLUSCONI GROUP SEEKS BANKING STATUSPROGRAMME ITALIA, the Italian financial services group which owns oneof Italy's leading life operators, Mediolanum Vita, has decided torestructure and seek banking status. The ownership of the group is alsounder discussion.Managing director, Ennio Doris, has expressed a desire to acquire amajority stake from Fininvest and the outgoing Italian prime minister,Silvio Berlusconi, with whom he started the company in 1982.The decision to convert to a bank, according to Doris, is "a naturalevolutionary step to exploit the company's expertise in various sectorsof the Italian financial services market". As a bank, he pointed out,Programme Italia will be in a better position to focus on corebusinesses and to widen the range of products and services.Programme Italia will not open banking branches for its clientele,preferring to operate almost exclusively through its extensive salesnetwork - the current 2,000 consultants will be increased to 3,000 bythe time the bank is launched in 1996.Mediolanum Vita, Italy's sixth-largest life company, saw its premiumincome rise by more than 30 percent to L552 billion ($338.8 million) inthe first ten months of 1994. Sales of Programme Italia's 15 mutualfunds increased by more than 40 percent over the same period and thegroup's total turnover grew by 27 percent to l,909 billion.Doris said it is likely that there will be a reorganisation of thegroup and this will affect the shareholding structure. "I am ready totake the leading role in the company if that is the result," hesaid."If necessary, I will look for partners to help finance aneventual acquisition."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995BELGIAN POST OFFICE SEEKS PARTNERTHE BELGIAN post office, De Postcheque, is planning to distributeproducts such as insurance, mortgages and loans through its post officenetwork and has narrowed the choice of candidates down to the last few.In late 1994, De Postcheque invited 260 financial companies in Belgiumto tender. Among the final contenders are Belgian insurer Royale Belgeand ING, the Dutch allfinanz group, which recently decided to developits international allfinanz operations (see LII 64), according toFreddie Weyers, project manager at De Postcheque.ING Group has a 100 percent-owned subsidiary, Postbank, which sellsproducts through the Dutch post office and "would like to apply thisexperience elsewhere", according to a company spokesman. Theconglomerate already has a life office in Belgium, La Patriotique,offering financial services including insurance.De Postcheque is prohibited by law from acting as a bank,"so if we wantto offer more sophisticated products to our customers, we must enterinto a partnership", said Weyers.De Postcheque has between 1,700 and 1,800 offices throughout Belgium.If it enters into a co-operation with a financial group, such as ING,it is only permitted by law to have that one partner. It can, however,have as many insurance partners as it wants.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995AMB AND AGF PULL CLOSERAACHENER UND Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB), Germany's second largestinsurer, and Assurances Generales de France (AGF), the second-largestcomposite insurer in France, are pulling closer together.AMB, which currently holds 2.57 percent of AGF's share capital, willincrease its holding to 5 percent on or before June 30 1995. In future,a representative from AMB will be entitled to attend meetings of AGF'sadministrative council. AGF must maintain its stake in AMB at 33.55percent until December 31 1999. In the first half of 1994 this stakecontributed Fr106 million ($19.72 million) to AGF's net earnings,almost twice the amount recorded the previous year.A working group of experts from both companies is being formed todefine and develop areas of co-operation. AMB is keen to look at AGF'sexperience with market segmentation, while AGF is interested in AMB'sdirect selling knowledge, gained through its associate direct insurerCOSMOS.On an international level, AMB and AGF will be formulating combinedstrategies, although it is not yet clear what form these strategieswill take.AMB has set up a building society in Strasburg and this is a businessarea AGF may develop in France.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995ALLIANZ, BERNER TO CO-OPERATEALLIANZ, EUROPE's largest insurer has sealed a co-operation agreementwith Berner Insurance of Switzerland, in which it bought a 31.5 percentstake last year, giving it a sizeable foothold on the Swiss market.The essence of the Berner agreement is exchange of information, Allianzspokesman Emilio Galli-Zugaro told LII. Gerhardt Rupprecht, Allianzboard member, is in charge of know-how transfers within the group andBerner will participate in working committees focused on the Europeanmarket."On the investment side, they can be part of our financial committees,deciding where to allocate resources, investment etcetera," Galli-Zugaro said. "International investment know-how is not as big atBerner." Information exchange will extend across the board - inelectronic data processing, for example, the Allianz sales force inGermany is equipped with lap- top computers and this could be apossibility for Switzerland.On the product side, Galli-Zugaro argued that the potential forinnovation may not be huge. Fund-linked products are already availablein Germany but are not popular, he pointed out.  "We would be ready tolaunch them tomorrow - we have our own investment management, but wedon't want gimmicks." Information exchange on mortality and actuarialtables will be important.The companies will be looking at all processes. Berner has beencarrying out a cost-cutting programme in recent years and this willcontinue.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995NEW YORK AND ST. JAMES CAPITAL LINKNEW YORK Life Worldwide Holding, a subsidiary of New York LifeInsurance Company, has announced the formation of a new company with UK-based, St. James Place Capital (SJPC), to pursue its UK acquisitionstrategy.The company, Life Assurance Holding Corporation (LAHC), will becapitalised at $100 million, with New York Life Worldwide and SJPC eachcontributing $31.25 million.Capital commitments have also been made by financial institutions suchas Chase Investment Bank, PosTel, Scottish Amicable, Invesco, and JohnRothschild Assurance Holdings. "LAHC is designed to help us participatein the consolidation which is taking place in the UK life market," saidWilliam Mowat, executive vice president and chief financial officer ofNew York Life, who compared the new company to Conseco, a leading buy-out firm in the US.One of the largest life insurance companies in the US, New York Life'sprevious UK acquisitions include Windsor Life Assurance Company, in1989; Gresham Life, in 1992; and US Aetna's UK life business, which itbought in 1993.The Windsor Life Assurance Company, sold to LAHC by New York Life (UK)as part of the transaction, will serve as the LAHC vehicle for lifeacquisitions. Windsor's chairman, John Wybrew, will act as chiefexecutive; SJPC chairman, Sir Mark Weinberg, was appointed chairman;and William Yelverton, chief executive officer of New York LifeWorldwide, is vice- chairman.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995BRADESCO MOVES INTO ARGENTINABRAZIL'S LARGEST insurer, Bradesco, has bought a 70 percent stake in LaRosario Companhia Argentina de Seguros, an inactive Argentinianinsurance company belonging to that country's Roberts allfinanzconglomerate.The move is part of a trend started by the economic integration of thetwo countries into the Southern Cone Common Market (Mercosul), whichcame into formal existence on January 1 and also includes Uruguay andParaguay.Already, other major Brazilian players, such as Bamerindus and SulAmerica, have set up operations in Buenos Aires, as have multinationalinsurance groups, such as AGF and Mapfre, with their Braziliansubsidiaries managing the operations.Bradesco's move into Argentina is noteworthy, given the size of theBrazilian insurer. It has a net worth of $1.5 billion, more than doublethe collective net worth of all the 220 companies operating inArgentina.Even in Brazil, Bradesco dwarfs the competition - its annual premiumsamount to over $300 million, twice that of the number two on themarket. The Argentinian market had total premiums of about 4.5 billionin June 1994, some 64 percent the size of the Brazilian market.The new company will be headquartered in Buenos Aires, with theoperational side run by La Buenos Aires, the largest insurer in theRoberts Group.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995CZECHS SLATE NEW PENSION PROPOSALSCZECH TRADE unions staged a 15-minute national strike on December 21,the first since the 1989 revolution, protesting against a pensionsreform bill recently submitted to Parliament.Pension fund management has become a boom industry in the CzechRepublic, especially for banks, but it's a bone of contention forunions and pensioners opposed to reforms which also affect the healthindustry.Unions and pensioners are concerned that the bill gives the governmentpowers to alter pension rates without indexation and to raise thepensionable age for men to 65 years. Men currently retire at age 60 andwomen from age 54 to 57, depending on the number of their children.The basic pension is around half of the worker's previous salary, butwith monthly salaries averaging only CK7,000 ($200), 62 percent of allpensioners complain they cannot cope, according to a poll by theChamber of Trade Unions. Of these, more than half supplement theirpensions from their savings, according to the poll.The debate has helped boost the profile of newly-formed privatepensions and fund managers claim demand has been strong among the fewworkers to be offered the schemes to date. Most schemes are run byCzech banks and other institutions with large employee or client bases.Since October, when private pension funds were first allowed tooperate, 21 licences have been granted and a further 23 applicationsare pending.Many leading funds are run as joint ventures, often between a bank andone or more financial specialists such as insurance companies, althoughnotable stand-alone operations include those of Komercni Banka andWinterthur Life (see LII 65).Among the largest non-financial firms offering pensions are a group ofconstruction firms based in Prague (Stavebni penzijni fond) and a joint-venture between trading companies in Northeast Moravia (Bansky a hutnipenzijni fond Trinec).Minimum capital is CK20 million, but Penzijni fond Ceske Pojistovna,run by the Czech Insurance Company, has the largest base capital atCK90 million. Pension funds can offer products including standardretirement incomes, disability and inheritable pensions and lump-sumcontributions.Employees select their own fund and manage their own contributions.Employers may supplement payments, but are not required to. Thegovernment is offering supplementary payments, depending on theemployee contribution.All pension funds must be open to all Czech citizens and are restrictedto conservative investments, including government securities, propertyand blue chip shares listed on the Prague Stock Exchange. The law alsorequires 85 per cent of funds to be distributed and a further 5 percent to be held as reserves.Some funds are offering rates of return of up to 10 percent - recallingthe feverish competition between investment privatisation funds whichbid one another up until they were offering rates of return whichfailed to materialise.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995BRITISH GOVERNMENT MAKES FRESH PENSIONS MOVEPROMPTED BY recent high-profile cases of plundering of company pensionschemes, the UK government has placed new pensions legislation beforeParliament.It proposes a new regulatory authority far larger than that anticipatedin an earlier White Paper. With 200 staff and a seven-membercontrolling panel, the Occupational Pensions Regulatory Authority(OPRA) will be bigger than the financial services watchdog, theSecurities and Investments Board (SIB).The bill includes many of the findings of the Goode Committee, whichrecommended widespread change to pensions legislation to prevent casessuch as that of the Maxwell Pension Fund, which was raided by chairmanRobert Maxwell prior to his death three years ago (see LII 64). It alsoequalises pensions ages for men and women at 65.Among the changes are index-linking of pensions fund benefits to theRetail Price Index (RPI) or 5 percent a year - whichever is smaller -and a requirement for minimum solvency standards for pension funds.The latter has already generated debate. The bill contains no actualfigures and some MPs are concerned that some companies may keep theirfunds to the bare minimum and avoid the build-up of large surpluses.Overall, the cost to the pensions industry of index-linking benefits,meeting solvency requirements (still to be decided), plus establishingOPRA has been estimated at #165 million ($256.3 million) a year, plus a#400 million one-off charge.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995UNION TO SUE OVER UK PENSIONS SCANDALA UNION representing members who were mis-sold pensions during the1980s has said that it will not wait for official investigations to becompleted before taking legal action against life and pensionscompanies.Bill Day, National Pensions Officer for the GMB union, which representsgeneral and municipal employees including teachers and health workers,said that the union had identified more than 100 cases whereindividuals were wrongly advised to opt out of union or company schemesinto personal pensions.Although the entire UK life and pensions industry is reviewingpotential mis-selling, following the Securities and Investments Board's(SIB) report that more than 250,000 pensions customers were wronglyadvised, GMB has said that it will not wait until the end of the 18-month review. "We're not happy with the level of compensation that theSIB recommends in the review and there is no suggestion of damages,"said Day. "We want to test it in court."When the action reaches court, expected to be in several months time,it will test SIB's approach to the mis-selling scandal and increase thebad publicity surrounding the industry.Concerns were expressed in October 1994 that SIB's schedule mightprevent some individuals from taking legal action due to the statute oflimitations. The GMB move may result from such concerns, although aspokesman would not confirm this.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995VITAL REQUESTS SHARE SUSPENSIONVITAL, NORWAY'S second-largest insurer, saw some turbulence in earlyJanuary. On January 4, the company, which has a 20 percent marketshare, asked the Oslo stock exchange to suspend trading in its sharesafter the share price was hit by rumours that it was in negotiationswith international insurers.Vital, which reported a loss of NKr97 million ($14.27 million) for thethird quarter of 1994, compared with a profit of NKr2.3 billion theprevious year, admitted that it was "considering various structuralalternatives, including international options". This is motivated, thecompany said, by the internationalisation expected as a result of theEuropean Economic Area (EEA) and the termination of its co-operationwith Den norske Bank in October last year.Last year's losses were largely as a result of rising interest rates,which hit the value of Vital's bond portfolio. Premium income at theend of the third quarter stood at NKr2.8 billion, up from NKr2.3billion.Trading resumed on January 11 - Vital has said that discussions areclosed for the moment and that it will initiate no new talks, althougha spokesman said it would "give all approaches consideration".Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995PRUDENTIAL MAKES FRAUD PROVISIONPRUDENTIAL INSURANCE Company, the US's biggest life insurer, isinjecting its securities division with $365 million to help buoy itagainst the spiralling expense of fraud settlements.Prudential Securities has cost its parent company $1.6 billion since1981 through settlements with defrauded investors, many of whom boughtlimited partnerships presented as being "safe" but actually high-risk.So far, Prudential Securities has paid over $650 million to arestitution fund established by the Justice Department and theSecurities & Exchange Commission (SEC). To date, a relatively smallpercentage of 56,000 claimants have received total settlements of $397million. However, reports from law firm Storch & Brenner indicate thatclaims total about 152,000 - and growing.The firm, selected to assist with fund administration, said claimsfiled against Pru Securities doubled to almost 3,000 a week, as theJanuary 10 filing deadline approached.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995IRISH LIFE FINED BY LAUTROIRISH LIFE has been fined #300,000 by Lautro, the UK life insurancedisciplinary authority, and ordered to pay Lautro's #85,000 costs. Thefine related to charges of: failure to deal satisfactorily withcomplaints; failure to adhere to Lautro recruitment requirements forsome appointed sales representatives; inadequate monitoring of companyrepresentatives; and failure to keep proper records. Up to April 1994,Irish Life UK had also failed to implement a satisfactory training andcompetence scheme.Lautro conceded that Irish Life, Ireland's top life insurer, remediedthese breaches quickly and fully - the life company said it wasdisappointed by the reprimand, given this acknowledgement and the factthat most of the offences were more than 12 months ago.Of Irish Life's total premium income of more than #800 million, about#100 million is generated in the UK.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995CORPORACION MAPFRE FORECASTING RISE IN PROFITSCORPORACION MAPFRE, of Spain, is forecasting a rise in consolidatedprofits for 1994 of more than 25 percent. The group's life subsidiary,Mapfre Vida, was the main contributor to profit growth, contributingabout Pta6 billion ($4.48 million).Mapfre Vida was listed on the Spanish exchange on December 23 1994,after 1.2 million of its shares - 7.5 percent of share capital - wereplaced at a price of Pta4,750 in a public offer exclusive toshareholders of Corporacion Mapfre, Spain's leading insurer. The issuewas oversubscribed 4.8 times. The proceeds will be used to strengthenMapfre's international activities.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995TRAVELERS GROUP SPREADING ITS NETTRAVELERS GROUP has been spreading its net, recruiting the head of afailed US investment house to two senior positions. Michael Carpenter,who resigned his chief executive post at the faltering securities firmof Kidder, Peabody in June, has been named an executive vice presidentof business development and strategic planning at Travelers Group. Hewill also take responsibility for the life and annuity businesses ofTravelers Insurance.Carpenter left Kidder, Peabody in the wake of rising interest rateswhich were deflating the bond market and an inside trading scandalwhich forced Kidder's parent company, General Electric (GE), to reduceits after-tax earnings by $210 million. Kidder Peabody went on theauction block earlier this year and will reportedly sell most of itsbusiness to another Wall Street securities firm, PaineWebber.Carpenter is an interesting choice for the Travelers life post. Whilehe has no direct experience in insurance, he managed several companyacquisitions and buy-out deals when working for Kidders' parentcompany, GE. Travelers does not currently admit to acquisition plans,but Travelers Group president James Dimon, said the company's lifebusiness is"expected to grow" and Carpenter said he expects "newopportunities" from industry consolidation.In his new positions, Carpenter will report to Robert Lipp, chiefexecutive of the company's insurance division, and to Sanford Weill,Travelers Group chairman.Based in New York, Travelers Group is the parent of the PrimericaFinancial Services term insurance network, and Travelers Insurance, thecompany which recently made headlines when it merged its group healthcare business with Metropolitan Life's, creating MetraHealth Companies,the largest commercial managed health care network in the US, with acustomer base of about 13 million customers (see LII 61).Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995IMPERIO ALLIES WITH BCP TO BID FOR BPAIMPERIO, PORTUGAL'S largest insurer, has allied with Banco CommercialPortugues (BCP), in a bid for the country's second- biggest bank, BancoPortugues do Atlantico (BPA). BCP made a failed takeover bid for a 34.5percent stake in the bank last summer.Imperio already owns the small Banco Mello and sells the bank'sproducts through its network - a spokesman said that the BPA bid couldbe useful in developing the insurer's allfinanz strategy, but nodetails were available.Under the terms of the tender, approved by the Ministry of Finance onJanuary 12, BCP is offering Esc300 billion ($1.87 billion) for BPA, orEsc2,730 per share, considerably lower than the Esc3,000 it offeredlast year.BCP would acquire just over 50 percent of BPA's capital and Imperio therest of the shares sold off.With BPA go two smaller banks it controls - Banco Commercial de Macauand Uniao de Bancos Portugueses - as well as BPA's life insurer, BPAVida.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995INSURERS SANGUINE ON EUIf Austria's EU membership as of January 1 means tougher competitionfor the life insurance market, domestic companies seem unperturbed.George Hamilton reports from ViennaAUSTRIA HAS technically been open to outsiders for the past year, underthe European Economic Area (EEA) agreement, but no sweeping changeshave occurred. Over two years ago, Austrian life insurers showed noanxiety over possible competition and nothing has happened to support areversal in their laid-back attitude.Insurance regulations were redrawn last summer to conform to EEA/EUpractice, greatly liberalising the market. Any insurer registered in anEEA/EU country may offer products in Austria, regardless of whether thefirm has an Austrian subsidiary.Non-Austrian firms must be approved by the finance ministry's insurancesupervisory authorities before products may be sold. Nor may Austrianagents legally offer products of non-approved insurers.If an insurer is not approved, "please don't ask me what happens in thecase of a claim", says one Austrian insurance broker. The registrationis no problem to serious companies and is intended mainly to protectpolicy purchasers and proscribe money laundering. About 30 companiesregistered outside Austria have filed their intent to sell insurancewithin the country - how many of these might offer life policies is notclear.While conditions indicate opportunities for companies new to theAustrian life insurance market, other factors work towards maintainingthe status quo. The market is dominated by a handful of domesticinsurers or the long-established subsidiaries of Italian and Germanconcerns.Helping to maintain the situation is a Sch40,000 ($3,600) "specialexpense" personal tax deduction, available only against premiums paidto Austrian insurers. Life policies, whether bought in Austria from adomestic insurer or purchased outside the country, are subject to a 4percent insurance tax.Furthermore, policies written in currencies other than schilling orDeutschmark carry an exchange rate risk - sterling and even the Ecu,for example, have plunged against the schilling in recent years.The threat of competition has resulted in gradual lowering of premiumsand greater policy flexibility on the part of domestic life insurers.Policyholders in some cases may cancel policies or switch withoutpenalty between different life types.New policyholders are able at any point to shift their life insurancefrom annual premiums to a paid-up policy, subject to a limit placed onthe minimum paid-in premium under which this option is available.Policy language has been greatly simplified and footnotes eliminated.Rates by domestic insurers have been reduced gradually to more closelymeet those of potential competitors and to conform to updated actuarialtables. Indeed, earlier last year, Wiener Allianz, member of the GermanAllianz group, estimated that rates for life policies could drop by asmuch as 20 per cent.The single main factor which continues to reserve the market todomestic insurers is the conservatism of the public, coupled with theassumption that the generous government retirement pensions willcontinue. The well-established vast network of company-tied localagents is also a help. Few life insurers could afford to build up theagent networks which the top half-dozen life insurers operate, eachwith some 3,500-4,000 agent-employees.This cost element admittedly contributes to higher premiums, but thedirect personal service is expected by the insured public. The agents'cost can be spread over a number of products and services such asclaims adjustment, helping to justify the expense while supporting anunusually high level of service."Austrians have a curious fascination with the subject of death, butdon't talk about it in a direct personal way," contends one observerwriting about the Austrian personality. The observation is verified byexperience of the life insurance industry, which finds it considerablyeasier to sell annuities or single-premium term policies than pure lifepolicies with pay-out upon death.This fact has led to considerable creativity on the part of insurers inpackaging the more traditional policies as investments rather thaninsurance and in developing new products. Single-premium terminsurance, for example, was the industry sales hit last year.On a direct basis, the local company agent can often sell life policiesin conjunction with other insurance coverage. A term life policy is arelatively easy add-on for banks when providing personal or home loans - this accounts for the high life market share of Wustenrot buildingsociety, for example, where insurance is a secondary but hardlyunimportant product.Indeed, Austrian insurers are finding banks increasingly importantbeyond their own sales networks in selling life policies. There iscross-ownership between the number one life insurer Wiener StadtischeVersicherung and the number one bank, Bank Austria.The same is true of the number two in each category, Generali Leben andCreditanstalt-Bankverein. The latter not only sells Erste Allgemeine-Generali products but shares a joint company, CA- Generali, with theinsurer.The CA tie has become so important to EA-Generali that it worries overcurrent moves to privatise the bank. German competitor Allianz isamongst those considering a bid for a shareholding in CA - such a movepresumably would preclude further links between CA and Generali.Generali has given notice that it would be prepared to increase itsstake in Creditanstalt before going to the expense of recreating thesales capacity which the present bank connection offers.Appearances would suggest considerable market potential for lifeinsurance. Each Austrian allegedly has about $73,000 in savings setaside in investments of one form or another, generally in savingsaccounts, often at minimal interest rates. By tapping some of thispotential, total life insurance written has been growing at an averagecumulative rate of 9 percent-10 percent, with premiums reaching $3.6billion in 1993. Nonetheless, Gregor Kozak, spokesman for the insuranceindustry, notes that "Austrians are not a particularly insurance-friendly people. Internationally, Austria lies well behind."No great invasion of new insurers is expected as a result of EEA/EU-inspired entry liberalisation. As Dietrich Karner, general director ofEA-Generali observes:"The prominent insurance groups are long sincepresent in Austria and have carved out their market share".Karner contends that Austria is oversupplied, relative to the number ofinsurers already in the market, and that lower rates can be achievedonly at the expense of services which the Austrian policyholderexpects. Given these conditions, market entry is clearly no casualaffair. Even entry via direct mail- order, probably the least expensiveapproach, offers limited opportunities.Well-established leader in health and hospitalisation, Austria-Collegialitat, tried a broad-brush mail-order sales programme forhealth insurance several years ago with only modest success; even atthat, the firm had follow-up capabilities via its rank of agents.Currently only the German mail-order house, Quelle, offers lifeinsurance by mail.The relative complacency of the current group of 35 domestic andinternational subsidiary firms offering life insurance in Austria maybe exaggerated - but the market has been fought over long enough andhard enough that the existing insurers will not yield territory tonewcomers without a good fight.Life Insurance in Force, Premiums and Claims (Sch million)                      1990         1991         1992       1993Total policy value    697,457      769,391      834,507    915,552Premiums written       27,585       29,198       31,265     40,111Claims paid            10,935       11,938       14,402     16,450Source: Verband der Versicherungsunternehmen OsterreichsTop Ten Life Insurers by market shareWiener Stadtische           (Austrian)Generali Leben              (Italy)Bundeslander                (Austrian)Raiffeisen                  (Austrian)Wiener Allianz Leben        (German/Austrian)Wustenrot                   (Austrian)Interunfall/RAS             (German)Austria-Collegialitat       (Austrian)Donau                       (Austrian)Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995GATEWAY TO ASIAAustralian life insurers face new challenges of stiffening regulationand emerging Asian markets. Tess Critzer reports on the issuespreoccupying the industryTHE AUSTRALIAN life insurance market enjoys the singular distinction ofbeing the only European model market in its region. Ranked eleventh inthe world, it is the third-largest market in the Asia Pacific region,surpassed in size only by Japan and South Korea.Companies entering the Australian market, or any of the emerging Asianmarkets, must be prepared to look deep and make market and culturalallowances, argues James Cochrane, managing director of OceanicHoldings."The British designed the Australian market, and have grown with it,and Europeans in general are used to adapting to different markets.American companies, however, have not fared as well here. I think thereason is that while Australia appears to be very similar to the US,there are actually important subtle differences, and we have veryentrenched notions of how we go about doing business."Cochrane points out that the Australian life industry is dominated byEuropeans. "It is a western economy with a consumption per capitaalmost identical to the US and it has 17 million consumers. Anyoverseas companies moving into the market must first recognise whatthose consumers want."Unlike in the US, both the life and non-life industries are regulatedfederally. Currently, there are 41 direct insurers, employing 20,000people, and five reinsurers, according to the Life Insurance Federationof Australia (LIFA). About 80 percent of the life business is currentlywritten by ten of those 41 insurers, 22 of which are Australian-owned.The three largest direct insurers are mutuals - Australian MutualProvident (AMP), the leading company, National Mutual and ColonialMutual. Seven of the 41 insurers are bank-owned, and three aregovernment-owned. Of the foreign insurers, eight are from the US andsix are of UK origin. There is one company each from the Netherlands,Switzerland and New Zealand, as well as one Belgo-Dutch company and oneUK/Dutch venture.As of September 1993, Australian life offices held $96 billion inassets, up 11 percent on the previous year, more than half of which arecontrolled by the three large mutuals. Indeed, the ten biggestcompanies control more than 80 percent of overall assets. Overseas,Australian life offices, located primarily in Asia and Europe, holdassets of about $16 billion.Career agents have traditionally been used for the distribution ofpersonal lines, with the industry employing an estimated 8,000 agents.Many direct insurers, particularly the three market leaders, employindependent or multi-agents, who sell the products of more than onecompany, resulting in a strong, independent market of self-employedagents.The industry is facing new regulatory and operating hurdles, Cochranepoints out:Allfinanz:"In general now in the Australian market, banks are thewinners, particularly since distribution has developed in investmentmarkets. The largest of these, Bankers Trust, sells investment productsand annuities, and it has the greatest share of retail funds managementin the country."Four years ago the three big mutual companies had about 70 percent ofpremium income. That's changed now. They still have a good share of therisk business, but bank-owned companies have undercut them on otherproducts."Banks came into their own in the Australian industry in the late1970s, then they got into the pension fund market in the 1980s. Thebanks did not replicate traditional insurance companies. Rather, theysought to deliver life products at lower costs, and they found theycould sell insurance investment products, which enjoy preferential taxtreatment."Banks have the advantage of generating business through their branchnetworks, and they also have access to a great deal of customerinformation, so that when a customer walks into a bank and deposits acheque, the bank representative can cross- sell that individual,convincing them to invest their savings in annuities or insurancebonds."Australian banks have very high security, with almost no failureswhatsoever in the country's banking history. However, banks do notguarantee their insurance products, and customers can lose a percentageof their money without realising it. I also believe that banks shouldissue disclosures of how they're managing their administrative costs."We've also seen the emergence of a broker market. Until recently, lifebrokers were non-existent in Australia, but certain regulatory changeshave made brokerage attractive. The brokers control the group lifemarket in our industry, but I don't believe that commercial-strengthgroups like brokers will branch out into individual products."Regulatory Change: "The genesis of Australia's latest round ofregulations stems from the inability of the current regulations toaccommodate the needs of the country's current life products, becausein fact, 60 percent of these products did not exist when the oldregulations were written. For example, the old laws didn't even requireprofit/loss statements."Within the next two months, a whole new raft of regulations will beenacted in Australia, affecting company conduct as well as agent andconsumer issues. The regulations for company conduct will be fairlystandard, allowing for the establishment of an actuarial standardsboard to oversee corporate control. The big difference is thatdirectors of life companies will owe primary allegiance topolicyholders, rather than shareholders."The regulations relating to agents and consumer issues are moredynamic. The new rules will revolve around `Needs Analysis', verysimilar to the British system. In other words, an insurer will not beable to sell a policy without a complete analysis of the customer'sneeds (unless a customer refuses to give out the information andthereby signs a release)."There will of course be a raft of regulation in regard to controllingsales methodology. Many regulations have been introduced over the pastyear and we have rules that prescribe complete illustration of fees,charges and earnings (the regulator prescribes rates for earnings andinflation purposes)."Agent commissions have also been cut back significantly in recentyears, and the general requirement is to move to a flatter commissionscale and thereby lower the front-end load, although no one has yetdevised a method for making up the inevitable income loss."New laws will help consumers know what they're buying. For example,the disclosure laws will help consumers recognise levels of agent bias.Agent bias usually takes the form of commission, or other methods ofpayments and benefits, and this naturally renders the agent biased infavour of certain products. Now, agents must show their commissionbias, and the company also issues a report in conjunction with policyissuance, informing the customer how much commission or what benefitsthat agent got for selling him the product."Another aspect of the new regulatory proposals concerns agent quality.At the moment, there are no qualifications other than industryexperience. However, some of the current proposals relate to agentlicensing, and movement toward greater education and improvedcompetency through training. In fact, steps are being taken toestablish a nationwide standard, enforced by training centres, at anestimated cost of about A$300 (US$229.88 million) per agent."A much feared aspect of the new regulations relates to joint andseveral liability, designed to make companies responsible for anagent's underwriting actions. This provision would relate mostspecifically to multi-agents - those who represent several companies.It would require such agents to notify all their employer companieswhen applying for a new agency, or when one of their agencies arecancelled. This law is designed to better protect consumers fromunsuccessful or unscrupulous agents."Costs and Profitability: "The costs of regulation are variable,stemming from the nature of the regulation. However, it is oftendifficult to balance off consumer interests against production costs."For example, the law now prescribes that an insurer's board ofdirectors must set up a compliance committee comprised of a majority ofoutside, non-aligned directors who will certify that the company'sapproved materials for market release comply with regulations.Legislation prescribes that consumers can directly sue the members ofthe compliance committee, so those external directors will seek toprotect themselves during their preparation and review of documents.The result is that everything done today must be checked by a team oflawyers. So, we turned things like advertising and promotion intoactivities which need to be checked by lawyers."Likewise, new requirements for customer brochures have made itvirtually impossible to print out total disclosure and illustrationtables on less than 30 pages, which is driving up the costs ofadvertising."Reduced agent commissions and other agent-related provisions haveresulted in a nearly double-digit reduction of agent numbers, industry-wide. Many agents saw the market contracting and they got out. The moreexperienced agents found renewed enthusiasm for selling risk products,because there is no commission disclosure on a risk product unless ithas an investment element."New Markets: Cochrane, like many other Australian life insurers, ishopeful that Australia may become a regional centre for theAsia/Pacific countries, along with Singapore and Hong Kong. Australiaoffers a viable alternative to Asian bases because it is politicallynon-aligned, he argues.Australia has more than a century-old history of doing business in Asia- one hundred years ago, four Asian insurers were also operating inAustralia: North China Insurance Company, Shanghai; China TradersInsurance Company and the Canton Insurance Office, Hong Kong; and TheStraits Insurance Company, Singapore.Today, only eight non-life Japanese companies represent Asia inAustralia. The tide is flowing the other way, with Asia the chosen areaof expansion for today's Australian insurers, according to MichaelWansley, chairman of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu's National InsuranceIndustry Group."Every year sees Australian insurers opening more offices in Asiancountries," says Wansley. The big three mutuals already havecapabilities in countries like Indonesia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan andthe Philippines, he points out. Already 17 direct insurers based inAustralia have offices in the Asian/Pacific countries: two are inChina; eight in Hong Kong; three in Indonesia; six in Japan; two inMalaysia; twelve in New Zealand; one in Pakistan; four in thePhilippines; eight in Singapore; two in South Korea; and three inTaiwan.The increasingly profitable Asian markets have"scarcely been tapped",argues a report by LIFA, compiled by specialist writer, Florence Chong.Australian life insurers have just begun establishing long-term,mutually profitable relationships throughout the region.Virtually all the Asian markets are experiencing double-digit growthand Chong predicts that Asia will become a significant contributor toAustralia's total life revenue by the year 2000.AMP offers a good illustration of the trend. Although it was the lastAustralian company to venture into Asia, AMP estimates that about 80percent of its income will originate in offshore European and Asianmarkets by the end of the decade, as opposed to the current proportionof 55 percent.The strongest future growth in Asia will stem from Australia's lifesector, rather than non-life insurance, Chong forecasts. In 1992, forexample, total life insurance premiums (US$283.7 billion) were morethan double those of non-life premiums (US$110.4 billion).Most Australian insurers in Asia seek long-term ventures with localpartners - a recent example was the agreement between Australia's MLCGroup and PT Asuransi Jiwa Simas Life, a subsidiary of the Indonesianmega-conglomerate, Sinar Mas.Asian companies are seeking out foreign partners in order to protecttheir market share against other joint venture companies, Chong notes,arguing that long-term thinking and market adaptation are the keyrequirements for achieving success in the region.The greatest growth potential lies in the Thai, Indonesian and Indianmarkets, according to LIFA research. A ten-year growth period for HongKong is predicted, and an ever-increasing demand for investmentproducts is forecast in Singapore. LIFA warns, however, that the Chinamarket will not be ready for foreign entry for three years, because ofthe inadequate legal framework, currently under revision by a draftingcommittee.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightLIFE INSURANCE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1995FRENCH BANKS TURN TRADITIONALAllfinanz has transformed the French life market. Jean-Pierre Danielinternational development manager of French research body CREP (Centrede Recherche sur l'Epargne et le Patrimoine) traces the stages ofdevelopmentTWENTY YEARS ago, France was from the insurance point of view a very"continental" country - very traditional, with few innovations inproducts, a widespread front-end commission system and under the firmcontrol of the state. Most of this has changed in the last few yearsand the growing role played by banks in distribution of insurancepersonal lines explains many of the changes.We had an old tradition of bancassurance with the Assurances du CreditMutuel (ACM), a subsidiary of the powerful co- operative bank, whichstarted in 1971 to sell general insurance products through the bankbranches. It started in the Eastern part of France, close to the Germanborder and gradually extended its network.Today, ACM is very strong in Alsace and present in most of theprovinces. But strangely, probably because in the first years theylimited their influence to some regions, the Credit Mutuel has not beenconsidered as a danger - or an example - by the other actors in theFrench market.The origin: Apart from the ACM, bancassurance started in France in the1960s when banks decided to sell insurance products as add-ons tobanking services. They had three objectives: to improve their relationswith their customers; to protect themselves, for instance in the caseof the borrower's death; and, of course, to earn extra commission.The most typical product of this period is a death insurance guaranteewhich covers a possible deficit on the bank account and is paid to thesurviving spouse if the account is in credit. The premiums are verysmall, directly debited from the bank account each month, and theresults are excellent for the bank.The tax factor: A second phase started in the 1970s when banks decidedto sell financial products under the insurance tax system. The typicalproduct is a deferred-capital contract, with a duration calculated tooptimise the tax treatment. Today, this is eight years.Often, the product is a single premium or a scheme where the customeris totally free to pay additional premiums when he wants to. Of course,if it's a regular premium contract, premiums are debited monthly fromthe bank account.The offer is based only on: profitability, or rate of interest paid onthe invested capital; flexibility, or freedom to pay additionalpremiums or to make withdrawals; and tax advantages under French law.Nowhere does advertising refer to classical insurance objectives, tothe protection of the family or to pension plans.These products still exist and, indeed, represent the huge majority ofcontracts at present sold by banks - the turnover of Frenchbancassurers is made up 90 percent of products of this generation.From a marketing point of view, these products can be classifiedaccording to their target market. For lower-income customers, bankssell very simple monthly premium contracts, emphasising tax relief anda guaranteed rate of interest. For medium-range customers, they offersingle premiums or non- compulsory premiums. And, for top-levelcustomers, they offer very sophisticated financial products, with aninterest rate linked to a stock exchange index, or multi-fund contractsor contracts with guaranteed results which are very high in comparisonto what the market offers.Changing traditions: The third stage of bancassurance started in the1990s. It is not a substitution of one stage by another one - it's anaddition. Banks are still widely distributing deferred- capitalpolicies but are also selling other products.On the life side, some subsidiaries of banks have started to sell deathinsurance. Individual term insurance is under-developed in France,mainly because the French over-estimate the protection provided bySocial Security and by the group contracts which result from collectiveagreements between workers' unions and employers.Entering this market, banks have what I would call an accountingapproach. While traditional insurers explained that a good husband andfather had to provide security for his widow and orphans, banks analysefor the customer the financial consequences of death, aim to minimisethe effects - and remain on the financial field where they have theirlegitimacy.At the same time, banks have reduced medical requirements as much aspossible, trying to avoid delay between the time when the customeragrees the contract and the point when the medical and administrativedepartment of the company officially accepts the risk. Often the sumsinsured are relatively small and the acceptance of risk is made at avery low level in the hierarchy of the bank.The rewards: For the French banks, bancassurance is a very successfuldiversification. They are selling new products and they have learned anew business. They have earned more commission and strengthened theirrelations with their customers. They have kept most of their staff -otherwise technological evolution would have forced them to reduce thenumber of employees. Indeed, the French banking industry was foreseenas "the steel industry of tomorrow".In France, there has been a serious debate on the profitability ofbancassurance, centring on "cannibalisation". As most of the moneyinvested by customers in life products was previously held in a bankaccount in the same bank, the argument is that bancassurance is non-productive for the bank.It's a very interesting theory but it doesn't have any practicalmeaning. In truth, a bank had no choice. Because of the mobility ofcustomers, if a bank had not adopted a bancassurance policy, itscustomers would have moved to a competitor.The market impact: Traditional insurers have not really lost anythingwith the emergence of bancassurance. The products banks have sold werenot sold - at least to any great degree - by agents, brokers and directsalesforces.And since many customers have not realised that in purchasing one ofthe investments offered by banks they have bought an insurance product,traditional insurers still have an opportunity in the field of pensionplans, for example, where people look more to insurers.The impact of bancassurance on products has been very important.Changes in product design largely explain the success of this new formof distribution: banks were forced to sell very simple contractsbecause they had to convince and train their commercial networks beforeconvincing their customers. Where insurers were at that time sellingendowment policies, mixing savings and family protection, banks havesold deferred capital and adopted a definitely savings-orientedattitude.Even today, although they sell term insurance, they separate protectionand savings. As a consequence of the banks' attitude, endowmentpolicies have almost disappeared from the French market.Another effect of bancassurance on new products is that they are nowmuch cheaper for the buyer. As newcomers to a market, banks had to bein some way "better" than traditional insurers. At that time theconsumer press, which is very powerful in France, carried a lot ofcriticism of the front-end commission system.The banks, to be different and because it was more suited to theirculture, offered contracts with a low cost for the customer - forinstance a 5 percent charge on each premium, with almost no additionalcharges. They have also improved the transparency of the contracts. Theclient can very easily see how much of the premium is really investedin his or her name and how much is eaten up by the company in costs.A third impact on the product results from banks' use of more financialtechnology in insurance products. They have reached a very high levelof sophistication and now the French market offers all the products aconsumer might dream of.The sale of financial products by banks under the life insurance taxsystem has been very successful. Life insurance is now the most popularinvestment in France - more than 50 percent of French households'savings are invested in life products.An interesting point may be underlined here. The surveys we carry outat CREP show that the number of French consumers who declare that theyhave bought a life insurance policy is relatively flat, at around 34percent of households. In spite of the tremendous growth of lifeinsurance turnover - Fr378 billion ($70.3 billion) in 1993, up fromFr59 billion in 1983 - this figure increases very slowly. Many of theconsumers who buy a life insurance contract in a bank are convincedthat they have made "an investment with tax advantages", but not theyhave purchased a life policy.The reason consumers are so fond of life insurance is that products aremuch better and much cheaper than they were 20 years ago. There arestill"bad contracts" on the French market but as a whole quality hasimproved.In 1980, commissions and administrative costs represented 30 percent oflife insurance premiums; in 1993, they represented no more than 11percent. This reduction is attributable to the entry of banks on to themarket. The banks' costs were lower but, most importantly, traditionalinsurers have had to follow the move started by the banks, which actedthen as challengers.The future: I would suggest two issues which French banks and theirlife insurance subsidiaries are facing or may face in the near future.In an environment of decreasing interest rates, newcomers which have amore recent portfolio of stocks and shares, are disadvantaged. This isthe position of life insurance subsidiaries compared with traditionalinsurers, which have very old and diversified portfolios of financialassets. This will impact on the profitability of life policies. One mayask whether the consumer will still prefer the convenience of the banknetwork to a better return on investment offered by a traditionalcompany?The other question arises from the fact that many consumers haverealised only that they have bought a tax-relief financial product, notthat they have agreed a life insurance policy. What will happen if thetax system changes? The billions which have so easily switched from abank account to a life contract could very easily swing the other way,switching to another product offered by the bank and leaving the lifeinsurance subsidiary a skeleton.This danger explains to a certain extent the desire of some lifesubsidiaries to sell products such as term insurance or generalinsurance. It is the one way that these subsidiaries can have theiridentity recognised by their clients - and by their shareholders.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications LimitedBack to Headline List